10-k
d307682d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2011
or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period
from to
commission file number 001-14053
milestone scientific inc.  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-3545623
state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
220 south orange avenue, livingston, nj 07039
(address of principal executive offices)  registrants telephone number, including area code 973-535-2717
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
none
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act:
common stock, par value $.001 per share
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities
act.yesxno
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or
section15(d) of the act.yesxno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or
15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90
days. xyesno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any,
every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post
such files).xyesno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k ( 229.405 of
this chapter) is not contained herein and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment of this form
10-k.  indicate by check mark whether
the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting
company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfiler
acceleratedfiler
non-accelerated filer
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
smallerreportingcompany
x
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule
12b-2 of the act).yesnox
as of june30, 2011, the last business day of the companys most recently completed second fiscal quarter, the
aggregate market value of the common stock held by non  affiliates of the issuer was $7,045,755. this amount is based on the closing price of $0.78 per share of the companys common stock as of such date, as reported on the otcqb.
as of march13, 2012 the registrant has a total of 15,693,678 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value
outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference  none
table of contents
milestone scientific inc.
form 10-k annual report  table of contents
page
part i
item 1. description of business
item 1a. risk factors
item 1b. unresolved staff comments
item 2. description of property
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. mine safety disclosure
part ii
item 5. market for common equity, related stockholder matters and small business issuer pruchases of equity securities
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. management's discussion and analysis or plan of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk
item 8. financial statements
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
item 9b. other information
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers, promoters and control persons and corporate governance; compliance with
section 16 (a) of the exchange act
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item 14. principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits
signatures
exhibits
forward-looking statements
certain statements made in this annual report on form 10-k are forward-looking statements (within the
meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995) regarding the plans and objectives of management for future operations. such statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results,
performance or achievements of milestone to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. the forward-looking statements included herein are based on current
expectations that involve numerous risks and uncertainties. milestones plans and objectives are based, in part, on assumptions involving the continued expansion of business. assumptions relating to the foregoing involve judgments with respect
to, among other things, future economic, competitive and market conditions and future business decisions, all of which are difficult or impossible to predict accurately and many of which are beyond the control of milestone. although milestone
believes that its assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate. in light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements included herein, particularly
in view of milestones early stage operations, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by milestone or any other person that the objectives and plans of milestone will be achieved. the company undertakes no
obligation to revise or update publicly any forward-looking statements for any reason.
table of contents
part i
item1. description of business
all references in this report to milestone, us, the company, or
milestone scientific refer to milestone scientific inc. unless the context otherwise indicates. milestone has rights to the following trademarks: compudent, compumed,
compuflo, the wand, the wand
plus, the safetywand, cool blue wand,
cool blue tooth whitening instrument, dynamic pressure sensing technology, sta single tooth
anesthesia, (sta instrument, instruments and handpieces), ionic white (light emitting diode), and
ionic white (whitening toothpaste). milestone was incorporated in the state of delaware in 1989.  business
background  milestone since its inception has engaged in pioneering proprietary, innovative, computer-controlled injection technologies and solutions for the medical and dental markets. the company has focused its
energy and resources on redefining the worldwide standard of care for injection techniques by making the experience more comfortable for the patient and by reducing the anxiety and stress of administering injections for the healthcare provider.
milestone and its technology is widely recognized by key opinion leaders, industry experts and medical and
dental practitioners as the noted leader in the emerging, high growth, computer-controlled injection industry; and remains intent on expanding the use and application of its proprietary, patented technologies to achieve greater operational
efficiencies, enhanced patient safety and therapeutic adherence, and improved quality of care within a broad range of medical disciplines.  in 1997, milestone first introduced the wand (compudent instrument) and the disposable wand handpiece. compudent provides painless injections for all
routine dental treatments, including root canals, crowns, fillings and cleanings. milestones computer-controlled local anesthetic delivery (c-clad) instrument handpiece does not look or feel like a syringe. and, whats more, it works
better than a syringe, resulting in a more pleasant experience for the patient and practitioner. with more than 18,000 compudent instruments sold within four months of its market introduction, this represented the most successful launch in
the history of small equipment sales in u.s. dentistry.  milestone subsequently expanded
its product offerings with the introduction of the compumed advanced injection instrument, designed for
use in a wide range of applications within the medical industry, including cosmetic surgery, hair restoration surgery, podiatry, colorectal surgery, nasal and sinus surgery, dermatology and orthopedics, among others.
central to milestones intellectual property platform and current product development strategy
is its patented compuflo technology for the precise delivery of medicaments. the compuflo
pressure/force computer-controlled local anesthetic delivery (c-clad) technology is an advanced, patented and fda-approved medical technology for the painless and accurate delivery of drugs, anesthetics and other medicaments into all tissue types,
as well as for the aspiration of bodily fluids or previously injected substances. its regulation and control of flow rate continues to provide the compudent and compumed benefits of painless injections, while its dynamic pressure
sensing capability provides visual and audible in-tissue pressure feedback, identifying tissue types to the
healthcare provider. this pressure feedback extends the benefit of painlessness from anesthetics with known viscosities to a wide range of liquid drugs and other medicaments with varying viscosities and flow rates. dynamic pressure sensing
also allows the healthcare provider to know when certain types of tissues have been penetrated and permits the healthcare provider to inject medicaments precisely at the desired location. thus, pressure feedback can prevent the suffusion of tissue
outside the intended target area, a vitally important characteristic in the injection of chemotherapeutics and other toxic substances.  the compuflo technology consists of two critical elements. one element is the ability to determine exit pressure in situ (in the injection site tissue) at the tip of the needle in real time.
this minimizes tissue damage (and eliminates the pain of the injection) because the flow rate and pressure of the injection are controlled. the other critical element of the technology is an integrated injection database of algorithms that have been
defined which allow for the measurement of the exit pressure. this database of algorithms contains the critical components of specific drugs, parameters of needles, tubing and syringes and all other pertinent components for the safe and efficacious
delivery of medications for all procedures.  the compuflo technology also consists of a disposable
injection handpiece that provides for precise tactile control during the injection, an electromechanical (computer-controlled) fluid delivery instrument and the ability to record data from the injection event. as confirmed by numerous noted medical
and dental experts within academia and the clinical practice arenas, compuflo has the potential to greatly increase the safety and efficacy of many drug delivery procedures that currently rely upon the over 150-year-old hypodermic syringe
technology and the tactile senses and delivery expertise of the administrator.
table of contents
on september14, 2004, milestone scientific was issued united states
patent no.6,786,885 for the compuflo technology, entitled pressure/force computer controlled drug delivery instrument with exit pressure. proprietary software, working with an innovative technology, allows the instrument to
continuously monitor and control the exit pressure of fluid and/or medication during an injection. this same technology also enables doctors to accurately identify different tissue types based on exit pressure during an injection. the technology has
numerous applications in both medicine and dentistry, including epidural and intra-articular injections.  in
december2004, the united states patent office issued a notice of allowance for patent protection on two additional critical elements of the compuflo automated drug delivery technology: drug delivery instrument with
profiles and pressure/force computer controlled drug delivery with automated charging.  in
december2005, milestone submitted a pre-market notification to the us food and drug administration (fda)on its compuflo technology, which was subsequently cleared by the fda in july of 2006. this initial submission was critical
for milestones continuing efforts to develop and commercialize this important technology. milestone has identified a number of potential applications for compuflo, including single-tooth dental injections, self-administered drug
delivery, osteoarthritis joint pain management and epidurals.  given the companys experience and
established brand awareness within the dental industry, it elected to focus its initial product development efforts on the integration of compuflo into its legacy computer-controlled dental injection instrument. as a result, milestone
developed the industrys first solution for painlessly administering a single-tooth injection as the only injection necessary for achieving anesthesia, foregoing the need to administer a traditional nerve branch block. this new instrument,
which also provides for use of a disposable handpiece, was trademarked the sta single tooth anesthesia instrument, now more commonly known as the sta instrument.
after receiving fda 510(k) pre-market notification acceptance for the marketing and sale of the
sta instrument, milestone introduced the instrument to market in february2007 at the chicago dental societys 143rd midwinter meeting. the patented sta instrument incorporates the "pressure feedback" elements of milestone's
patented compuflo technology, thereby allowing dentists to administer injections accurately and painlessly into the periodontal ligament space, effectively anesthetizing a single tooth. this injection is of significant value in that it allows
the dentist to profoundly anesthetize the tooth within one or two minutes, versus up to 15-18 minutes for a block injection to take effect. utilizing the sta instrument single tooth injection, the patient will suffer neither pain nor
collateral anesthesia in the cheek, lips or tongue at any time. the sta instrument is capable of performing all of the injections that can be done with a conventional dental syringe, including the palatal-anterior superior alveolar, anterior
middle superior alveolar and inferior alveolar nerve block. the sta instrument achieves these injections predictably and reliably.  initial market response to the sta instrument following its commercial debut in february 2007 proved to be less than robust. moreover, at that time, the company had granted exclusive us and
canadian distribution and marketing rights for the sta instrument to henry schein, inc., the largest distributor of healthcare products and services to office-based practitioners in the combined north american and european markets. following
several months of lackluster sales and after making critical senior management changes, milestone initiated an in-depth market study to reassess its positioning and marketing strategies for the sta instrument. the insight gained from this
study led management to redefine and implement a new messaging platform, created to emphasize key benefits that milestone discovered are of most value to dental professionals. this new product messaging was launched in january 2008 and has remained
in constant review.  in the spring of 2009, milestone signed an exclusive distribution and marketing agreement
with china national medicines corporation, dba sinopharm, which is chinas largest domestic manufacturer, distributor and marketer of pharmaceuticals and importer of medical devices and the countrys largest domestic distributor of dental
anesthetic carpules to the chinese dental industry. prior to the end of 2009, china national medicines issued milestone a blanket purchase order for 12,000 sta instruments and related handpieces to be delivered over 36 months, thereby marking
the companys initial penetration into chinas emerging dental market.  as of march13, 2012,
china national medicine has not received the appropriate registration approval from the regulatory body in china, therefore, shipment of sta instruments and handpieces have been suspended pending the approval to sell and distribute these products in
china. it is expected that the approval by the appropriate chinese regulatory body will be received in 2012.
according to a report published by the u.s. department of commerce, titled chinas emerging markets:
opportunities in the dental and dental lab industry, chinas dental market lags behind other healthcare services and has largely been neglected in the past. in fact, cs market research reports that of chinas 1.3 billion plus
population, 50% of the adults and 70% of the children are estimated to have decayed tooth problems, and over 90% have periodontal disease. however, with increasing affluence of the chinese population, as well as increasing attention towards
personal care, demand for dental services has been growing. market research firm freedonia agrees, noting that demand for dental products in china is expected to climb to 21.5 billion rmb (us$3.15 billion) by 2012, due primarily to escalating
personal income levels and government programs promoting awareness of the benefits of good oral care.  shortly
before the end of the second quarter of 2009, milestone elected to refine its international marketing strategy to gain greater access to and penetration of the international dental markets. the new sales strategy provides for increasing hands-on
oversight and support of its existing international distribution network, while also attracting new distributors throughout europe, asia and south america.
table of contents
beginning in the second and third quarter 2010, milestone expanded its
international and domestic sales force by hiring a director of international sales and director of domestic sales. these additions have proven to be a valuable addition to our dental market business, as we expand our distribution in both markets.
compuflo advanced injection technology  core technology  the compuflo technology is patented and embedded in the sta instrument that is being sold worldwide in the dental market. compuflo technology has been tried and proven in human and
animal studies, as well as by dentists in most parts of the world who are using the sta instrument in their practices.  compuflo is a revolutionary new technology for injections. compuflo enables health care practitioners to monitor and precisely control pressure, rate and
volume during all injections and can be used to inject all liquid medicaments as well as anesthetics. compuflo can also be used to aspirate body fluids.
negative side effects from the use of traditional hypodermic drug delivery injection instruments are well documented in
dental and medical literature and include risk of death, transient or permanent paralysis, pain, tissue damage and post-operative complications. the pain and tissue damage are a direct result of uncontrolled flow rates and pressures that are created
during the administration of drug solutions into human tissue. while several technologies have been capable of controlling flow rate, the ability to accurately and precisely control pressure has been unobtainable until the development of compuflo.
precisely controlling in-tissue pressure increases patient safety by reducing the risk of tissue damage and
post-treatment pain related to excessive pressure that may occur during certain injections. identification of the tissue, in which the needle tip is imbedded, is believed to be highly important in epidural injections, intra-articular injections and
numerous organ, subcutaneous and intramuscular injections.  compuflos pressure sensing technology
provides an objective tool that consistently and accurately identifies the epidural space by detecting the difference in pressure between the ligamentum flavum and the extraligamentary tissue. in studies utilizing the compuflo technology the
epidural space has been correctly identified 100% of the time. knowing the precise location of a needle during an epidural injection procedure provides a measure of safety not presently available to doctors using conventional syringes, who
identify the epidural space by relying on the subjective perception of loss of resistance to saline.  in the absence of curative procedures, arthritis patients are obliged to endure multiple painful injections for a lifetime. often these injections are not efficacious, because the doctor using a syringe
failed to locate the intra-articular space or did not inject the appropriate volume of hyaluronic acid or other medicament into that space. the compuflo technology has been successful in administering viscous hyaluronic acid and other
medicaments into the intra-articular space in both small and large joints using its computer-controlled pressure sensing capabilities in an independent animal study.
there are a number of injectable drugs routinely self-administered in a home or office setting using spring loaded
automatic injection devices by people who suffer from long term chronic conditions such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis. the compuflo technology, using pressure sensing capabilities, can serve as a painless subcutaneous
injection method for these self-administered drugs. a significant reduction in pain during delivery will have a positive impact on compliance, which is a major consideration when physicians are determining which drugs to prescribe.
on december3, 2009, milestone announced that it signed an agreement of intent with china national medicines
corporation, ltd. and yichang humanwell pharmaceutical co. ltd., both incorporated in the peoples republic of china (prc), to develop orthopedic and epidural drug delivery instruments utilizing compuflo. this agreement of intent was
terminated, effective july13, 2011.  in july 2011, we entered into a definitive joint venture agreement
with beijing 3h (heart-help-health) scientific technology co., ltd. (beijing 3h) for the development, commercialization, manufacture and marketing of epidural and intra-articular injection instruments. milestone scientific has a 50% interest in the
joint venture and beijing 3h, whose shareholders are a number of individuals, including a large shareholder in milestone who is also the principal of a supplier to milestone, bejing 3h also has a 50% interest in joint venture.
the joint venture provided for milestones contribution of an exclusive worldwide royalty-free
license to use its patents. beijing 3h will contribute $1.5 million to the joint venture to design and develop two commercial instruments using milestones compuflo technology and disposables. milestone will have distribution responsibility in the u.s., canada and the rest of the world, while beijing 3h will distribute products
exclusively in the peoples republic of china, macao, hong kong and other regions of asia.
table of contents
product platform
milestone has developed and brought to market a highly differentiated portfolio of industry innovations. thus far, the
companys proprietary solutions have succeeded in elevating the standard of care in the professional dental arena. the product portfolio includes:  sta single tooth anesthesia instrument (sta instrument)  the sta single tooth anesthesia instrument (sta instrument) is a patented, computer-controlled local anesthesia delivery instrument that incorporates the pressure feedback
elements of milestones patented compuflo technology, thereby allowing dentists to administer injections accurately into the periodontal ligament space, effectively anesthetizing a single tooth. while the periodontal ligament injection
has been available for some time, there has been no effective technology that allows dentists to easily perform the procedure painlessly, safely and predictably until now. with this unique procedure dentists can easily and predictably anesthetize a
single tooth root in one minute and a multiple root tooth in two minutes, as compared to a general blocking injection and waiting up to 18 minutes (or longer if the blocking injection needs to be re-administered) before proceeding to perform a
procedure on the target tooth. a device which allows dentists to effectively anesthetize a single tooth will greatly enhance the productivity of dental practices and, when combined with the painless injection capabilities already present in the
compudent instrument, such a device provides a compelling value in the marketplace. the sta instrument will generate recurring revenues from per-patient disposable handpieces.
since its market introduction in the spring of 2007, the sta instrument has received rave reviews and awards from
the dental industry. in july 2007, noted industry publication dentistry today featured the sta instrument as one of the top 100 products in 2007, helping to promote much broader recognition of the instrument and validating
stas value proposition for dentists and patients, alike. in early 2008, medical device& diagnostic industry magazine distinguished the sta instrument as a 2008 medical design excellence award winner in the
dental instruments, equipment and supplies product category. of the 33 products to receive this coveted award, the sta was one of only two winning products that serve dental practitioners. in december 2008, milestone continued to
win broad acclaim for the sta instrument by winning a townie choice award. the townie choice awards were originally started by dr.howard darran and farran media, publisher of dentaltown magazine, to
assist dentists in making product purchasing decisions, and are considered the peoples choice of the products and services available to the dental industry today. that same month, the sta instrument was also named as a
dental products report top 100 2008 product of distinction. additionally, the sta instrument was named one of dentistry todays top 100 products for the third consecutive year in 2010.
compudent  compudent (also known as the wand plus
internationally) is milestones proprietary, patented computer-controlled local anesthetic delivery (c-clad) instrument and predecessor of the sta instrument. compudent delivers anesthesia at a precise and consistent rate below a
patients pain threshold. over the years, compudent has been widely heralded as a revolutionary device, considered one of the major advances in dentistry in the 20th century. the instrument has been favorably evaluated in more than 50 peer reviewed or independent clinical research
reports. compudent, including its ergonomically designed single-use handpieces (the wand),
provides numerous, well documented benefits:
compudent minimizes the pain associated with palatal, mandibular block and all other injections, resulting in a more comfortable
injection experience for the patient;
the pencil grip used with the wand handpieces allows unprecedented tactile sense and accurate control;
new injections made possible with the compudent technology eliminate collateral numbness of the tongue, lips and facial muscles;
bi-directional rotation of the wand handpieces eliminates needle deflection resulting in greater success and more rapid onset of
anesthesia in mandibular block injections;
the use of a single patient use, disposable handpieces minimizes the risk of cross contamination; and
the ergonomic design of the wand handpieces makes an injection easier and less stressful to administer, lowering the risk of carpal
tunnel syndrome.
table of contents
despite compudents many benefits, including the administration
of less painful and more comfortable injections, dentists in the united states have been slow to give up the use of traditional syringes. dentists have all been trained to use syringes in dental school and often have become accustomed to and are
comfortable with their use during many years of clinical practice, in spite of the obvious reluctance and/or fear of the patient in relation to injections administered by hypodermic syringe. there are approximately 40million dental phobics,
those people afraid to visit a dentist, in the united states. therefore, milestone believes there is a disconnect in the way dentists perceive their patients attitudes toward injection by hypodermic syringe. the compudent is used today
by thousands of dentists around the world, many of whom have long since abandoned the over 150-year old syringe.
compumed
compumed is a patented computer-controlled injection instrument geared to the
needs of the medical market and providing benefits similar to compudent. compumed allows many medical procedures, now requiring intravenous sedation, to be performed with only local anesthesia due to dramatic pain reduction. also, dosages of
local anesthetic can often be significantly reduced, thus reducing side effects, accelerating recovery times, lowering costs and eliminating potential complications. compumed has accumulated clinical evidence demonstrating benefits from use
in colorectal surgery; podiatry; dermatology, including surgery for the removal of basal cell carcinomas and other oncological dermatologic procedures; nasal and sinus surgery, including rhinoplasty; hair transplantation and cosmetic surgery, among
others.  the wand  the wand
handpiece is used in conjunction with the sta, compudent and compumed instruments. it is an ergonomically designed and patented handpieces that enables all traditional and newer injections, such as amsa, p-asa and modified-pdl, to be
more comfortable and easier to deliver. moreover, the pen-like grasp of the wand allows bi-directional rotation during injection, which prevents needle deflection that occurs with a traditional syringe. a straighter path results in a more
accurate injection, meaning fewer missed mandibular blocks, and more rapid onset of anesthesia. missed blocks are reported in the literature to occur 30% of the time. this raises both patient anxiety and difficulties for the dentists in managing
their business. while awaiting profound anesthesia, the dentist is losing time and money.  the
safetywand
the safetywand is the first, patented safety-engineered injection device that conforms to regulatory standards
while also meeting the clinical needs of dental and medical practitioners. following the adoption of the federal needlestick safety and prevention act, milestone developed, and in september2003 the fda approved marketing of, milestones
safetywand disposable handpiece, a patented injection device that incorporates safety engineered sharp protection features to aid in the prevention of needlesticks. the safetywand is the first patented injection device to be fully
compliant with osha regulations under the federal needlestick safety act while meeting the clinical needs of dentists.  the safetywand represents the culmination of two years effort to develop a safer injection device for dentists, physicians and hygienists. while safety injection devices have been mandated since
2000 under federal law, osha had been unable to enforce this law against dentists because of the inadequacy of existing devices to meet both the requirements of the law and the clinical needs of dentists. the safetywand meets these requirements and
provides dental practitioners with a safer retractable needle device, with single hand activation, which is reusable multiple times during a single patient visit; yet small and sleek enough not to obscure the dentists sometimes limited field
of view. while safetywand is now available commercially and osha has not begun, in a meaningful way, to enforce existing regulations requiring the use of these devices. osha is empowered to levy substantial fines for failure to use safety engineered
devices.  medical instrument for joint venture
in july 2011, we entered into a definitive joint venture agreement with beijing 3h (heart-help-health) scientific
technology co., ltd. (beijing 3h) for the development, commercialization, manufacture and marketing of epidural and intra-articular injection instruments. milestone scientific has a 50% interest in the joint venture and beijing 3h together with a
number of individuals, including a large shareholder in milestone who is also the principal of a supplier to milestone, bejing 3j also has a 50% interest in joint venture.  competition  milestones proprietary, patented
computer-controlled local anesthesia delivery (c-clad) instruments compete with disposable and reusable syringes that generally sell at lower prices and that use established and well-understood methodologies in both the dental and medical
marketplaces.
table of contents
milestones instruments compete on the basis of their performance
characteristics and the benefits provided to both the practitioner and the patient. clinical studies have shown that the instruments reduce fear, pain and anxiety for many patients, and milestone believes that they can reduce practitioner stress
levels, as well. the companys newest product introduction, the sta instrument, can be used for all dental injections that can be performed with a traditional dental syringe. moreover, the sta instrument can also be used for new
and modified dental injection techniques that cannot be performed with traditional syringes. these new techniques allow for faster procedures shortening chair-time, minimizing the numbing of the lips and facial muscles, enhancing practice
productivity, reducing stress and virtually eliminating pain and anxiety for both the patient and the dentist.
milestone faces intense competition from many companies in the medical and dental device industry, possessing
substantially greater financial, marketing, personnel, and other resources. most competitors have established reputations, stemming from their success in the development, sale, and service of competing dental products. further, rapid technological
change and research may affect the products. current or new competitors could, at any time, introduce new or enhanced products with features that render the products less marketable or even obsolete. therefore, the company must devote substantial
efforts and financial resources to improve existing products, bring products to market quickly, and develop new products for related markets. in addition, the ability to compete successfully requires that milestone establish an effective
distribution network and with a strong marketing plan. historically, milestone has been unsuccessful in executing the marketing plans for the products, primarily due to resource constraints. new products must be approved by regulatory authorities
before they may be marketed. milestone cannot assure you that it can compete successfully; that competitors will not develop technologies or products that render the products less marketable or obsolete; or, that milestone will succeed in improving
the existing products, effectively develop new products, or obtain required regulatory approval for those products.  patents and
intellectual property  milestone holds the following u.s. utility and design patents:
september 30,
september 30,
u.s.patentnumber
date ofissue
computer controlled drug delivery systems
dental anesthetic and delivery injection unit
6,022,337
2/8/2000
design for a dental anesthetic delivery system holder
d422,361
4/4/2000
design for a dental anesthetic delivery system housing
d423,665
4/25/2000
design for a dental anesthetic delivery system handle
d427,314
6/27/2000
cartridge holder for injection device
6,132,414
10/17/2000
dental anesthetic delivery injection unit
6,152,734
11/28/2000
microprocessor-controlled fluid dispensing apparatus
6,159,161
12/12/2000
pressure/force computer controlled drug delivery system
6,200,289
3/13/2001
dental anesthetic and delivery injection unit with automated rate control
6,652,482
11/25/2003
pressure/force computer controlled drug delivery system with exit pressure
6,786,885
9/14/2004
pressure/force computer controlled drug delivery system with automated charging
6,887,216
5/3/2005
drug delivery system with profiles
6,945,954
9/20/2005
cartridge holder for anesthetic and delivery injection device
d558,340
12/25/2007
design for drive unit for anesthetic
d566,265
4/8/2008
design for drive unit for anesthetic
d579,540
10/28/2008
drug infusion device with tissue identification using pressure sensing
7,449,008
11/11/2008
computer controlled drug delivery systems with pressure sensing
7,618,409
11/17/2009
hand piece for fluid administration
7,625,354
12/1/2009
self-administration injection system
7,740,612
6/22/2010
computer controlled drug delivery system with dynamic pressure sensing
7,896,833
3/1/2011
engineered sharps injury protection devices
handpiece for injection device with a retractable and rotating needle
6,428,517
8/6/2002
safety iv catheter device
6,726,658
4/27/2004
safety iv catheter infusion device
6,905,482
6/14/2005
handpiece for injection device with a retractable and rotating needle
6,966,899
11/22/2005
during the 2011 and 2010 fiscal years, milestone expensed $140,053 and $270,494,
respectively, on research and development activities. the higher costs incurred in 2010 were primarily associated with the continued development of the single tooth anesthetic (sta) delivery instrument and continuing efforts on developing medical
products utilizing the compuflo technology.
table of contents
milestone relies on a combination of patent, copyright, trade secret, and
trademark laws and employee and third party nondisclosure agreements to protect intellectual property rights. despite the precautions taken by milestone to protect the products, unauthorized parties may attempt to reverse engineer, copy, or obtain
and use products and information that milestone regarded as proprietary, or may design products serving similar purposes that do not infringe on milestones patents. the companys failure to protect its proprietary information and the
expenses of doing so could have a material adverse effect on the operating results and financial condition.
in the event that the products infringe upon patent or proprietary rights of others, milestone may be required to modify
processes or to obtain a license. there can be no assurance that milestone would be able to do so in a timely manner, upon acceptable terms and conditions, or at all. the failure to do so would have a material adverse effect on the company.
government regulation  the fda cleared the compudent instrument and its disposable handpieces for marketing in the u.s. for dental applications in july 1996; the compumed instrument for marketing in the u.s. for
medical applications in may 2001; and, the safety wand for marketing in the u.s. for dental applications in september 2003. for us to commercialize the other products in the u.s., milestone will have to submit additional 510(k) applications
with the fda. milestone received fda 510 (k)approval for the sta instrument in august 2006.  the
manufacture and sale of medical devices and other medical products are subject to extensive regulation by the fda pursuant to the fdc act, and by other federal, state and foreign authorities. under the fdc act, medical devices must receive fda
clearance before they can be marketed commercially in the u.s. some medical products must undergo rigorous pre-clinical and clinical testing and an extensive fda approval process before they can be marketed. these processes can take a number of
years and require the expenditure of substantial resources. the time required for completing such testing and obtaining such approvals is uncertain, and fda clearance may never be obtained. delays or rejections may be encountered based upon changes
in fda policy during the period of product development and fda regulatory review of each product submitted. similar delays also may be encountered in other countries. following the enactment of the medical device amendments to the fdc act in may
1976, the fda classified medical devices in commercial distribution into one of three classes. this classification is based on the controls necessary to reasonably ensure the safety and effectiveness of the medical device. class i devices are those
devices whose safety and effectiveness can reasonably be ensured through general controls, such as adequate labeling, pre-market notification, and adherence to the fdas quality instrument regulation (qsr), also referred to as
good manufacturing practices (gmp) regulations. some class i devices are further exempted from some of the general controls. class ii devices are those devices whose safety and effectiveness reasonably can be ensured through
the use of special controls, such as performance standards, post-market surveillance, patient registries, and fda guidelines. class iii devices are those which must receive pre-market approval by the fda to ensure their safety and effectiveness.
generally, class iii devices are limited to life-sustaining, life-supporting or implantable devices.  if a
manufacturer or distributor can establish that a proposed device is substantially equivalent to a legally marketed class i or class ii medical device or to a class iii medical device for which the fda has not required pre-market
approval, the manufacturer or distributor may seek fda marketing clearance for the device by filing a 510(k) pre-market notification. the 510(k) pre-market notification and the claim of substantial equivalence may have to be supported by various
types of data and materials, including test results indicating that the device is as safe and effective for its intended use as a legally marketed predicate device. following submission of the 510(k) pre-market notification, the manufacturer or
distributor may not place the device into commercial distribution until an order is issued by the fda. by regulation, the fda has no specific time limit by which it must respond to a 510(k) pre-market notification. at this time, the fda typically
responds to the submission of a 510(k) pre-market notification within 180 days. the fda response may declare that the device is substantially equivalent to another legally marketed device and allow the proposed device to be marketed in the u.s.
however, the fda may determine that the proposed device is not substantially equivalent or may require further information, such as additional test data, before the fda is able to make a determination regarding substantial equivalence. such
determination or request for additional information could delay market introduction of products and could have a material adverse effect on us. if a device that has obtained 510(k) pre-market notification clearance is changed or modified in design,
components, method of manufacture, or intended use, such that the safety or effectiveness of the device could be significantly affected, separate 510(k) pre-market notification clearance must be obtained before the modified device can be marketed in
the u.s. if a manufacturer or distributor cannot establish that a proposed device is substantially equivalent to a legally marketed device, the manufacturer or distributor will have to seek pre-market approval of the proposed device, a more
difficult procedure requiring extensive data, including pre-clinical and human clinical trial data, as well as extensive literature to prove the safety and efficacy of the device.
though the sta instrument, compudent, the safety wand and compumed have received fda marketing
clearance, there can be no assurance that any of the other products under development will obtain the required regulatory clearance in a timely manner, or at all. if regulatory clearance of a product is granted, such clearance may entail limitations
on the indicated uses for which the
table of contents
product may be marketed. in addition, modifications may be made to the products to incorporate and enhance their functionality and performance based upon new data and design review. there can be
no assurance that the fda will not request additional information relating to product improvements; that any such improvements would not require further regulatory review, thereby delaying the testing, approval and commercialization of product
improvements; or, that ultimately any such improvements will receive fda clearance.  compliance with
applicable regulatory requirements is subject to continual review and will be monitored through periodic inspections by the fda. later discovery of previously unknown problems with a product, manufacturer, or facility may result in restrictions on
such product or manufacturer, including fines, delays or suspensions of regulatory clearances, seizures or recalls of products, operating restrictions and criminal prosecution and could have a material adverse effect on the company.
milestone is subject to pervasive and continuing regulation by the fda, whose regulations require manufacturers of
medical devices to adhere to certain qsr requirements as defined by the fdc act. qsr compliance requires testing, quality control and documentation procedures. failure to comply with qsr requirements can result in the suspension or termination of
production, product recall or fines and penalties. products also must be manufactured in registered establishments. in addition, labeling and promotional activities are subject to scrutiny by the fda and, in certain circumstances, by the federal
trade commission. the export of devices is also subject to regulation in certain instances.  the medical
device reporting (mdr) regulation obligates us to provide information to the fda on product malfunctions or injuries alleged to have been associated with the use of the product or in connection with certain product failures that could
cause serious injury. if, as a result of fda inspections, mdr reports or other information, the fda believes that milestone are not in compliance with the law, the fda can institute proceedings to detain or seize products, enjoin future violations,
or assess civil and/or criminal penalties against us, the officers or employees. any action by the fda could result in disruption of operations for an undetermined time.
in june 2007, milestone received a ce mark for the marketing of the sta instrument in europe. in june 2003
milestone received a ce mark for marketing of the safety wand and the wand handpieces with needle in europe. in july 2003, milestone obtained regulatory approval to sell compudent and its handpieces in australia and new zealand.
product liability  failure to use any of the products in accordance with recommended operating procedures could potentially result in health hazards or injury. failures of the products to function properly could subject the
company to claims of liability. milestone maintains liability insurance in an amount that milestone believes is adequate. however, there can be no assurance that the insurance coverage will be sufficient to pay product liability claims brought
against the company. a partially or completely uninsured claim, if successful and of significant magnitude, could have a material adverse effect on the company.  employees  on december31, 2011, milestone had a
total of 16 employees, consisting of two executive officers, a director of international and professional relations, a director of engineering, a domestic sales manager, an international sales manager, five sales representatives (field and
internal), two customer service representatives, a staff accountant, a bookkeeper and an administrative manager. milestone also has a full time consultant who serves as a director of clinical affairs.
item1a. certain risk factors that may affect growth and profitability
the following factors may affect the growth and profitability of milestone and should be considered by any prospective
purchaser or current holder of milestones securities:  milestone has no history of profitable operations. continuing
losses could exhaust capital resources and force us to discontinue operations.  for the years ended
december31, 2011 and 2010, revenues were approximately $8.4 million and $9.7 million, respectively. in addition, milestone has had losses for each year since the commencement of operations, including net losses of approximately $1,482,000 and
$615,000 for 2011 and 2010, respectively. at december31, 2011, milestone had an accumulated deficit of approximately $60.9 million. at december31, 2011, the company had cash and cash equivalents $96,324 and a negative working capital of
$1,310,935. the working capital decrease is due to the companys ramp up of purchasing of parts in anticipation of significant sales to our distributor in china. such sales have been delayed. the significant working capital decrease of
$1,304,250 in 2011 as compared to 2010 is due to the delay in obtaining regulatory approval to sell our instruments and handpieces in china.
table of contents
obtaining such regulatory approval was not a condition of the purchase order and sale with the distributor in china. as a result of this delay, the advance to the contract manufacturer has been
allocated between current and long term. additionally, the accounts payable due to suppliers has recognized as short term in 2011 and has been allocated between long term and short term in 2010. and finally, the accounts receivable for the china
distributor has been allocated between current and long term, with a reserve of $516,000 provided against the accounts receivable. the company is actively pursuing the generation of positive cash flows from operating activities through increases in
revenues based upon managements assessment of present contracts and current negotiations and reductions in operating expenses.  as of december31, 2011, the company believes that it does not have sufficient cash reserves to meet all of its anticipated obligations for the next twelve months. if the company requires a need for
a higher level of marketing and sales effort, or if the company is unable to generate positive cash flows from its operating activities, it will need to raise additional capital. there is no assurance that the company will be able to achieve
positive operating cash flows or that additional capital can be raised on the terms and conditions satisfactory to the company, if at all. if additional capital is required and it cannot be raised, then the company would be forced to curtail its
development activities, reduce marketing expenses for existing dental products or adopt other cost savings measures, any of which might negatively affect the companys operating results.
the companys recurring losses raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern.
milestone cannot become successful unless it gains greater market acceptance for its products and technology.
as with any new technology, there is substantial risk that the marketplace will not accept the potential benefits of this
technology or be unwilling to pay for any cost differential with the existing technologies. market acceptance of compudent, sta instrument, the safetywand, compumed and compuflo depends, in large part, upon the
ability to educate potential customers of the products distinctive characteristics and benefits and will require substantial marketing efforts and expense. more than 35,000 instruments of the sta instrument and its predecessors have
been sold worldwide since 1998. since being introduced to market in february 2007, more than 8,000 instruments of the sta instrument have been sold. milestone cannot assure that its current or proposed products will be accepted by
practitioners or that any of the current or proposed products will be able to compete effectively against current and alternative products.
the companys limited distribution channels must be expanded in order to become successful.
future revenues depend on the companys ability to market and distribute its computer-controlled injection products
successfully. in the u.s., milestone hired in july 2010 a domestic sales director to spur our growth trend in the usa and canada. the us and canadian market rely on several independent dental distributors, and a team of clinical product specialists
comprised of independent dental hygienists who help to educate, train and sell our products to dental practitioners and group dental practices in key u.s. markets. abroad, milestone lacked appropriate distribution in many markets. in april 2010, the
company hired an international sales director to improve sales effort outside the usa. to be successful, the company will need to engage additional distributors, provide for their proper training and ensure adequate customer support. in the spring
of 2009, the company signed an exclusive distribution and marketing agreement with china national medicines corporation, dba sinopharm, which is chinas largest domestic manufacturer, distributor and marketer of pharmaceuticals and importer of
medical devices and the countrys largest domestic distributor of dental anesthetic carpules to the chinese dental industry. prior to the end of 2009, china national medicines issued milestone a blanket purchase order for 12,000 sta units and
related handpieces to be delivered over 36 months, thereby marking the companys initial penetration into chinas emerging dental market. milestone cannot assure that it will be able to hire and retain an adequate sales force or engage
suitable distributors, or that the sales force or distributors will be able to successfully market and sell the products.  as of march13, 2012, china national medicine has not received the appropriate registration approval from the regulatory body in china, therefore, shipment of sta instruments and handpieces have been
suspended pending the approval to sell and distribute these products in china. it is expected that the approval by the appropriate chinese regulatory body will be received in 2012.
milestone depends on three principal manufacturers. if the company cannot maintain its existing relationships or develop new ones, it
may have to cease operations.  milestone has informal arrangements with the manufacturer of the sta
instrument, compudent and compumed instruments and with one of the principal manufacturers of the handpieces, for those items, respectively. pursuant to the informal arrangements, they manufacture these products under specific
purchase orders without minimum purchase commitment. however, in november 2009, the company issued a purchase order to tricor corporation to manufacture 12,000 sta instruments, over the next three years. in 2010,
table of contents
1,000 sta instrument were purchased and shipped against this purchase order. milestone has a manufacturing agreement with one of the principal manufacturers of its handpieces pursuant to
which they manufacture products under specific purchase orders but without minimum purchase commitments. milestone has been supplied by the manufacturer of the sta instrument, compudent and compumed since the commencement of production
in 1998, one of the manufacturers of its handpieces since 2002 and the other manufacturer of handpieces since 2003. however, termination of the manufacturing relationship with any of these manufacturers could significantly and adversely affect the
ability to produce and sell the products. though milestone has established an alternate source of supply for the handpieces in china and other alternate sources of supply exist, milestone would need to recover its existing tools or have new tools
produced to establish relationships with new suppliers. establishing new manufacturing relationships could involve significant expense and delay. any curtailment or interruptions of the supply, whether or not as a result or termination of the
relationship, would have an adverse affect.  milestone may be subject to product liability claims that are not fully
covered by insurance and that could put the company under financial strain.  milestone could be subject to
claims for personal injury from the alleged malfunction or misuse of the dental and medical products. while milestone carries liability insurance that is believed to be adequate, the company cannot assure that the insurance coverage will be
sufficient to pay such claims should they be successful. a partially or completely uninsured claim, if successful and of significant magnitude, could have a material adverse effect on the company.
milestone relies on the continuing services of the chief executive officer and director of clinical affairs.
milestone depends on the personal efforts and abilities of the chief executive officer and the director of clinical
affairs. milestone maintains a key man life insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000 on the life of the chief executive officer. however, the loss of his services or director of clinical affairs, on whom milestone maintains no insurance, could
have a materially adverse effect on the business.  the market price of milestones common stock has been volatile and
may continue to fluctuate significantly because of various factors, some of which are beyond the companys control.  milestones stock price has been extremely volatile, fluctuating over the last two years between closing prices of $.25 and $1.85. the market price of common shares could continue to fluctuate
significantly in response to a variety of factors, some of which may be beyond the companys control.  milestone is controlled by a
limited number of shareholders.  milestones principal shareholders, leonard osser and k. tucker
andersen, beneficially own 32.6% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock. as a result, they have the ability to exercise substantial control over the companys affairs and corporate actions requiring shareholder approval, including
electing directors, selling all or substantially all of the assets, merging with another entity or amending its certificate of incorporation. this de facto control could delay, deter or prevent a change in control and could adversely affect the
price that investors might be willing to pay in the future for the companys securities.  future sales or the
potential for sale of a substantial number of shares of milestones common stock could cause the trading price of common stock and warrants to decline and could impair the companys ability to raise capital through subsequent equity
offerings.  sales of a substantial number of shares of milestones common stock in the public
markets, or the perception that these sales may occur, could cause the market price of the stock to decline and could materially impair its ability to raise capital through the sale of additional equity securities. at december31, 2011,
milestone had outstanding options and warrants to purchase 1,599,281 shares of common stock at prices ranging from $0.32 to $2.69 per share with a weighted average exercise price of $1.13. holders of these warrants and options are given the
opportunity to profit from a rise in the market price of the common stock and are likely to exercise their securities at a time when the company would be able to obtain additional equity capital on more favorable terms. thus, the terms upon which
the company will be able to obtain additional equity capital may be adversely affected, since the holders of outstanding options and warrants can be expected to exercise them at a time when milestone would, in all likelihood, be able to obtain any
needed capital on terms more favorable than the exercise terms provided by such outstanding securities. the market price of the common shares has been volatile and may continue to fluctuate significantly because of various factors, some of which are
beyond the companys control.
table of contents
implementation of procedures to comply with the sarbanes-oxley act and sec rules
concerning internal controls may be so costly that compliance could have an adverse effect on the company.
the management of the company has assessed the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of
december31, 2011. in making this assessment, management used the criteria established in internal control-integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the company complied
with sarbanes-oxley requirements to include in the annual report a management report on the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting. in 2005, milestone hired an outside consultant to assist with the development and
implementation of the necessary internal controls and reporting procedures. in 2011 and 2010, the company utilized the outside consultant on a quarterly basis to review compliance with the internal controls over financial reporting. this expense
amounted to $13,533 and $15,200 in 2011 and 2010, respectively and the cost is expected to continue in 2012.
item1b. unresolved staff comments
none
item2. description of property  the headquarters for the company is located at 220 south orange
avenue, livingston, new jersey which consists of approximately 6,300 square feet of office space. the company leases its headquarters at a monthly cost of $6,942, which it believes to be competitive and the lease term expires on june30, 2014.
the leased office space is in good condition. additionally, since november 2010 milestone leased a corporate apartment in maplewood, new jersey on a month-to-month basis which it terminated in december 2011. a third party distribution and logistics
center in pennsylvania handles shipping and order fulfillment on a month-to-month basis.  milestone does not
own or intend to invest in any real property. milestone currently has no policy with respect to investments or interests in real estate, real estate mortgages or securities of, or interests in, persons primarily engaged in real estate activities.
item3. legal proceedings
at the present time, the company is not involved in any significant litigation.
item4. mine safety disclosure
table of contents
part ii
item5. market for common equity and related stockholder matters and small business issuer purchases of equity
securities  market information  milestones common stock trades on the otc bulletin board (otcbb) and, beginning in february 2011, on the otc market on the otcqb market tier under the symbol mlss. the
quotations reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission, and may not necessarily represent actual transactions.  common stock  the following table sets forth the high and
low sales prices of the common stock
september 30,
september 30,
high
low
first quarter
$
1.05
$
0.62
second quarter *
$
0.80
$
0.41
third quarter
$
0.78
$
0.30
fourth quarter
$
0.70
$
0.25
first quarter
$
1.85
$
1.45
second quarter
$
1.70
$
1.12
third quarter
$
1.25
$
0.95
fourth quarter
$
1.12
$
0.80
*
on february19, 2011, milestones common stock began trading on the otcqb.
holders
according to the records of the transfer agent, there were approximately 91 and 71 shareholders of record of the common
stock as of december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. however, the company believes that there are approximately 2,000 beneficial owners of the companys common stock at december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
dividends  the holders of the common stock are entitled to receive such dividends as may be declared by milestones board of directors. milestone has not paid and does not expect to declare or pay any dividends
in the foreseeable future.  for information regarding securities authorized under the equity compensation
plan, see item12.  sales of unregistered securities
see note j  stockholders equity, to the financial statements for the issuance of unregistered securities.
item6. selected financial data
milestone is a smaller reporting company as defined by regulations s-k and as such, is not providing the
information contained in this item pursuant to regulation s-k.  item7. managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations.  the following discussions of the financial
condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this annual report. certain statements in this discussion and elsewhere in this report constitute
forward-looking statements, within the meaning of section 21e of the exchange act, that involve risks and uncertainties. the actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. see certain risk
factors on page 11 of this form 10-k.
table of contents
overview  milestone remains focused on advancing efforts to achieve our two primary objectives; those being:
optimizing our tactical approach to product sales and marketing in order to materially increase penetration of the global dental and medical
markets with our proprietary, patented computer-controlled local anesthesia delivery (c-clad) solution, the sta single tooth anesthesia instrument (sta instrument); and
identifying and pursing strategic collaborations with third parties to jointly develop new products utilizing our patented compuflo
pressure force technology for novel new medical applications.  sta instrument awards  industry recognition
since its market introduction in the spring of 2007, the sta instrument has received favorable
reviews and awards from the dental industry. in july2007, noted industry publication dentistry today featured the sta instrument as one of the top 100 products in 2007, helping to promote much broader recognition of
the instrument and validating the sta instruments value proposition for dentists and patients alike. in april2008, medical device& diagnostic industry magazine distinguished the sta instrument as a 2008
medical design excellence award winner in the dental instruments, equipment and supplies product category. of the 33 products to receive this coveted award, the sta instrument was one of only two winning products that serve dental
practitioners.  in july 2010, the sta instrument was recognized as one of dentistry
todays, top 100 products, for the third consecutive year. this honor is significant because it is unprecedented in milestones history and serves to support our objective of establishing our instrument as the new global standard of
care for painless dental injections.  sta instrument growth
since its market introduction in early 2007, the sta instrument and a prior computerized controlled local
anesthesia delivery product, have been used to deliver over 48million of safe, effective and comfortable injections. the instrument has also been favorably evaluated in numerous peer-reviewed, published clinical studies and associated
articles. moreover, there appears to be a growing consensus among users that the sta instrument is proving to be a valuable and beneficial instrument that is positively impacting the practice of dentistry worldwide. the utility and value of
the sta instrument is perhaps best summarized by dr.joe blaes, who wrote in the december2008 edition of dental economics, i tried the sta instrument and my patients absolutely love it. this is a no brainer
go get one asap!  global distribution network
north america market  the sta instrument and related hand pieces are marketed to the dental industry in the united states and canada by many of the nations leading dental supply companies, including henry schein,
inc., patterson dental supply, atlanta dental, benco dental, burkhart dental, darby dental supply, dental health products, goetze dental, iowa dental, nashville dental and newark dental. in canada, our independent distributors include dental 2000,
mediclub, and specialty dental.  in the third quarter of 2010, the company added a domestic sales director to
refocus our attention on the usa and canadian markets. the mission of the domestic sales director is to grow our business through marketing our sta instrument to dental group practices, as well as individual dental practitioners. through direct
marketing to the dental group practices and utilizing a group of independent hygienists, the instrument and handpiece sales should increase substantially in the future. the company signed on its first group dental practice in january 2011, towncare
dental.  international market
on the global front, we also have granted exclusive marketing and distribution rights for the sta instrument to
select dental suppliers in various international regions in asia, africa, south america and europe. they include istrodent in south africa and unident in the scandinavian countries of denmark, sweden, norway and iceland.
in april2009, we signed an exclusive distribution and marketing agreement with china national medicines
corporation, d/b/a sinopharm, which is chinas largest domestic manufacturer, distributor and marketer of pharmaceuticals and importer of medical devices and the countrys largest domestic distributor of dental anesthetic carpules to the
chinese dental industry. prior to the end of 2009, china national medicines issued milestone a blanket purchase order for 12,000 sta instruments to be delivered over 36 months, thereby marking the companys initial penetration into
chinas emerging dental market.
table of contents
as of march13, 2012, china national medicine has not received the
appropriate registration approval from the regulatory body in china, therefore, shipment of sta instruments and handpieces have been suspended pending the approval to sell and distribute these products in china. it is expected that the approval by
the appropriate chinese regulatory body will be received in 2012.  according to a report published by the u.s.
department of commerce, titled chinas emerging markets: opportunities in the dental and dental lab industry, chinas dental market lags behind other healthcare services and has largely been neglected in the past. in fact, cs
market research reports that of chinas 1.3 billion plus population, 50% of the adults and 70% of the children are estimated to have decayed tooth problems, and over 90% have periodontal disease. however, with increasing affluence
of the chinese population, as well as increasing attention towards personal care, demand for dental services has been growing. market research firm freedonia agrees, noting that demand for dental products in china is expected to climb to 21.5
billion rmb (us$3.15 billion) by 2012, due primarily to escalating personal income levels and government programs promoting awareness of the benefits of good oral care.
shortly before the end of the second quarter 2009, we announced that we were refining our international marketing
strategy to gain greater access to and penetration of the international dental markets for the sta instrument, compudent and related disposable hand pieces. the new sales strategy provides for increasing hands-on oversight and support of our
existing international distribution network, while also attracting new distributors throughout europe, asia and south america. to assist in this endeavor, milestone added in the spring of 2010 an international sales director to focus on growth of
our products outside the usa and canada. the new addition to the companys staff has proven to be a positive improvement to our sales and marketing effort outside the usa and canada.
in july 2011, we entered into a definitive joint venture agreement with beijing 3h (heart-help-health) scientific
technology co., ltd. (beijing 3h) for the development, commercialization, manufacture and marketing of epidural and intra-articular injection medical instruments. milestone scientific has a 50% interest in the joint venture and beijing 3h, whose
shareholders are a number of individuals, including a large shareholder in milestone who is also the principal of a supplier to milestone, bejing 3h also has a 50% interest in joint venture.
the joint venture provided for milestones contribution of an exclusive worldwide royalty-free
license to use its patents. beijing 3h will contribute $1.5 million to the joint venture to design and develop two commercial instrument and related disposables using milestones compuflo technology and disposables. milestone will have distribution responsibility in the u.s. and canada while beijing 3h will distribute products exclusively in the
peoples republic of china, macao, hong kong and other regions of asia. as of december31, 2011, bejing 3h has contributed $670,000 to the joint venture and the development project has been initiated.
table of contents
the following table shows a breakdown of milestones product sales
(net), domestically and internationally, by product category, and the percentage of product sales (net) by each product category:
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
years ended december31,
domestic
instruments
$
1,321,967
28.4
%
$
1,236,517
27.3
%
handpieces
3,272,113
70.2
%
3,216,000
71.0
%
other
64,247
1.4
%
76,903
1.7
%
total domestic
$
4,658,327
100.0
%
$
4,529,420
100.0
%
international
instruments
$
1,501,702
%
$
2,453,939
47.0
%
handpieces
2,185,083
%
2,746,965
52.6
%
other
32,982
%
19,644
0.4
%
total international
$
3,719,767
100.0
%
$
5,220,548
100.0
%
domestic/international analysis
domestic
$
4,658,327
55.6
%
$
4,529,420
46.5
%
international
3,719,767
44.4
%
5,220,548
53.5
%
total product sales
$
8,378,094
100.0
%
$
9,749,968
100.0
%
the company earned gross profits of 64% and 64% in the years ended december31, 2011
and 2010, respectively. however, the revenues and related gross profits have not been sufficient to support overhead, new product introduction and research and development expenses. although the company anticipates expending funds for research and
development in 2012, these amounts will vary based on the operating results for each quarter. the company has incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities since its inception, except for 2009. the company, at
december31, 2011, believes that it does not have sufficient cash reserves to meet all of its anticipated obligations for the next twelve months. the company is actively pursuing the generation of positive cash flows from operating activities
through increase in revenue, assessment of current contracts and current negotiations. there is no assurance that the company will be able to achieve positive operating cash flows or that additional capital raised on terms and conditions
satisfactory to the company, if at all. if additional capital is required and it cannot be raised, then the company would be forced to curtail its development activities, reduce marketing for existing dental products or adopt other cost saving
measures, any of which might negatively affect the companys operating results.  in 2012, the company
plans to further support increased sales and marketing activity through trade show appearances, utilization of independent hygienists making sales calls and training individual practitioners and group practices domestically, refined and
directed advertising to dental professionals, and support and broaden our global distribution network.  in
january 2011, the company signed an agreement with its first group dental practice towncare dental partnership for deployment of our sta instrument. the sta instrument will replace the syringe in this practice. this practice has agreed
to expand development of the sta instrument into its remaining offices in 2012 beginning with eight offices in broward county.
current product platform  see item1. description of business  technology rights
the technology underlying the safetywand and compuflo technology and an improvement to the controls for
compudent were developed by the director of clinical affairs and assigned to milestone. the company purchased this technology pursuant to an agreement dated january1, 2005, for 43,424 shares of restricted common stock and $145,000 in
cash, paid on april1, 2005. in addition, the director of clinical affairs will receive additional deferred contingent payments of 2.5% of the total sales of products using some of these technologies, and 5% of the total sales of products using
some of the other technologies. if products produced by third parties use any of these technologies, under a license from milestone, then he will also receive the corresponding percentage of the consideration received by us for such sale or license.
table of contents
summary of critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
milestones discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based
upon its financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles, generally accepted in the u.s. the preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported
amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. on an on-going basis, the company evaluates its estimates, including those related to accounts receivable, inventories, stock-based
compensation and contingencies. the company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the
carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
while significant accounting policies are more fully described in note b to the financial statements included elsewhere
in this report, the company believes that the following accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates are most critical in understanding and evaluating the reported financial results.
accounts receivable  the realization of accounts receivable current and long-term will have a significant impact on the company. the criteria used by management to evaluate the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts
included, among others, credit worthiness of the customer, current trends, prior payment performance, the age of the receivables and the companys overall historical experience.  inventories  inventory costing, obsolescence and physical
control are significant to the on-going operation of the business. inventories principally consist of finished goods and component parts stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or market. inventory quantities on hand are reviewed on
a quarterly basis and a provision for excess and obsolete inventory is recorded if required based on past and expected future sales.
investment in medical joint venture  the company has entered into a medical joint venture with a third party for the development and commercialization of two medical products. the company owns fifty percent of the joint venture and has
recorded its investment on the equity basis of accounting. the companys proportionate share of expenses incurred by the joint venture is charged to the statement of operations and adjusted against the investment in medical joint venture.
impairment of long-lived assets  the long lived assets of the company, principally patents and trademarks are the base features of the business. milestone reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever circumstances and situations
change such that there is an indication that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. the carrying value of the asset is evaluated in relation to the operating performance and future undiscounted cash flows of the underlying assets.
accounts payable  current and long term accounts payable represents amounts due to suppliers of the company. long term accounts payable is based on an informal payment agreement with the supplier to assist in the
purchasing of instruments and handpieces, beyond one year from the balance sheet date.  revenue recognition
revenue from product sales is recognized net of discounts and allowances to domestic distributors on the date of shipment
for essentially all shipments, since the shipment terms are fob warehouse. the company will recognize revenue on date of arrival of the goods at the customers location where shipments are fob destination. shipments to international
distributors are fob the warehouse and revenue is therefore recognized on shipment. in both cases the price to the buyer is fixed and the collectability is reasonably assured. further, the company has no obligation on these sales for any post
installation, set-up or maintenance, these being the responsibility of the buyer. milestones only obligation after sale is the normal commercial warranty against manufacturing defects if the alleged defective unit is returned within the
warranty period.
table of contents
results of operations
the following table sets forth for the consolidated results of operations for the year ended december31, 2011
compared to 2010 as a percentage of revenues. the trends suggested by this table may not be indicative of future operating results:
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
years ended
december 31, 2011
december 31, 2010
total revenue
$
8,378,094
%
$
9,749,968
%
cost of products sold
3,016,642
%
3,531,452
%
gross profit
5,361,452
%
6,218,516
%
selling, general and administrative expenses
6,445,001
%
6,648,859
%
research and development expenses
140,053
%
270,494
%
operating expenses
6,585,054
%
6,919,353
%
loss from operations
(1,223,602
)
-15
%
(700,837
)
-7
%
total other (expense) income
(258,498
)
-3
%
86,329
%
net loss
$
(1,482,100
)
-18
%
$
(614,508
)
-6
%
year ended december31, 2011 compared to year ended december31, 2010
total revenues for the twelve months ended december31, 2011 and 2010 were $8,378,094 and $9,749,968, respectively.
the total decrease in product sales of $1,371,874, or 14%, is a direct result of our shipment of sta instruments and handpieces to a chinese distributor in june 2010. excluding the shipment in 2010 to the chinese distributor, comparatively,
the total sales volume increased by $468,802 in 2011 over 2010. the increase in sales volume of domestic instruments by $85,450, or 7% in 2011 over 2010, was directly related to managements implementation of a new sales and training strategy
focused on concentrated geographical sales efforts and support (deploying independent hygienists) for all customers. in the domestic market, the sta handpiece sales increased by $208,024 or 35% as compared to 2010. compudent handpiece
sales decreased by $151,911 or 6%. the compudent handpiece sales decrease in the domestic market is not specifically attributable to any marketing or sales deemphasizing of the product category. rather it may be attributable to our customers
migrating to our sta instrument. on the international scene, instrument sales decreased in 2011 over 2010 by $952,237, or 39%, primarily due to a significant reduction in sales to our chinese distributor. sta instrument sales in 2010,
to china, represented $1,290,000 of the international sales. this revenue did not occur in 2011, as the chinese distributor is still in the process of registering the sta instruments with the regulatory authorities in china. comparatively, on
an international basis, 2011 revenues increased against 2010 revenues for sta instrument sales excluding china sta instruments sales in 2010, ($1,290,000) by $396,700. the decrease in handpiece sales internationally was $561,882 or 20%
due to a decrease in sales of sta handpieces of $485,103 ($557,568 for handpiece sales to china in 2010) and a decrease in sales of compudent handpieces $76,779.
cost of products sold for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010 were $3,016,642 and $3,531,452, respectively.
the $514,810 decrease in product cost is due to a decrease in revenue volume.  for the year ended
december31, 2011, milestones gross profit percentage remained the same as compared to the prior year ended december31, 2010, however, gross profit dollars decreased as a result of reduced revenues. milestone generated a gross
profit of $5,361,452, or 64% in 2011 as compared to a gross profit of $6,218,516, or 64% in 2010. the total dollar decrease in gross profit was $857,064 in 2011 over 2010.
selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010 were $6,445,001 and
$6,648,859, respectively. the $203,858, or 3.1%, net decrease was focused on several expense categories. in 2011, sales expense increased by $87,451. this increase is primarily due to increased travel and tradeshow attendance. marketing expense
decreased by $138,925. this decrease was primarily in the areas of printing cost of $33,931, media placement $23,247, marketing key opinion leaders of $69,939; marketing consulting of $31,682 and brochure and production design of $50,720 and offset
by promotions at trade shows (national and regional) of $72,390. payroll expenses increased by $776,615, due to a full year compensation cost for two marketing directors (total $138,242), a reversal of a 2009 achievement bonus for the chief
executive officer of approximately $300,000 and a reversal in stock based compensation of approximately $198,000 in 2010. this bonus ($300,000) was awarded in 2011 to the chief executive officer upon completion of the medical joint venture
agreement. legal and patent expenses increased by $36,849 in the aggregate due to reduced general litigation expenses and offset by increased customary patent annuity payments throughout the world. other general
table of contents
and administrative expenses decreased by $965,848 due to decrease in payment of an international commission of $203,391, decreased royalties of $53,003 as a result of a decreased sales volume, an
international travel expense increase of $4,720, directly related to our current and future sales growth, decrease in the success fees for domestic and international business of $44,670 offset by an increase in business consulting of $22,102. bad
debt expense decreased by $726,678, in 2011 compared to 2010. this decrease is the result of a $636,000 charge in 2010 related to a chinese distributor accounts receivable. this charge did not occur in 2011 and, in fact, a portion of the reserve was
reduced based on collection of a portion of the accounts receivable. in addition, the company realized expense increases in the areas of professional accounting and audit fees of $31,095 and reduced insurance costs of $15,523.
research and development expenses for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010 were $140,053 and $270,494,
respectively. the decrease of $130,441 is due principally to application of $104,968 from the medical joint venture for reimbursement of expenses previously incurred by the company.
the loss from operations for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010 was $1,223,602 and $700,837, respectively.
the $522,765, or increase in loss from operations, is mainly attributable to our decreased revenue in 2011.
for the year ended december31, 2011 we had total other expense of $258,498 compared to total other income of
$86,329 for the same prior year period, a decrease of $344,827. the decrease is attributable to the decrease of $183,673 of other income we had in 2010 from the sale of tax credits under the new jersey technology business tax certificate program;
respective increases of $36,703 and $2,500 in interest expense related to the line of credit and long term note (see note i to the financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report) and amortization of debt discount; and a loss on
earnings of $121,399 from medical joint venture due to the development cost of medical instruments incurred by the medical joint venture.  for the reasons explained above, net loss for the year ended december31, 2011 was $1,482,100 as compared to a net loss of $614,508 for the year ended december31, 2010. the $867,592, or 141%,
increase in net loss is primarily a result of a significant decrease in gross profit ($857,064), offset partially by a decrease in selling, general and administrative and research and development expenses of $334,298. there was a reduction in other
income of $183,673, nj technology tax corporative program and increase to loss on earnings for joint venture in 2011 of $121,399, both of which had the effect of increasing the loss by $305,072.
liquidity and capital resources  as of december31, 2011, the company had cash and cash equivalents of $96,324 and a negative working capital of $1,310,935. the decrease in working capital of $1,304,250 in 2011 was caused by a delay
in obtaining regulatory approval to sell our instruments and handpieces in china. based on the initial purchase order from our distributor in china in 2009, the company ramped up purchasing of parts in anticipation of significant sales in 2010 and
future years. as a result of the delay in shipping, the advances to contract manufacturer has increased significantly, (current and long term), in 2011 as compared to 2010. additionally, the accounts payable due to suppliers has also increased and
is classified as a current liability in 2011 and allocated as current and long term in 2010. and finally, the accounts receivable from the china distributor has been classified between current and long term net of a reserve of doubtful accounts in
the aggregate of $516,000.  the company entered a medical joint venture agreement with a third party in 2011,
for the development and commercialization of two medical instruments. the company did not invest any funds into this medical joint venture. see note f to the financial statements.
as a result of this delay on shipments to china, current accounts receivable increased by $358,238, inventories decreased
by $196,453 and current advances to contract manufacturer increased by $222,067. also, cash decreased by $530,758, utilized in operations and to pay for parts required for the china production and for operations. current liabilities increased by
$1,214,059, principally due to an increase in current accounts payable for the purchase of materials to produce instruments and handpieces.  the company has also incurred increases in noncurrent advances to contract manufacturer of $740,154 and a decrease in noncurrent accounts payable of $440,376 as a result of the delay in shipping
instruments and handpieces to our distributor in china. the company continues to take positive steps to maintain adequate inventory levels and advances to contract manufacturers to maintain available inventory to meet our domestic and international
sales requirements. milestone incurred net losses of $1,482,100 and $614,508 for the years ended 2011 and 2010, respectively. cash flows from operating activities for the year ended december31, 2011 was a negative $570,730 and for the year
ended december31, 2010 was a negative $293,777.  for the year ended december31, 2011, net cash
used in operating activities was $570,730. this was attributable primarily to a net loss of $1,482,100 adjusted for noncash items of $1,010,521 and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $99,150. the decrease in noncash items in 2011 as
compared to 2010 is principally due to the increase in shares issued for compensation of $670,156 in 2011.
table of contents
for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010, milestone used $39,028
and $108,270, respectively, in investing activities, primarily attributable to legal fees related to payment for patent rights.  the company borrowed $450,000 from a shareholder in 2008. in december 2008 and again in june 2011, the company refinanced the $450,000 note, extending the due date to july31, 2013. the $450,000 note
is classified as a long term note payable on the balance sheet at december31, 2011. see note i  line of credit to the financial statements.  the company has incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities since its inception, except for 2009. the company did not achieve positive cash flow in 2011. the company is
actively pursuing the generation of positive cash flows from operating activities through increases in revenues based upon managements assessment of present contracts and current negotiations and reductions in operating expenses. as of
december31, 2011, the company believes that it does not have sufficient cash reserves to meet all of its anticipated obligations for the next twelve months. however, if the company requires a higher level of marketing and sales effort, or if
the company is unable to continue generating positive cash flows from its operating activities it will need to raise additional capital. there is no assurance that the company will be able to continue to achieve positive operating cash flows or that
additional capital can be raised on the terms and conditions satisfactory to the company if at all. if additional capital is required and it cannot be raised, then the company would be forced to curtail its development activities, reduce marketing
expenses for existing dental products or adopt other cost savings measures, any of which might negatively affect the companys operating results.  the companys recurring losses and negative operating cash flows raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. the accompanying financial statements do not include any
adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.  off-balance sheet arrangements
the company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are currently material or reasonably likely to be
material to the financial position or results of operations.  contractual obligations
the impact of the contractual obligations at december31, 2011, expected on the liquidity and cash flows in future
periods, is as follows:
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
payments due by period
total
less than 1year
1-3 years
3-5years
long-term debt obligations
$
450,000
$
$
450,000
$
operating lease obligations
208,786
83,828
124,958
purchase obligations (1)
4,940,410
1,570,768
3,369,642
total
$
5,599,196
$
1,654,597
$
3,944,600
$
(1)
purchase obligations include agreements for the purchase of instruments and handpieces. the agreements are referred as purchase orders.
recent accounting pronouncements
see note bsummary of significant accounting policies to the financial statements for explanation of
recent accounting pronouncements impacting the company.  item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk  milestone is a smaller reporting company as defined by regulation s-k and
as such, is not required to provide the information required by this item.
table of contents
item8. financial statements
the financial statements of milestone required by this item are set forth beginning on page f-1.
item9. change in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item9a. controls and procedures  the companys management, including the chief executive
officer and chief financial officer, has evaluated the effectiveness of the design and operation of the companys disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) as of the end of the period covered
by this report. based upon that evaluation, the companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that the disclosure controls and procedures as of december31, 2011 are effective to ensure that information
required to be disclosed in the reports the company files or submits under the exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the secs rules and forms and that such information is accumulated
and communicated to the company's management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  managements annual report on internal control over financial reporting  milestone management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an adequate instrument of internal control over financial reporting. the internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that:
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets;
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of the financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in the united states, and that the receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of the management and directors; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the assets that could have
a material effect on the financial statements.  because of its inherent limitations,
internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. all internal control instruments, no matter how well designed, have inherent limitations. therefore, even those instruments determined to be effective can provide only
reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement preparation and presentation. because of the inherent limitations of internal control, there is a risk that material misstatements may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis by
internal control over financial reporting. however, these inherent limitations are known features of the financial reporting process. therefore, it is possible to design into the process safeguards to reduce, though not eliminate, this risk.
milestone management assessed the effectiveness of its instrument of internal control over financial
reporting as of december31, 2011. in making this assessment, management used the framework in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
(coso). based on the assessment and the criteria set forth by coso, management believes that the company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2011.
there have been no changes in the companys internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with
the evaluation that occurred during the companys last fiscal quarter ended december31, 2011 that have materially affected, or that are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal controls over financial reporting.
item9b. other information
none.
table of contents
part iii
item10. directors, executive officers, promoters, control persons and corporate governance; compliance with
section16 (a)of the exchange act.  milestones directors are elected annually by the
shareholders and serve for one-year terms until his/her successor is elected and qualified or until such directors earlier death, resignation or removal. the executive officers and key personnel are appointed by and serve as the pleasure of
the board of directors.  the current executive officers and directors of milestone and their respective ages
as of march13, 2012 are as follows:
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
name
age
position
directorsince
leslie bernhard (2)
chairmanoftheboardanddirector
leonard a. osser
chief executive officer and director
joseph dagostino
chieffinancialofficerandchiefoperatingofficer
pablo felipe serna cardenas (1)
director
leonard m. schiller(1)(2)
director
(1)
member of the audit committee
(2)
member of the compensation committee  key personnel  the following are the names of individuals
who are not executive officers of milestone but are deemed key personnel of milestone, their respective ages and positions as of march30, 2011:
september 30,
september 30,
name
age
position
eugene casagrande, d.d.s.
directorofprofessionalrelations
mark hochman, d.d.s.
director of clinical affairs
leslie bernhard, chairman of the board
in october 2009, leslie bernhard assumed the position of chairman of the board, filing a position left vacant by
mr.osser who assumed the position of chief executive officer. leslie bernhard has served as an independent director of milestone since may 2003 and was named chairman of the board in september of 2009. she co-founded adstar, inc. and since
1986 has served as its president, chief executive officer and executive director. adstar is an application service provider for the newspaper classified advertising industry. she serves on the board of directors of universal power group (amex:upg)
of dallas, texas and has done so since 2006.ms.bernhards professional experience and background with adstar and with us, as one of our directors since 2003, have given her the expertise needed to serve as chairman of the board.
leonard osser, chief executive officer  mr.osser has been milestones chief executive officer and a director since september 2009. prior to that, he served as the companys chairman from 1991 until september of 2009, and during
that time, from 1991 until 2007, was also chief executive officer of the company. in september2009, he resigned as chairman of the company, but remained a director, and assumed the position of chief executive officer. from 1980 until the
consummation of milestones public offering in november1995, mr.osser was primarily engaged as the principal owner and chief executive officer of u.s. asian consulting group, inc., a new jersey-based provider of consulting services
specializing in distressed or turnaround situations in both the public and private markets. mr.ossers knowledge of our business and background with us since 1980 provides the board with valuable leadership skills and insight into our
business.  joseph dagostino, chief financial officer
joining milestone in january 2008 as acting cfo, joseph dagostino brings to milestone a wealth of finance and
accounting experience earned over 25 years serving both publicly and privately held companies. following a nine month performance assessment by the board of directors, mr.dagostino was officially named milestones chief financial
officer in october 2008. mr.dagostino was giving the additional position of chief operating officer in september 2011. a results-oriented and decisive leader, he has specific proven expertise in treasury and cash management, strategic
planning, information technology, internal controls, sarbanes-
table of contents
oxley compliance, operations and financial and tax accounting. immediately prior to joining milestone, mr.dagostino served as senior vice president and treasurer of summit global
logistics, a publicly traded, full service international freight forwarder and customs broker with operations in the united states and china. previous executive posts also included executive vice president and cfo of haynes security, inc., a leading
electronic and manned security solutions company serving government agencies and commercial enterprises; executive vice president of finance and administration for casio, inc., the u.s. subsidiary of casio computer co., ltd., a leading manufacturer
of consumer electronics with subsidiaries throughout the world; and manager of accounting and auditing for main hurdmans national office in new york city (merged into kpmg). mr.dagostino is a certified public accountant and holds
memberships in the american institute of cpas, new jersey society of cpas, financial executive institute, consumer electronics industry association and homeland security industry association. he is a graduate of william paterson
university where he earned a bachelor of arts degree in science.  mark hochman, d.d.s., director of clinical affairs
dr.hochman has served as director of clinical affairs and director of research and development since 1999. he has a
doctorate of dental surgery with advanced training in the specialties of periodontics and orthodontics from new york university of dentistry and has been practicing dentistry since 1984. he holds a faculty appointment as a clinical associate
professor at nyu school of dental surgery. recognized as a world authority on advanced drug delivery instruments, dr.hochman has published numerous articles in this area, and shares in the responsibility for inventing much of the technology
currently available from milestone.  dr.eugene casagrande, director of international& professional relations
since 1998, dr.casagrande has served as director of international and professional relations, charged with pursuing
a broad range of clinical and industry-related strategic business opportunities for the company. he has also lectured both nationally and internationally at over 35 dental schools and in over 22 countries on computer-controlled local anesthesia
delivery. dr.casagrande is past president of the california state board of dentistry and the los angeles dental society and is a fellow of the american and international colleges of dentists and has served on the faculty of the university of
southern california, school of dentistry.  leonard m. schiller, director
mr.schiller has been a director of milestone since april 1997. mr.schiller has been a partner in the chicago
law firm of schiller, klein& mcelroy, p.c. since 1977. he has also been president of the dearborn group, a residential property management and real estate acquisition company since 1980. mr.schiller became a director of the gravitas
cayman corporation in february 2010. gravitas cayman corporation is an investment fund. mr.schillers professional experience and background as an attorney and a partner of a law firm and with us, as one of our directors since 1997, have
given him the expertise needed to serve as one of our directors.  pablo felipe serna cardenas, director
mr.serna cardenas has been a director of milestone since june 2006. he is the founder of spot investments, a
european-based financial services firm. previously, from 2001 to 2005, he was a director and senior manager at dynamic decisions group ltd, an equity research and valuation consulting firm. in that capacity, mr.serna cardenas led the corporate
finance team at dynamic decisions in investment banking and project valuation consulting. prior to joining dynamic decisions, from 1999-2001, mr.serna cardenas served as an associate with real options group. real options group is an
international academic research center consulting to business entities. before joining real options group, mr.serna cardenas was the general manager with estudios, consultorias y asesorias financieras, a financial consulting firm in columbia.
he has been a director of pairstech fund, a uk hedge fund since 2008. mr.cardenas professional experience and background as an entrepreneur and as a financial consultant and with us, as one of our directors since 2006, have given him the
expertise needed to serve as one of directors.  milestones board of directors has established
compensation and audit committees. the compensation committee reviews and recommends to the board of directors the compensation and benefits of all the officers of milestone, reviews general policy matters relating to compensation and benefits of
employees of milestone, and administers the issuance of stock options to milestones officers, employees, directors and consultants. all compensation arrangements between milestone and its directors, officers and affiliates are reviewed by the
compensation committee. the audit committee meets with management and milestones independent auditors to determine the adequacy of internal controls and other financial reporting matters; all of the members are independent directors. the board
of directors has determined that pablo felipe serna cardenas qualifies as an audit committee financial expert pursuant to item407 (d)(5) of regulation s-k. mr.cardenas is independent, as that term is defined in the listing standards of
the nyse amex.  section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance
section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934 requires our officers and directors, and person who own more
than ten percent of a registered class of our equity securities, to file reports of ownership and changes in ownership with the sec. officers, directors and greater than ten-percent stockholders are required by sec regulation to furnish us with
copies of all section16(a) forms they file. based solely on review of the copies of such forms furnish to us, or written representations that no forms 5 were required, we believe that all section16(a) filing requirements applicable to
our officers and director were complied with during the fiscal year ended december31, 2011 except that each of leonard osser and joseph dagostino did not timely file one form 4.
table of contents
code of ethics
milestone has adopted a code of ethics that applies to its principal executive officer, principal financial officer and
other persons performing similar functions. this code of ethics is filed herewith as an exhibit to this annual report and is posted on milestones web site at www.milesci.com. milestone will also provide a copy of the code of ethics to
any person without charge, upon written request addressed to the chief financial officer, joseph dagostino at the principal executive office, located at 220 south orange avenue, livingston, nj, 07039
item11. executive compensation.
the following summary compensation table sets forth all compensation earned, in all capacities, during the fiscal years
ended december31, 2011 and 2010 by (i)milestones ceo and (ii)the most highly compensated executive officers, other than the ceo who were serving as executive officers at the end of the 2011 fiscal year and whose salary as
determined by regulation s-k, item402, exceeded $100,000 (the individuals falling within categories (i)and (ii)are collectively referred to as the named executive officers).
summary of compensation table
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
name and principal position
year
salary
bonuses
othercompensation
optionawards(2)
total
leonard a. osser
chief executive officer
$
300,000
$
400,000
(1)
$
75,708
(1)
$
$
775,708
$
300,000
$
100,000
(1)
$
50,880
(1)
$
$
450,880
joseph dagostino
$
171,600
$
100,000
(3)
$
27,442
(3)
$
100,000
$
399,042
chief financial officer
$
171,600
$
50,000
(3)
$
9,000
$
168,000
$
398,600
(1)
payment of $350,000 of the bonuses have been deferred and will be paid in common stock upon the termination of his employment with the company in
accordance with the terms of his employment agreement. other compensation represents payments made for personal use of corporate apartment, health insurance coverage and car allowance.
(2)
the amounts in this column reflect the fair value of the options at date of grant. for details used in the assumption calculating the fair value of
the option reward, see note b to the financial statements for the year ended december31, 2011 and 2010, which is located on pages f-7 through f-11 of the annual report on form 10-k. compensation cost is generally recognized over the vesting
period of the award. see the table below entitled outstanding equity awards at december31, 2011.
(3)
payment of the bonuses have been deferred and will be paid in common stock upon the termination of his employment with the company in accordance
with the terms of his employment agreement. other compensation represents payments made for health insurance coverage and car allowance.  employment contracts  in march 2009, the mr.osser
assumed the position of milestones acting chief executive officer. in september 2009, he stepped down as chairman to fill the position of chief executive officer and entered into a new employment agreement with the company effective
september1, 2009. this new agreement suspends the previous agreement scheduled to terminate on december31, 2012. the new agreement is for five years ending on august31, 2014. the contract shall be extended for successive one-year
periods, unless prior to august1 of any year, either party notifies the other that he or it chooses not to extend the new employment term. as part of this agreement, mr.osser relinquished the title and position of chairman. under the new
agreement, the chief executive officer will receive a base compensation of $300,000 per year. in addition, the ceo, may earn annual bonuses up to an aggregate of $400,000, payable one half in cash and one half in common stock, contingent upon
achieving targets set for each year by the compensation committee of the board of directors of the company.
in addition, if in any year of the term of the agreement the ceo earns a bonus, he shall also be granted five-year stock
options to purchase twice the number of shares earned. each such option is to be exercisable at a price per share equal to the fair market value of a share on the date of grant (110%)of the fair market value if the ceo is a 10% or greater
stockholder on the date of grant). the options shall vest and become exercisable to the extent of one-third of the shares covered at the end of each of the first three years following the date of grant, but shall only be exercisable while the ceo is
employed by milestone or within 30 days after the termination of his employment.
table of contents
in accordance with the employment contract 1,025,735 shares of common stock
are to be paid out at the end of the contract in settlement of $1,058,333 at december31, 2011 and 571,190 shares of common stock to be paid out at the end of the contract in settlement of $758,333 at december31, 2010 of accrued deferred
compensation and, accordingly, such shares have been classified in stockholders equity with the common shares classified as to be issued.
objective of executive compensation program  the primary objective of the executive compensation program is to attract and retain qualified, energetic managers who are enthusiastic about the mission and culture. a further objective of the
compensation program is to provide incentives and reward each manager for their contribution. in addition, milestone strives to promote an ownership mentality among key leadership and the board of directors.
the compensation committee reviews and approves, or in some cases recommends for the approval of the full board of
directors, the annual compensation procedures for the named executive officers.  the compensation program is
designed to reward teamwork, as well as each managers individual contribution. in measuring the named executive officers contribution, the compensation committee considers numerous factors including the growth, strategic business
relationships and financial performance. regarding most compensation matters, including executive and director compensation, the management provides recommendations to the compensation committee; however, the compensation committee does not delegate
any of its functions to others in setting compensation. milestone does not currently engage any consultant to advice on executive and/or director compensation matters.
stock price performance has not been a factor in determining annual compensation because the price of milestones
common stock is subject to a variety of factors outside of the control. milestone does not have an exact formula for allocating between cash and non-cash compensation.
annual chief executive officer compensation consists of a base salary component and periodic stock option grants. it is
the compensation committees intention to set totals for the chief executive officer for cash compensation sufficiently high enough to attract and retain a strong motivated leadership team, but not so high that it creates a negative perception
with the other stakeholders. the chief executive officer receives stock option grants under the stock option plan. the number of stock options granted to the executive officer is made on a discretionary rather than a formula basis by the
compensation committee. the chief executive officers current and prior compensation is considered in setting future compensation. in addition, milestone reviews the compensation practices of 28 other companies. to some extent, the compensation
plan is based on the market and the companies that compete for executive management. the elements of the plan (e.g., base salary, bonus and stock options) are similar to the elements used by many companies. the exact base pay, stock option grant,
and bonus amounts are chosen in an attempt to balance the competing objectives of fairness to all stakeholders and attracting/retaining executive managers.  outstanding equity awards at december31, 2011  the
following table includes certain information with respect to the value of all unexercised options previously awarded to the named executive officers.
2011 options awards
stock awards
name
numberofsecuritiesunderlyingunexercisedoptions(#)exercisable
(1)
numberofsecuritiesunderlyingunexercisedoptions(#)unexercisable
(1)
optionexerciseprice ($)
optionexpirationdate
numberofsharesorunits of stock
thathavenotvested(#)(2)
numberofsharesorunits of stock
thathavenotvested(#)(3)
leonard osser
1,025,736
$
369,265
joseph dagostino
91,667
186,111
$
0.36
12/31/2016
333,943
$
120,219
33,333
66,667
$
1.00
12/20/2015
55,555
44,445
$
1.00
12/20/2015
27,777
22,223
$
1.15
12/17/2014
24,613
7,033
$
1.58
12/17/2014
33,300
16,700
$
1.15
9/1/2014
60,000
$
0.40
3/31/2014
total
326,245
343,179
table of contents
(1)
represents stock option grants at fair market value on the date of grant.
(2)
issuance of the shares of common stock has been deferred until the termination of his employment with the company in accordance with the terms of
his employment agreement.
(3)
based on the closing price per share of $0.36 as reported on the otcqb on december31, 2011.
compensation of directors  milestone issued company shares as compensation to its independent directors in 2011 as stated below in the compensation table. on june16, 2011 milestone approved annual compensation to its
directors in the amount of $30,000, one half payable in common stock shares and one half in cash. on june16, 2011, $15,000 of common shares were issued to each independent director.
the following table provides compensation information for the year ended december31, 2011 for each of the
independent directors. directors are reimbursed for the costs relating to attending board and committee meetings.  director compensation
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
feesearnedor
name
stockawards(1)
paidincash($)
total($)
leonard m. schiller
$
15,000
$
15,000
$
30,000
leslie bernhard
$
15,000
$
15,000
$
30,000
pablo felipe serna cardenas
$
15,000
$
15,000
$
30,000
(1)
represents the aggregate grant-date fair value of the awards computed in accordance with the fasb asc topic 718. 15,000 shares, valued at $0.60 per
share on june16, 2011, were issued to each director  item12. security ownership of
certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters  the following table, together
with the accompanying footnotes, sets forth information, as of march13, 2012, regarding stock ownership of all persons known by milestone to own beneficially more than 5% of milestones outstanding common stock, named executives, all
directors, and all directors and officers of milestone as a group:
september 30,
september 30,
march13, 2012
names of benefical owner (1)
sharesofcommonstockbeneficially owned (2)
percentageofownership
executive officers and directors
leonard osser
2,562,483
(3)
16.30
%
joseph dagostino
660,188
(4)
4.20
%
leonard schiller
114,766
(5)
*
pablo felipe serna cardenas
101,558
(6)
*
leslie bernhard
76,538
(7)
*
all directors& executive officers as group (5 persons)
3,515,533
(8)
22.40
%
k. tucker andersen
2,556,230
16.30
%
tom cheng
752,852
4.78
%
*
less than 1%
(1)
the addresses of the persons named in this table are as follows: leonard osser and joseph dagostino are at 220 south orange avenue in, new
jersey 07039; leonard m. schiller, c/o schiller, klein& mcelroy, p.c., 33 north dearborn street, suite 1030, chicago, illinois 60602; pablo felipe serna cardenas, via camillo golgi 2 opera, italy 20090; leslie bernhard, c/o adstar, inc.,
4553 glencoe avenue, suite 325, marina del rey, california 90292; k. tucker andersen, c/o cumberland associates llc, 1114 avenue of the americas, new york, new york 10036.
(2)
a person is deemed to be a beneficial owner of securities that can be acquired by such person within 60 days from march13, 2012, as
applicable, upon the exercise of options and warrants or conversion of convertible securities. each beneficial owners percentage ownership is determined by assuming that options, warrants and convertible securities that are held by such person
(but not held by any other person) and that are exercisable or convertible within 60 days from the filing of this report have been
table of contents
exercised or converted. except as otherwise indicated, and subject to applicable community property and similar laws, each of the persons named has sole voting and investment power with respect
to the shares shown as beneficially owned. all percentages are determined based on the number of all shares, including those underlying options exercisable within 60 days from the filing of this report held by the named individual, divided by
15,693,678 outstanding shares on march13, 2012, plus those shares underlying options exercisable within 60 days from the filing of this report held by the named individual or the group.
(3)
includes 1,378,413 shares held by mr.osser or family, 1,092,403 shares to be issued at the termination of his employment agreement, and 91,667
shares subject to options at $0.75 shares.
(4)
includes 304,712 shares to be issued at the termination of employment. also 29,231 shares held by mr.dagostino at march13, 2012.
additionally, this includes 326,245 shares subject to options as follows: 60,000 shares at $0.40; 61,077 shares at $1.15; 24,613 shares at $1.58;, 88,888 shares at $1.00; and 91,667 shares at $0.36.
(5)
includes 65,000 stock options as follows: 25,000 shares at $0.55 issued in june 2009; 20,000 shares at $1.68 and 20,000 shares at $0.74.
(6)
includes 65,000 stock options as follows: 25,000 shares at $0.55 issued in june 2009, 20,000 shares at $1.68 and 20,000 shares at $0.74.
(7)
includes 65,000 stock options as follows: 20,000 shares at $1.68; 20,000 shares at $0.74; and 25,000 shares at $0.55.
(8)
includes 612,912 shares of common stock underlying outstanding options.
table of contents
securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans
equity compensation plan information  the following table summarizes the (i)options granted under the milestone 2004 stock option plan, (ii)options and warrants granted outside the milestone 2004 stock option plan, as of
december31, 2011, and (iii)options granted under the milestone 2011 stock option plan. the shares covered by outstanding options and warrants are subject to adjustment for changes in capitalization, stock splits, stock dividends and
similar events. no other equity compensation has been issued.
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
numberofsecurities
tobeissueduponexerciseofoutstandingoptionsandwarrants
weighted-average
exerciseprice of outstandingoptions and warrants
numberof
securitiesremainingavailableforfuture issuance underequitycompensationplan
equity compensation plan approved by stockholders
grants under our 2004 stock option plan (1)
109,000
$
2.77
641,000
grants under our 2011 stock option plan (3)
377,778
$
0.33
1,622,222
equity compensation plan not approved by stockholders (2)
notapplicable
aggregate individual option and warrants grants
1,112,503
$
1.24
total
1,599,281
$
1.13
(1)
in july 2004 the board of directors approved the adoption of the 2004 stock option plan. the 2004 stock option plan provides for the grant of
options to purchase up to 500,000 shares of milestones common stock. options may be granted to employees, officers, directors and consultants of milestone for the purchase of common stock of milestone at a price not less than the fair market
value of the common stock on the date of the grant. in general, options become exercisable over a three-year period from the grant date and expire five years after the date of grant. no options were exercised in 2011.
in march 2008, the board of directors authorized an additional 250,000 options to this plan.
(2)
the aggregate individual option grants outside the stock option plans referred to in the table above include options issued as payment for services
rendered to us by outside consultants and providers of certain services. the aggregate individual warrant grants referred to in the table above include warrants granted to investors in milestone as part of private placements and credit line
arrangements. 100,000 options were exercised at $ 0.24per share in 2011.
(3)
in june 2011, the stockholders approved the adoption of the 2011 stock option plan. the 2011 stock option plan provides for the grant of options to
purchase 2,000,000 shares of milestones common stock. options may be granted to employees, directors and consultants of milestone for the purchase of common stock of milestone at a price not less than the fair market value of the common stock
on the date of grant. in general, options become exercisable over a three-year period from the grant date and expire five years after the date of grant. no options were exercised in 2011.
stock plan  in 2006 milestone adopted an equity compensation plan for the issuance of up to 300,000 shares of the common stock in lieu of cash compensation for services performed by employees, officers, directors and
consultants (the 2006 stock plan). the purpose of the 2006 stock plan is to conserve cash while allowing the company to adequately compensate existing employees, officers, directors and consultants, or new employees, officers, directors
and consultants, whose performance will contribute to the long-term success and growth. milestone believe that the availability of these shares will also strengthen the ability to attract and retain employees, officers, directors and consultants of
high competence, increase the identity of interests of such people with those of the stockholders and help maintain loyalty to us through recognition and the opportunity for stock ownership. all shares granted under this plan will be at fair market
value, or at a premium to that value, on the date of grant.  as of december31, 2011 there are no shares
remaining under this plan.  in december 2007, the board of directors authorized the company to issue up to $2
million of its company stock to vendors or employees, and to grant them piggy back registration rights in the usual form, at a value of not less than 90% of the market value on the date of the agreement for the vendor or employee to accept said
shares. such future shares are not included in the above noted shares reserved for future issuance.
table of contents
in 2010, the company issued the following shares under this plan; 50,000
shares valued at of $50,000 for officer compensation, 76,661 shares valued at $104,000 for consulting services, 23,388 shares valued at $33,354 for employee compensation, 34,614 shares valued at $45,000 issued to directors as compensation.
at december31, 2011 and 2010 there was $11,316, respectively, available to be issued under this plan.
the vendor shares were issued in reliance upon the exemption from the registration requirements of the act,
as provided in section4(6) and thereof, as a transaction by an issuer not involving a public offering. milestone reasonably believed that each vendor had such knowledge and experience in financial and business matters to be capable of
evaluating the merits and risks of the investment, each vendor represented an intention to acquire the securities for investment only and not with a view to distribution thereof and appropriate legends were affixed to the stock certificates. no
commissions were paid in connection with such issuances.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions and director independence.
on june28, 2007 the company secured a $1 million line of credit from k. tucker andersen, a stockholder,
beneficially owning approximately 18% of the companys outstanding stock. this borrowing was amended to $1,300,000 as of september30, 2008 under the same terms and conditions as the original. in december 2009, the company converted the
$1.3 million principal amount of the borrowing under the line of credit into 822,785 shares of common stock at a price of $1.58 per share. additionally, the interest due on the principal is payable over a two year period (quarterly payments of
$23,000).  the company borrowed an additional $450,000 from the same stockholder in 2008. the borrowing was
originally on short term loan with a maturity date of january19, 2009. in december 2008 and again on june30, 2011, this borrowing was refinanced with the shareholder with a due date of july31, 2013. the borrowing includes a twelve
percent interest rate, interest compound quarterly, with interest and principle due at the maturity. further, the note provides for the issuance of warrants to the stockholder that is exercisable for five years at the price of $0.32 per share for
45,000 shares of stock. the warrants were valued using the black-scholes model and are reflected as a discount against the debt. the company did not have any other related party transactions pursuant to item404 of regulation s-k of the
exchange act. milestone has adopted a policy that, in the future, the audit committee must review all transactions with any officer, director or 5% stockholder. the amount outstanding to the stockholder was $450,000 for both years ending
december31, 2011 and 2010. interest expense accrued on this debt was $77,722 and $61,398 for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
tom cheng, a shareholder, is also a supplier of handpieces to the company. mr.cheng is also a shareholder in 3h
bejing, a 50 percent owner in the medical joint venture.  director independence
the board has determined that leonard m. schiller and pablo felipe serna cardenas (the independent directors)
are independent as that term is defined in the listing standards of the nyse amex. as disclosed above, pablo felipe serna cardenas and leonard m. schiller members of the audit committee and are independent for such purposes, and leonard m. schiller
and leslie bernhard are members of the compensation committee and leonard schiller is independent for such purposes.  in determining director independence, the board considered the stock awards to the independent directors for the year ended december31, 2011, disclosed in item 11  executive compensation
director compensation above, and determined that such awards were compensation for services rendered to the board and therefore did not impact their ability to continue to serve as independent directors.
item14.
principal accounting fees and services
audit fees  milestone incurred audit and financial statement review fees totaling $132,033 and $110,738, respectively from holtz rubenstein reminick llp, the principal accountant for 2011 and 2010.
audit related fees  there were no audit related fees to the principal accountant holtz rubenstein reminick llp in 2011 and 2010.
table of contents
tax fees  there were no fees for services related to tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning billed by the principal accountant in 2011 and 2010.  all other fees  there were no other fees billed during
2011 and 2010 by milestones principal accountants.  audit committee administration of the engagement
the engagement with holtz rubenstein reminick llp, the principal accountants, was approved in advance by the board of
directors and the audit committee. no non-audit or non-audit related services were approved by the audit committee in 2011.  audit
committee pre-approval policies and procedures  the audit committee charter provides that the audit
committee will pre-approve audit services and non-audit services to be provided by the independent auditors before the accountant is engaged to render these services. the audit committee may consult with management in the decision-making process,
but may not delegate this authority to management. the audit committee may delegate its authority to preapprove services to one or more committee members, provided that the designees present the pre-approvals to the full committee at the next
committee meeting. all audit and non-audit services performed by the independent accountants have been pre-approved by the audit committee to assure that such services do not impair the auditors independence from us.
table of contents
part iv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules  (a) the following documents are filed as part of this report:
1.
financial statements. the following financial statements and the reports of milestones independent auditor thereon, are filed herewith.
report of independent registered public accounting firm (holtz rubenstein llp -2011 and 2010)
balance sheets at december31, 2011 and 2010
statements of operations for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010
statements of changes in stockholders equity for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010
statements of cash flows for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010
notes to financial statements
2.
financial statement schedule  schedules are omitted because the information required is not applicable or the required information is shown in the consolidated financial statements or notes thereto
3.
exhibits  certain of the following exhibits were filed as exhibits to previous filings filed by milestone under the securities act of 1933, as amended, or reports filed under the securities and exchange act of
1934, as amended, and are hereby incorporated by reference.
table of contents
exhibitno.
description
3.1
certificate of incorporation of milestone (1)
3.2
certificate of amendment filed july 13, 1995 (2)
3.3
certificate of amendment filed december 6, 1996 (3)
3.4
certificate of amendment filed december 17, 1997 (4
3.5
certificate of amendment filed july 23, 2003 (5)
3.6
certificate of amendment filed january 8, 2004. (5)
3.7
certificate of designation filed january 15, 2004 (5)
3.8
by-laws of milestone (1)
4.1
speciman stock certificate (2)
4.3
form of warrant agreement, including form of warrant (6)
10.1
lease dated november, 25, 1996 between livingston corporate park associates, l.l.c. and milestone (3)
10.2
agreement with davinci instruments, dated july 30, 2003 (5)
10.3
agreement with strider, dated september 3, 2003 (5)
10.4
agreement with len osser and k. tucker andersen, dated october 9, 2003 (5)
10.5
agreement with morse, zelnick, rose & lander, dated december 22, 2003 (5)
10.6**
employment agreement with leonard osser, dated december 20, 2003 (5)
10.7
agreement with united instruments, dated october 20, 2004 (7)
10.8
agreement with mark hochman, dated january 1, 2005 (7)
10.9
lease amendment dated april 28, 2004 between livingston corporate park associates, l.l.c. and milestone (7)
10.10
agreement with davinci regarding exclusive license over patented products, dated june 1, 2004 (8)
10.11**
employment agreement with leonard osser, dated september 1, 2009 (9))
10.12
loan agreement of $1 million from k. tucker andersen, dated june 29, 2007 (10)
10.13
amendment to the loan agreement of $1.3 million from k. tucker andersen, dated april 18, 2008 (10)
10.14
promissory note in the principal amount of $450,000 held by k. tucker andersen, dated december 24, 2008 (10)
10.15*
amendment to the $450,000 promissory note held by k. tucker andersen, dated june 30, 2011 (10)
10.16*
2004 stock option plan (11)
10.17*
2005 stock option plan (12)
code of ethics (6)
23.1
consent of holtz rubenstein reminick llp*
31.1
rule 13a-14(a) certification-chief executive officer*
31.2
rule 13a-14(a) certification-chief financial officer*
32.1
section 1350 certifications-chief executive officer*
32.2
section 1350 certifications-chief financial officer*
101.ins***
xbrl instance document
101.sch***
xbrl taxonomy extension schema document
101.cal***
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document
101.lab***
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document
101.pre***
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase document
101.def***
xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase document
*
filed herewith.
**
indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
***
furnished with this report. in accordance with rule406t of regulations-t, the information in these exhibits shall not be deemed to be
filed for purposes of section18 of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, or otherwise subject to liability under that section, and shall not be incorporated by reference into any registration statement or other document
filed under the securities act of 1933, as amended, except as expressly set forth by specific reference in such filing.
table of contents
(1) incorporated by reference to milestones registration statement on form sb-2
no.33-92324.  (2) incorporated by reference to amendment no.1 to milestones registration statement on form
sb-2 no.333-92324.  (3) incorporated by reference to milestones form 10-ksb for the year ended december31,
1996.  (4) incorporated by reference to milestones form 10-ksb for the year ended december31, 1999.
(5) incorporated by reference to milestones registration statement on form s-2 no.333-110376, amendment no.3.
(6) incorporated by reference to milestones form 10-ksb for the year ended december31, 2003.
(7) incorporated by reference to milestones registration statement on form s-2 no.333-110367, amendment no.5.
(8) incorporated by reference to milestones form 10-ksb for the year ended december31, 2004.
(9) incorporated by reference to milestones form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2009.
(10) incorporated by reference to milestones form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2010.
(11) filed as appendix c to the companys proxy statement filed with the sec on june28, 2004 and incorporated herein by
reference.  (12) filed as appendix a to the companys proxy statement filed with the sec on may2, 2011 and
incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
signatures
in accordance with section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
milestone scientific inc.
by:
/s/ leonard osser
chief executive officer
(principal executive officer)
date: march13, 2012  in accordance with the exchange act, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
date
title
/s/ leonard osser
leonard osser
march13, 2012
chief executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)
/s/ joseph dagostino
joseph dagostino
march13, 2012
chief financial officer (principal financial
officer)
/s/ leonard schiller
leonard schiller
march13, 2012
director
/s/ leslie bernard
leslie bernhard
march13, 2012
chairman and director
/s/ pablo felipe serna cardenas
pablo felipe serna cardenas
march13, 2012
director
table of contents
index to financial statements
september 30,
page
report of independent registered public accounting firm
f-2
balance sheets as of december31, 2011 and 2010
f-3
statements of operations for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010
f-4
statements of changes in stockholders equity for the years ended december31, 2011 and
f-5
statements of cash flows for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010
f-6
notes to financial statements
f-7
f-1
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
board of directors and stockholders  milestone
scientific inc.  we have audited the accompanying balance sheets of milestone scientific inc. as of december31, 2011 and
2010 and the related statements of operations, stockholders' equity, and cash flows for the years then ended. these financial statements are the responsibility of the company's management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audits.  we conducted our audits in accordance with standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. the company is not required to have, nor
were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. our audits included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the company's internal control over financial reporting. accordingly, we express no such opinion. an audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.  in our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of milestone scientific inc. as of december31, 2011 and 2010 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the united states of america.  the accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the company will
continue as a going concern. as discussed in note a to the financial statements, the company has suffered recurring losses from operations since inception, which raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. management's
plans in regard to these matters are described in note a. the financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.  /s/ holtz rubenstein reminick llp  new york, new york
march13, 2012
f-2
table of contents
milestone scientific inc.
balance sheets
december31, 2011 and 2010
september 30,
september 30,
december31,2011
december31,2010
assets
current assets:
cash and cash equivalents
$
96,324
$
627,082
accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $182,880 in 2011 and $202,160 in 2010
1,154,459
796,221
inventories
790,494
986,947
advances to contract manufacturer
952,558
730,491
prepaid expenses and other current assets
304,180
247,465
total current assets
3,298,015
3,388,206
accounts receivable-long term, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $372,000 in 2011 and $438,840 in 2010
261,256
361,160
advances to contract manufacturer
2,453,948
1,713,794
investment in distributor, at cost
76,319
76,319
investment in medical joint venture
124,179
furniture, fixtures& equipment net of accumulated depreciation of $446,484 as of december31, 2011 and $426,482 as
of december31, 2010
52,309
66,936
patents, net of accumulated amortization of $344,238 as of december31, 2011 and $294,934 as of december31,
698,357
944,858
other assets
27,819
57,750
total assets
$
6,992,202
$
6,609,023
liabilities and stockholders equity
current liabilities:
accounts payableshort term
$
3,931,531
$
2,883,587
accrued expenses and other payable
677,419
511,304
total current liabilities
4,608,950
3,394,891
long-term liabilities:
accounts payablelong term
440,376
notes payable-net of discount of $3,065 and $8,361, respectively
446,935
441,639
total long-term liabilities
446,935
882,015
commitments and contingencies
stockholders equity
common stock, par value $.001; authorized 50,000,000 shares; 15,556,878 shares issued 1,501,457 shares to be issued and
15,523,545 shares outstanding as of december31, 2011; 14,915,959 shares issued, 637,013 shares to be issued, and 14,882,626 shares outstanding as of december31, 2010
17,058
15,552
additional paid-in capital
63,690,837
62,606,043
accumulated deficit
(60,860,062
)
(59,377,962
)
treasury stock, at cost, 33,333 shares
(911,516
)
(911,516
)
total stockholders equity
1,936,317
2,332,117
total liabilities and stockholders equity
$
6,992,202
$
6,609,023
see notes to financial statements
f-3
table of contents
milestone scientific inc.
statements of operations
years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010
september 30,
september 30,
product sales, net
$
8,378,094
$
9,749,968
cost of products sold
3,016,642
3,531,452
gross profit
5,361,452
6,218,516
selling, general and administrative expenses
6,445,001
6,648,859
research and development expenses
140,053
270,494
6,585,054
6,919,353
loss from operations
(1,223,602
)
(700,837
)
other income (expense)
other income
183,673
interest income
interest expense
(131,838
)
(95,135
)
amortized debt issuance
(5,296
)
(2,796
)
loss on earnings from medical joint venture
(121,399
)
total other (expense) income
(258,498
)
86,329
net loss
$
(1,482,100
)
$
(614,508
)
net loss applicable to common stockholders
$
(1,482,100
)
$
(614,508
)
loss per share applicable to common stockholdersbasic and diluted
$
(0.10
)
$
(0.04
)
weighted average shares outstanding and to be issuedbasic and diluted
15,174,893
14,824,802
see notes to financial statements
f-4
table of contents
milestone scientific inc.
statements of changes in stockholders equity
years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
additional
common stock
paid-in
accumulated
treasury
shares
amount
capital
deficit
stock
total
balance, december31, 2009
15,473,794
$
15,472
$
62,300,619
$
(58,763,454
)
$
(911,516
)
$
2,641,121
options issued to employees and consultants
239,817
239,817
common stock issued for directors compensation
34,614
44,965
45,000
common stock issued for payment of consulting services to settle accounts payable
76,661
103,923
104,000
common stock issued for payment of employee compensation
23,388
33,331
33,354
common stock to be issued for settlement of bonus compensation
50,000
49,950
50,000
reversal of common stock to be issued for settlement of bonus compensation
(105,485
)
(105
)
(166,562
)
(166,667
)
net loss
(614,508
)
(614,508
)
balance, december31, 2010
15,552,972
15,552
62,606,043
(59,377,962
)
(911,516
)
2,332,117
options issued to consultants
255,899
255,899
options exercised
100,000
24,900
25,000
common stock to be issued to employee for bonuses
748,990
419,251
420,000
common stock to be issued to employee for compensation
12,153
4,363
4,375
common stock to be issued to consultants
103,300
60,710
60,813
sale of common stock
99,999
29,900
30,000
common stock issued for directors compensation
75,000
44,925
45,000
common stock issued for payment of consulting services to settle accounts payable
327,222
190,886
191,214
proceeds on sale of option rights
24,000
24,000
common stock issued for payment of employee compensation
38,699
29,961
30,000
net loss
(1,482,100
)
(1,482,100
)
balance, december31, 2011
17,058,335
$
17,058
$
63,690,837
$
(60,860,062
)
$
(911,516
)
$
1,936,317
see notes to financial statements
f-5
table of contents
milestone scientific inc.
statements of cash flows
years ended december 31, 2011 and 2010
september 30,
september 30,
cash flows from operating activities:
net loss
$
(1,482,100
)
$
(614,508
)
adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:
depreciation expense
22,094
45,243
amortization of patents
83,297
83,395
amortization of debt discount
5,296
2,796
common stock and options issued for compensation, consulting, and vendor services
864,555
194,399
bad debt expense
(86,120
)
640,558
loss on sale/disposal of equipment
(7,494
)
loss on earnings on joint venture
121,399
changes in operating assets and liabilities:
(increase) in accounts receivable
(172,214
)
(734,197
)
decrease (increase) in inventories
196,453
(182,211
)
(increase) to advances to contract manufacturer
(962,221
)
(1,981,060
)
decrease to prepaid expenses and other current assets
17,717
73,708
decrease in other assets
47,432
120,356
increase in accounts payable
607,568
2,169,950
increase (decrease) in accrued expenses
166,114
(104,712
)
net cash used in operating activities
(570,730
)
(293,777
)
cash flows from investing activities:
purchases of property and equipment
(7,467
)
(29,355
)
proceeds on sale of equipment
2,023
payment for patent rights
(31,561
)
(80,938
)
net cash used in investing activities
(39,028
)
(108,270
)
cash flows from financing activities:
proceeds from the sale of stock options rights
24,000
proceeds from the exercise of stock options
25,000
proceeds from the sale of common stock
30,000
net cash provided by financing activities
79,000
net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
(530,758
)
(402,047
)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
627,082
1,029,129
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
96,324
$
627,082
supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
interest expense paid in cash
$
23,000
$
92,000
supplemental disclosure of non cash activities:
shares issued to directors for compensation
$
45,000
$
45,000
shares issued to employees in lieu of cash compensation
$
30,000
$
33,354
shares issued to settle accounts payable
$
191,214
$
104,000
non-cash
transfer of assets to jv
$
194,765
$
see notes to financial statements
f-6
table of contents
milestone scientific inc.
notes to financial statements
note a  organization, business and basis of presentation
milestone scientific inc. (milestone) or (the company) was incorporated in the state of
delaware in august 1989. milestone has developed a proprietary, computer-controlled anesthetic delivery instrument, through the use of the wand, a single use disposable handpiece. the instrument is marketed in dentistry under the trademark
compudent, wand plus and sta (single tooth anesthesia) and in medicine under the trademark compumed. compudent is suitable for all dental procedures that require local anesthetic. compumed and wand plus are suitable for
many medical procedures regularly performed in plastic surgery, hair restoration surgery, podiatry, colorectal surgery, dermatology, orthopedics and a number of other disciplines. the instruments are sold in the united states and in over 47
countries abroad. milestones products are manufactured by a third-party contract manufacturer.  the company had incurred
operating losses since its inception. the company had negative cash flows from operating activities at december31, 2011 of $570,730 and a negative cash flow from operating activities at december31, 2010 of $293,777. at december31,
2011, the company had cash and cash equivalents and a negative working capital of $96,324 and $$1,310,935, respectively. the negative working capital increase of $1,304,250 in as compared to 2010 is due to the companys continued commitment of
purchasing parts in anticipation of significant sales to our distributor in china. such sales have been delayed. as a result of this delay, the advances to contract manufacturer has been allocated between current and long term. additionally, the
accounts payable due to suppliers is presented as short term in 2011 and has been allocated between long term and short term in 2010. and finally, the accounts receivable for the china distributor had been allocated between current and long term,
with a reserve of $516,000 provided against the accounts receivable. additionally, the company borrowed $450,000 in 2008 from a shareholder, with a due date of january 2009. this additional borrowing was refinanced at december31, 2008 and
june30, 2011 and the due date was extended to july31, 2013. the company is actively pursuing the generation of positive cash flows from operating activities through an increase in revenue based upon managements assessment of
present contracts and current negotiations and reductions in operating expenses. as of december31, 2011, the company does not expect to have sufficient cash reserves to meet all of its anticipated obligations for the next twelve months. the
company may require the need for a higher level of marketing and sales efforts that at present it cannot fund. if the company is unable to generate positive cash flows from its operating activities it will need to raise additional capital. there is
no assurance that the company will be able to achieve positive operating cash flows or that traditional capital can be raised on terms and conditions satisfactory to the company, if at all. if positive cash flow cannot be achieved or if additional
capital is required and it cannot be raised, then the company would be forced to curtail its development activities, reduce marketing expenses for existing dental products or adopt other cost saving measures, any of which might negatively affect the
companys operating results.  the companys recurring losses raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue
as a going concern. the accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
note b  summary of significant accounting policies
1. cash and cash equivalents  milestone considers all highly liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
2. accounts receivable  the realization of accounts receivable current and long-term will have a significant impact on the company. consequently, milestone estimates losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make
payments for amounts billed. the collectability of outstanding amounts is continually assessed.  3. product return and
warranty  milestone does not accept non-defective returns from its customers. product returns under warranty are accepted,
evaluated and repaired or replaced in accordance with the warranty policy. returns not within the warranty policy are charged to the customer. warranty expense was $63,445 and $43,397 for 2011 and 2010, respectively. non-warranty repairs are
collected from the customers. non-warranty repair income was $100,017 and $76,172 for 2011 and 2010, respectively.
f-7
table of contents
4. inventories  inventories principally consist of finished goods and component parts stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or market. inventory quantities on hand are reviewed on a quarterly basis and
a provision for excess and obsolete inventory is recorded if required based on past and expected future sales.  5. investment
in medical joint venture  the company has entered into a joint venture with a third party for the development and
commercialization of two medical instruments. the company owns fifty percent of the joint venture and has recorded its investment on the equity basis of accounting. the companys proportionate share of losses incurred by the joint venture is
charged to the statement of operations and adjusted against the investment in joint venture.  6. furniture, fixture and
equipment  equipment is recorded at cost, less accumulated depreciation. depreciation expense is computed using the
straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from five to seven years. the costs of maintenance and repairs are charged to operations as incurred.
7. investments
investments in less than twenty percent owned entities are accounted for under the cost basis and are reviewed for impairment
periodically. the company does not have any significant control over the operations of this investee.  8. patents
patents are recorded at actual cost to prepare and file the applicable documents with the united states patent office, or internationally
with the applicable governmental office in the respective country. although certain patents have not yet been approved, the costs related to these patents are being amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the
patent. if the applicable patent application is ultimately rejected, the remaining unamortized balance will be expensed in the period in which the company receives a notice of such rejection. patent applications filed and patents obtained in foreign
countries are subject to the laws and procedures that differ from those in the united states. patent protection in foreign countries may be different from patent protection under united states laws and may not be favorable to the company. the
company also attempts to protect the proprietary information through the use of confidentiality agreements and by limiting access to the facilities. there can be no assurance that the program of patents, confidentiality agreements and restricted
access to the facilities will be sufficient to protect the proprietary technology.  9. impairment of long-lived assets
milestone reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may
not be recoverable. the carrying value of the assets is evaluated in relation to the operating performance and future undiscounted cash flows of the underlying assets. milestone adjusts the net book value of an underlying asset if its fair value is
determined to be less than its net book value. the company has reviewed long-lived assets for impairment and concluded no impairment exist as of december31, 2011 and december31, 2010, respectively.
10. accounts payable  current and long term accounts payable represents amounts due to suppliers of the company. long term accounts payable is based on an informal financing agreement with the supplier to assist in the
purchasing of instruments and handpieces, beyond one year from the balance sheet date.  11. revenue recognition
revenue from product sales is recognized net of discounts and allowances to the domestic distributor on the date of shipment of the
goods, for essentially all shipments, since the terms are fob warehouse. the company will recognize revenue on date of arrival where shipments are fob destination. shipments to the international distributors are fob the warehouse and revenue is
therefore recognized on shipment. in both cases, the price to the buyer is fixed and the collectability is reasonably assured. further, milestone has no obligation on these sales for any post sale installation, set-up or maintenance, these being the
responsibility of the buyer. customer acceptance is considered made at delivery. the only obligation after sale is the normal commercial warranty against manufacturing defects if the alleged defective unit is returned within the warranty period.
f-8
table of contents
12. shipping and handling costs
the company includes shipping and handling costs in cost of goods sold. these costs are billed to customers at the time of shipment for
domestic shipments. international shipments are fob the warehouse, therefore no costs are incurred by the company.  13.
research and development  research and development costs, which consist principally of new product development costs incurred
to third parties, are expensed as incurred.  14. advertising expenses
milestone expenses advertising costs as they are incurred. for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010, milestone recorded
advertising expenses of $83,764 and $107,011, respectively.  15. income taxes
milestone accounts for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method which requires deferred income tax assets and liabilities
to be computed for temporary differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which
the differences are expected to affect taxable income. valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. the income tax provision or credit is the tax payable or refundable for
the period plus or minus the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities.  16. basic and diluted net loss
per common share  milestone presents basic earnings (loss) per common share applicable to common stockholders and,
if applicable, diluted earnings (loss) per common share applicable to common stockholders pursuant to the provisions of statement of financial accounting standards asc topic 260. basic earnings (loss) per common share is calculated by
dividing net income or loss applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding and to be issued during each period. the calculation of diluted earnings per common share is similar to that of basic earnings
per common share, except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if all potentially dilutive common shares, such as those issuable upon the exercise of stock options,
warrants, and the conversion of debt were issued during the period.  since milestone had net losses for 2011 and 2010, the
assumed effects of the exercise of outstanding stock options and warrants, and the conversion of convertible debt were not included in the calculation as their effect would have been anti-dilutive. such outstanding options and warrants totaled
1,599,281 at december31, 2011 and 1,538,503 at december31, 2010.  17. use of estimates
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america
requires management to make estimates and assumptions in determining the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and
expenses during the reporting period. the most significant estimates relate to the allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation, and cash flow assumptions regarding evaluations for impairment of long-lived assets and valuation allowances on
deferred tax assets. actual results could differ from those estimates.  18. fair value of financial instruments
fair value measurements:we follow the provisions of asc 820, fair value measurements and disclosures related to
financial assets and liabilities that are being measured and reported on a fair value basis. fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants in the
principal market at the measurement date (exit price). we are required to classify fair value measurements in one of the following categories:  level 1 inputs which are defined as quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the reporting entity has the ability to access at the measurement date.
level 2 inputs which are defined as inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the
assets or liabilities, either directly or indirectly.  level 3 inputs are defined as unobservable inputs for the assets or
liabilities.  financial assets and liabilities are classified based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the
fair value measurement. our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment, and may effect the valuation of the fair value of assets and liabilities and their placement within the fair value
hierarchy levels.
f-9
table of contents
the carrying amounts reported in the balance sheet for cash, accounts receivable, advances
to contract manufacturer, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximate fair value based on the maturity of these instruments.  19. stock-based compensation  milestone accounts for stock-based compensation
under asc topic 718, share-based payment. asc topic 718 requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the statements of operations over the service period, as an operating
expense, based on the grant-date fair values.  the weighted-average fair value of the individual options granted during 2011
and 2010 was estimated as $0.33 and $0.91, respectively, on the date of grant. the fair value for 2011 and 2010 was determined using the black-scholes option-pricing model with the following weighted average assumptions:
september 30,
september 30,
december31,
volatility
%
%
risk-free interest rate
0.84
%
2.13
%
expected life
3years
3years
dividend yield
%
%
forfeiture rate
%
%
issuances of common stock, stock options or other equity instruments to non-employees as consideration
for goods or services received by milestone are accounted for based on the fair value of the equity instruments issued (unless the fair value of the consideration received can be more reliably measured). the fair value of any options or similar
equity instruments issued is estimated based on the black-scholes option-pricing model, and the assumption that all of the options or other equity instruments will ultimately vest. such fair value is measured as of an appropriate date pursuant to
the guidance in the consensus of the party becomes committed to provide goods or services or the date performance by the other party is complete and capitalized or expensed as if milestone had paid cash for the goods or services.
expected volatilities are based on historical volatility of milestones common stock over a period commensurate with expected term.
milestone uses historical data to estimate option exercise and employee termination within the valuation model. the company has granted performance based options to the chief executive officer. such performance based options are earned based on
specific criteria established by the company. the company records these options based on the likelihood of the officer achieving the specified performance objective and accrues these costs over the performance period. the estimates inherent in
making this assessment are reviewed periodically by management and the resulting changes are booked through the statement of operations.  20. concentration of credit risk  milestones financial instruments that are
exposed to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of cash and trade accounts receivable, and advances to contract manufacturer. milestone places its cash and cash equivalents with large financial institutions. at times, such investments may
be in excess of the federal deposit insurance corporation insurance limit. milestone has not experienced any losses in such accounts and believes it is not exposed to any significant credit risks. financial instruments which potentially subject
milestone to credit risk consist principally of trade accounts receivable, as milestone does not require collateral or other security to support customer receivables, and advances to contract manufacturer. milestone entered into a purchase agreement
with a vendor to supply milestone with 5,000 instruments of compudent and 12,000 sta instrument. as part of these agreements, milestone has advanced approximately $3,407,000 and $2,444,000 to the vendor for purchase of materials at
december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. the advance will be credited to milestone as the goods are delivered. milestone does not believe that significant credit risk exists with respect to this advance to the contract manufacturer at
december31, 2011 and 2010.  milestone closely monitors the extension of credit to its customers while maintaining
allowances, if necessary, for potential credit losses. on a periodic basis, milestone evaluates its accounts receivable and establishes an allowance for doubtful accounts, based on a history of past write-offs and collections and current credit
conditions. management has provided a reserve that it believes is sufficient record accounts receivable at net realizable value as of december31, 2011 and 2010.  a five percent shareholder of the company is also a shareholder of a major supplier of handpieces to the company. in addition, he is an investor in the prc entity, beijing 3h, which entered into a joint
venture agreement with milestone.  the company purchased $2,006,885 and $2,016,212 from the supplier for the years ended
december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. the company owed $1,207,280 and $1,118,757 to this supplier as of december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
f-10
table of contents
21. recent accounting pronouncements
fair value measurements and disclosures (topic 820): improving disclosures about fair value measurements. effective for interim
and annual reporting periods beginning after december15, 2009, except for the disclosures about purchases, sales, issuances, and settlements in the roll forward of activity in level 3 fair value measurements. those disclosures are effective
for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2010, and for interim periods within those fiscal years. this statement does not currently impact the financial statement of the company.
in the second quarter of 2010, the fasb issued accounting standards updates (asu) 2010-09, fair value measurements and disclosures:
improving disclosures about fair value measurements (asu 2010-06). asu 2010-06 amends fasb asc topic 820, fair value measurements and disclosures, and requires reporting entities to make new disclosures about recurring or nonrecurring
fair-value measurements. asu 2010-06 also clarifies existing fair-value measurement disclosure guidance about the level of disaggregation, inputs and valuation techniques. except for the detailed level 3 rollforward disclosures, we adopted the
provisions of asu 2010-06 in the first quarter of 2010. this adoption did not affect our financial statements. we have adopted the provisions of asu 2010-06 related to the new level 3 rollforward disclosures.
in the first quarter of 2010, the fasb issued asu 2010-09, subsequent events: amendments to certain recognition and disclosure
requirements (asu 2010-09). asu 2010-09 amends asc 855, subsequent events, so that sec filers are no longer required to disclose the date through which subsequent events have been evaluated in financial statements. we adopted the
provisions of asu 2010-09 in the first quarter of 2010.  in december 2010, the fasb issued asu no.2010-28,
intangibles-goodwill and other (topic 350) when to perform step 2 of the goodwill impairment test for reporting units with zero or negative carrying amounts. this guidance clarifies application of step 2 of the goodwill impairment test.
the guidance requires an entity to perform step 2 if it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. this accounting guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2010. this statement does not currently impact the
financial statements of the company.  in october 2009, the fasb issued asu 2009-13, revenue recognition (topic 605):
multiple-deliverable revenue arrangements  a consensus of the fasb emerging issues task force, which amends the criteria for when to evaluate individual delivered items in a multiple deliverable arrangement and how to allocate
consideration received. this asu is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after june15, 2010, which is january1, 2011 for the corporation. this statement does not currently impact the financial statement of the company.
in may 2011, the fasb issued asu no.2011-04, fair value measurement (topic 820): amendments to achieve common fair value
measurement and disclosure requirements in u.s. gaap and ifrss, which is intended to improve comparability of fair value measurements presented and disclosed in financial statements prepared in accordance with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles and international financial reporting standards. this standard clarifies the application of existing fair value measurement requirements including (1)the application of the highest and best use valuation premise,
(2)the methodology to measure the fair value of an instrument classified in a reporting entitys shareholders equity, (3)disclosure requirements for quantitative information on level3 fair value measurements and
(4)guidance on measuring the fair value of financial instruments managed within a portfolio. in addition, the standard requires additional disclosures of the sensitivity of fair value to changes in unobservable inputs for level3
securities. this standard is effective for interim and annual reporting periods ending on or after december15, 2011. the adoption of this guidance is not expected to have a significant impact on the companys financial statements.
in june 2011, the fasb issued asu no.2011-05, presentation of comprehensive income, which requires that
comprehensive income be presented either in a single continuous statement of comprehensive income or in two separate but consecutive statements. the standard also requires entities to disclose on the face of the financial statements reclassification
adjustments for items that are reclassified from other comprehensive income to net earnings. this standard no longer allows companies to present components of other comprehensive income only in the statement of equity. this standard is effective for
interim and annual reporting periods beginning after december15, 2011. the adoption of this guidance is not expected to have a significant impact on the companys financial statements other than the prescribed change in presentation.
in september 2011, the fasb amended its guidance for goodwill impairment testing. the amendment allows entities to first
assess qualitative factors in determining whether or not the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value. if an entity concludes from this qualitative assessment that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit
exceeds its carrying value, then performing a two-step impairment test is unnecessary. this standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2011 and is not expected to have an impact on the financial statements.
f-11
table of contents
note c  accounts receivable  current and long term
the company sells a significant amount of its product on credit terms to its major distributors. the company estimates
losses from the inability of its customers to make payments on amounts billed. a majority of credit sales are due within ninety days from invoicing. in 2010, the company shipped a significant order to a major international distributor. at the time
of the shipment, regulatory approval to sell the product in the respective country was in process. obtaining such regulatory approval was not a condition of the purchase order and sale to the distributor. the regulatory approval has been delayed and
as such the customer has not paid the full amount of the invoiced shipment. the company is receiving periodic payments from the international distributor. based on the periodic payment plan prepared by the international distributor, the company has
recorded a long term net accounts receivable of $261,000 as of december31, 2011. the current portion of this net accounts receivable is approximately $96,000. the company reserved $516,000 of the total accounts receivable from this distributor
as december31, 2011.
note d  inventories
september 30,
september 30,
december31
inventories consist of the following:
finished goods
$
604,320
$
766,693
component parts and other materials
186,175
220,254
$
790,494
$
986,947
note e  advances to contract manufacturer
the net advances to contract manufacturer represent funding of future sta, compudent and wand plus inventory
purchases. the balance of the net advances as of december31, 2011 and 2010 totaled $3,406,506 and $2,444,285, respectively. the portion of this advance expected to be utilized in the next twelve months is classified as current asset, with the
remainder classified as non-current asset. the company has an outstanding accounts payable of $1,752,000 and $1,521,000 at december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively to the contract manufacture specifically related to the advances.
note f  investment in medical joint venture
in march 2011, milestone entered into an agreement with a peoples republic of china ("prc") entity (bejing 3h)
to establish a joint venture entity in the prc to develop intra-articular and epidural drug delivery instruments utilizing milestones patented compuflo technology. the prc entity agreed to contribute up to $1.5 million to this joint
venture entity, based on progress reports from milestone and subject to refund if the instruments are not developed because of technological problems within 30 months of the inception date. milestone evaluates the technological feasibility of the
products to be developed using the compuflo technology periodically and at every reporting date, to establish if circumstances indicate that the technology continues to be feasible. based on the available evidence milestone concluded that the
contingency associated with the return of capital to 3h would be remote as of december31, 2011 and accordingly no amounts have been accrued in the accompanying financial statements relating to this contingency. the initial $500,000 capital
contribution was to have been made at inception. the prc joint venture entity was established in september 2011. however, to move the process forward, milestone, with the consent of beijing 3h, organized a domestic research and development
corporation to which its joint venture partner completed a capital contribution of $500,000 to the us research and development corporation. the joint venture is owned fifty percent by the prc entity and fifty percent by milestone. milestone
contributed an exclusive worldwide royalty-free license to use compuflo technology to the joint venture which has been valued at approximately $245,000 and has accounted for its investment in the joint venture using the equity method of accounting.
milestone will have distribution responsibility in the u.s. and canada and the rest of the world, while beijing 3h will
distribute products exclusively in the prc, macao, hong kong and other regions of asia. as of december31, 2011, bejing 3h has contributed $670,000 to the joint venture and the development project has been initiated.
the joint venture reimbursed milestone approximately $105,000 for previously incurred research and development expenses, which has been
included as a credit to research and development expenses in the accompanying statement of operations in 2011. the medical joint ventures total year-to-date expenses were approximately $243,000 of which milestones share of approximately
$121,000 has been included in the accompanying statement of operations as the proportionate share of losses from the joint venture. further, milestone was authorized by the joint venture to manage and oversee the development of the two products for
the joint venture. in connection with this, milestone also entered into an agreement with a significant vendor to develop the two instruments included in the joint venture.
f-12
table of contents
note g  furniture, fixtures and equipment
september 30,
september 30,
december31
furniture, fixtures and equipment consist of the following:
leasehold improvements
$
22,317
$
22,317
office furniture and equipment
98,268
98,268
molds
7,200
7,200
trade show displays
89,395
89,395
computers and software
186,384
181,008
tooling equipment-sta& wand
31,477
31,477
sta trials instruments
63,752
63,752
total
498,793
493,418
less accumulated depreciation
(446,484
)
(426,482
)
$
52,309
$
66,936
depreciation expense was $22,094 and $45,243 for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
note h  patents
patents are being amortized by the straight-line method over estimated useful lives ranging from 10 to 20 years, with
a weighted average amortization period of 12 years. amortization expense amounted to $83,297 in 2011 and $83,395 in 2010. estimated amortization expense of existing patents for each of the next five fiscal years amounts to approximately $75,393 per
year.
note i line of credit and notes payable
on june28, 2007 the company secured a $1 million line of credit from a stockholder. this borrowing was amended
to $1,300,000 as of september30, 2008 under the same terms and conditions as the original. the $1.3 million line of credit was converted into shares of milestones common stock in december 2009 at a conversion rate of $1.58 per share. a
total of 822,785 shares were issued and the debt liquated at that date. interest on the line of credit of aggregated $176,655 was accrued as of december31, 2009. this interest will be paid in equal quarterly payments of $23,000 over the next
two years. the company borrowed an additional $450,000 from the same shareholder in 2008. the borrowing was originally on short term loan with a maturity date of january19, 2009. in december 2008 and again on june30, 2011, this borrowing
was refinanced with the shareholder with a due date of july13, 2013. the borrowing includes a twelve percent interest rate, interest compound quarterly, with interest and principle due at the maturity. further, the note has warrants
exercisable for five years at the price of $0.32 per share for 45,000 shares of stock. the warrants were valued using the black-scholes model and are reflected as a discount against the debt. at december31, 2011, the discount was $3,065.
interest expense on this line of credit for the year ended december31, 2011 and 2010 was $77,722 and $95,135,
respectively. accrued interest related to this line of credit was $269,547 and $214,825 at december31, 2011 and december31, 2010, respectively. the charge for amortization of debt discount related to this line of credit is $5,296 and
$2,796 for the year ended december31, 2011 and december31, 2010, respectively.
note j  stockholders equity
issuances of common stock
during 2011, milestone issued 75,000 shares valued at $45,000 for the directors compensation.  during 2011, milestone issued 327,222 shares valued at $191,214 for payment of consulting services.  during 2011, milestone issued 38,699 shares valued at $30,000 for payment of employee compensation.  during 2011, milestone sold 99,999 shares valued at $30,000.  during 2011, milestones to be
issued shares are 12,153 valued at $4,375 for the officers deferred compensation.  during 2011, milestones to be issued shares are
748,990 valued at $420,000 for employee for bonus compensation.  during 2011, milestones to be issued shares are 103,300 valued at
$60,813 for the consulting services.
f-13
table of contents
shares to be issued  as of december31, 2011 and 2010, there were 1,501,456 and 637,013 shares that have been deferred from being issued, subject to employment agreements with the chief executive officer, chief financial
officer and employees of the company. such shares will be issued to each party upon termination of their employment.  outstanding warrants
at december31, 2011, there were 45,000 warrants outstanding. these warrants were issued in connection with the long
term note of $450,000, exercisable at $0.32 per share, expiring in june 2012.  there were no warrants issued in 2011 and 2010.
shares reserved for future issuance  at december31, 2011 and 2010 there were 3,694,072 and 3,521,850 shares reserved for future; 1,599,281 and 1,538,503 shares underlying other stock options and warrants that were outstanding at
december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively: 1,501,457 shares in 2011 and 637,013 shares in 2010 to be issued in settlement of deferred compensation to officers of the company; and 593,335 shares in 2011 and 2010, respectively, for performance
options issued to an officer of the company. 73,333 options were issued but not vested in 2010 for the performance options noted above.  in december 2007, the board of directors authorized the company to issue up to $2 million of its company stock to vendors or employees, and to grant them piggy back registration rights in the usual form,
at a value of not less than 90% of the market value on the date of the agreement for the vendor or employee to accept said shares. such future shares are not included in the above noted shares reserved for future issuance.
in june 2011, the shareholders of the company approved the 2011 stock option plan (the 2011 plan) that provides for stock
options to our employees, directors and consultants an incentive and non-qualified stock options to purchase up to 2,000,000 shares of common stock. such future shares are included in the above noted shares reserved for future issuances.
note k  stock option plans
in july 2004, the board of directors approved the adoption of the 2004 stock option plan. the 2004 stock option plan
provides for the grant of options to purchase up to 750,000 shares of milestones common stock. options may be granted to employees, officers, directors and consultants of milestone for the purchase of common stock of milestone at a price not
less than the fair market value of the common stock on the date of the grant. in general, options become exercisable over a three-year period from the grant date and expire five years after the date of grant.
in december 2007, the board of directors authorized the company to issue up to $2 million of its company stock to vendors or employees,
and to grant them piggy back registration rights in the usual form, at a value of not less than 90% of the market value on the date of the agreement for the vendor or employee to accept said shares. such future shares are not included in the above
noted shares reserved for future issuance.  in november 2009, the board of directors authorized 666,667 options be reserved
for a special bonus to the chief executive officer of the company, for obtaining a three year purchase order for the sale of 12,000 sta instruments and related handpieces over a four year period. these options were reserved and 73,333 were granted
but not vested in 2010. the remaining 593,334 were reserved until specific performance targets are achieved. the options will be issued upon achievement of the specific target on a yearly basis. the options were valued at $1.49 per share.
f-14
table of contents
a summary of option activity for employees under the plans as of december31, 2011 and
2010, and changes during the year then ended is presented below:
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
number ofoptions
weightedaveragedexerciseprice $
weightedaverageremainingcontractuallife (years)
aggregateintrinsicoptionsvalue $
outstanding, january1, 2010
1,060,142
1.33
3.61
632,624
granted
313,333
1.11
5.88
exercised
forfeited or expired
(444,971
)
1.72
outstanding, december31, 2010
928,504
1.07
3.92
115,849
exercisable, december31, 2010
471,722
0.95
2.74
110,142
granted
277,778
0.36
5.00
exercised during 2011
forfeited or expired
67,000
1.17
outstanding, december31, 2011
1,139,282
0.89
3.62
1,000
exercisable, december31, 2011
638,176
0.89
2.79
1,000
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
numberof options
weightedaveragedexerciseprice $
weightedaveragegrantdate fairvalue $
vested options
outstanding, january1, 2010
559,154
1.45
exercised during 2010
vested options during 2010
214,456
0.81
forfeited during 2010
(301,888
)
1.72
outstanding, december31, 2010
471,722
0.95
exercised during 2011
vested options during 2011
233,454
0.83
forfeited during 2011
67,000
1.17
outstanding, december31, 2011
638,176
0.89
nonvested options
nonvested, january1, 2010
500,988
1.20
granted during 2010
313,333
1.11
vested during 2010
(214,456
)
0.81
forfeited during 2010
(143,083
)
1.62
nonvested, december31, 2010
456,782
1.20
granted during 2011
277,778
0.36
vested during 2011
(233,454
)
0.83
forfeited during 2011
nonvested, december31, 2011
501,106
0.90
milestone recognizes compensation expense on a straight line basis over the requisite service period and
in case of performance based options over the period of the expected performance. during the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010 milestone recognized $225,257, and $140,226 of total compensation cost related to options that vested each year,
respectively. as of december31, 2011 and 2010, there was $156,753 and $258,369 of total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested options which milestone expects to recognize over a weighted average period of 2.3 years and 2.5 years
for december31, 2011 and december31, 2010, respectively.
f-15
table of contents
a summary of option activity for non-employees under the plans as of december31, 2010
and 2011, and changes during the year ended is presented below:
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
september 30,
numberof options
weightedaveragedexerciseprice $
weightedaverageremainingcontractedlife(years)
aggregateintrinsicoptionsvalue $
outstanding, january1, 2010
414,999
1.90
2.70
236,083
exercisable, december31, 2010
336,387
1.96
2.71
234,638
granted during 2010
136,666
1.69
0.72
forfeited during 2010
(16,666
)
1.98
outstanding, december31, 2010
534,999
1.85
1.51
99,617
exercisable, december31, 2010
514,998
1.87
1.41
99,311
granted during 2011
100,000
0.24
2.50
exercised during 2011
(100,000
)
0.25
forfeited during 2011
(120,000
)
1.75
outstanding, december31, 2011
414,999
1.87
1.43
12,000
exercisable, december31, 2011
399,443
1.90
1.36
12,000
september 30,
september 30,
numberof options
weightedaveragedexerciseprice $
vested options
outstanding, january1, 2010
336,387
1.96
vested during 2010
195,277
1.72
forfeited during 2010
(16,666
)
1.98
outstanding, december31, 2010
514,998
1.87
exercised during 2011
(100,000
)
0.25
vested during 2011
104,445
0.29
forfeited during 2011
(120,000
)
1.75
outstanding, december31, 2011
399,443
1.90
nonvested options
nonvested january1, 2010
78,612
1.64
granted during 2010
136,666
1.69
vested during 2010
(195,277
)
1.72
forfeited during 2010
nonvested december31, 2010
20,001
1.21
granted during 2011
100,000
0.24
exercised during 2011
vested during 2011
(104,445
)
0.29
outstanding, december31, 2011
15,556
1.16
the fair value of the options was estimated on the date of grant using the black scholes option-pricing
model. for the year ended december31, 2011, the following weighted average assumptions were used in calculating fair value; expected life of 3 years; volatility of 117.82 and risk-free interest rate of 1.64%. during the year ended
december31, 2011 and 2010 milestone recognized $44,002 and $86,231 of expense related to non-employee options that vested, respectively. the total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested options was $2,358 and $24,316 as of
december31, 2011 and 2010.
note l  employment contract and deferred compensation
employment contracts  in march 2009, the chairman assumed the position of milestones acting chief executive officer. in september 2009 the chairman stepped down as chairman to fill the position of chief executive
officer. the chief executive officer entered into a new employment agreement with the company effective september1, 2009. this new agreement succeeds the previous agreement scheduled to
f-16
table of contents
terminate on december31, 2012. the new agreement is for five years ending on
august31, 2014. the contract shall be extended for successive one-year periods, unless prior to august1 of any year, either party notifies the other that he or it chooses not to extend the new employment term. as part of this agreement
the chairman relinquished the title and position of chairman. under the new agreement, the chief executive officer will receive a base compensation of $300,000 per year payable. in addition, the ceo, may earn annual bonuses up to an aggregate of
$400,000, payable one half in cash and one half in common stock, contingent upon achieving targets set for each year by the compensation committee of the board of directors of the company.
in addition, if in any year of the term of the agreement the ceo earns a bonus, he shall also be granted five-year stock options to
purchase twice the number of shares earned. each such option is to be exercisable at a price per share equal to the fair market value of a share on the date of grant (110%)of the fair market value if the ceo is a 10% or greater stockholder on
the date of grant. the options shall vest and become exercisable to the extent of one-third of the shares covered at the end of each of the first three years following the date of grant, but shall only be exercisable while the ceo is employed by
milestone or within 30 days after the termination of his employment.  in accordance with the employment contract 1,025,735
shares of common stock are to be paid out at the end of the contract in settlement of $1,058,333 at december31, 2011 and 571,190 shares of common stock to be paid out at the end of the contract in settlement of $758,333 at december31,
2010 of accrued deferred compensation and, accordingly, such shares have been classified in stockholders equity with the common shares classified as to be issued.
note m  income taxes
the companys expected federal income tax benefit computed at the statutory rate (34%)on the pre-tax loss
amounted to $504,000 in 2011 and $209,000 in 2010. such benefit was not recognized in the accompanying financial statements due to milestones history of past operating losses, which required full valuation allowances for all of
milestones deferred tax assets at december31, 2011 and 2010.  deferred tax attributes resulting from differences
between financial accounting amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities at december31, 2011 and 2010 are as follows:
september 30,
september 30,
current assets
allowance for doubtful accounts-short term
$
73,000
$
81,000
inventory allowance
79,000
79,000
warranty reserve
10,000
10,000
deferred officers compensation
527,000
333,000
subtotal
689,000
503,000
valuation allowance
(689,000
)
(503,000
)
current deferred tax asset
$
$
non-current assets
allowance for doubtful accounts-long term
$
149,000
$
175,000
net operating loss carryforward
16,715,000
16,100,000
subtotal
16,864,000
16,275,000
valuation allowance
(16,864,000
)
(16,275,000
)
non-current deferred tax asset
$
$
the current deferred asset allowance increased by $186,000 for the year ended december31, 2011 and
increased by $335,000 for the year ended december31, 2010, respectively. the non-current deferred allowance increased by $589,000 for the year ended december31, 2011.
as of december31, 2011 and 2010, milestone has federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $48,805,000 and
$47,657,000, respectively that will be available to offset future taxable income, if any, through december 2031. milestone has state net operating losses of $2,028,000 and $886,000 in 2011 and 2010, respectively, expiring through december 2015.the
utilization of milestones net operating losses may be subject to a substantial limitation due to the change of ownership provisions under section382 of the internal revenue code and similar state provisions. such limitation
may result in the expiration of the net operating loss carry forwards before their utilization. milestone has established a 100% valuation allowance for all of its deferred tax assets due to uncertainty as to their future realization.
f-17
table of contents
a reconciliation of the statutory tax rates for the years ended december31, is as follows:
september 30,
september 30,
statutory rate
(34
)%
(34
)%
state income taxall states
(6
)%
(6
)%
(40
)%
(40
)%
current year valuation allowance
%
%
benefit for income taxes
%
%
in 2010, milestone received $183,673 for sale of tax credits under the new jersey technology business tax
certificate transfer program and is included in other income as of december31, 2010.  accounting for uncertain tax positions:
the company follows the income taxes topic of the fasb accounting standards codification, which provides clarification on
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprises financial statements. the guidance prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position
taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, and also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, disclosure and transition. at december31, 2011, no significant income tax uncertainties have been included in
the companys balance sheets. the companys policy is to recognize interest and penalties on unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense in the statements of operations. no interest and penalties are present for periods open. tax
returns for the 2008, 2009, and 2010 years are subject to audit by federal and state jurisdictions.
note n  product sales and significant customers and vendors
milestones sales by product and by geographical region are as follows:
september 30,
september 30,
year end december31,
instruments
$
2,823,669
$
3,690,456
handpieces
5,457,196
5,962,965
other
97,229
96,547
$
8,378,094
$
9,749,968
united states
$
4,658,327
$
4,529,420
canada
468,786
601,034
other foreign
3,250,981
4,619,514
$
8,378,094
$
9,749,968
the company has informal arrangements with the manufacturer of the sta, compudent and
compumed instruments, one of the principal manufacturers for those instruments pursuant to which they manufacture these products under specific purchase orders but without any long-term contract or minimum purchase commitment. purchases from
this supplier were $2,049,103 (50%)and $3,541,806 (60.8%)in 2011 and 2010, respectively. the company has a manufacturing agreement with one of the principal manufacturers of the handpieces pursuant to which they manufacture products
under specific purchase orders but without minimum purchase commitments. purchases from this supplier for handpieces were $56,231 (1%)and $270,517 (4.6%)in 2011 and 2010, respectively. the company has established an alternate source of
supply for the handpieces from a vendor in china and other alternate sources of supply exist. purchases of handpieces from this vendor in china were $2,006,885 (40%)and $2,016,212 (34.6%)in 2011 and 2010, respectively. as further
described in note b, a five percent shareholder of the company is also a shareholder of this vendor. all other purchases from other suppliers were not significant in either 2011 or 2010.
for the year ended december31, 2011, milestone had two customers (distributors) that had approximately 43%, (30% and 13%) of its
net product sales. accounts receivable, current and long term, for the three customers amounted to approximately $917,575, or 65%, (28%, 12% and 25%) of gross accounts receivable. for the year ended december31, 2010, milestone had three
customers (distributors) that had approximately 60%, (30%, 11%, and 19%) of its net product sales. accounts receivable from these three customers amounted to approximately and $1,346,966, or 73% (5%, 7% and 61%) of gross accounts receivable.
f-18
table of contents
note o  commitments and other
(1) lease commitments  the headquarters for the company is located at 220 south orange ave, livingston, new jersey. the company leases approximately 6,300 square feet of office space at 220 south orange avenue in livingston,
new jersey. the lease term expires june30, 2014 at a monthly cost of $6,942 which milestone believes to be competitive. the leased office space is in good condition. additionally, milestone leased a corporate apartment in maplewood, nj. this
lease expired in november 2010 at a monthly cost of $4,000. the company terminated the lease in december 2011. a third party distribution and logistics center in pennsylvania handles shipping and order fulfillment on a month-to-month basis.
milestone also leases office and telecom equipment under operating leases with payments ranging from $130-$522 per month.  aggregate minimum
rental commitments under noncancelable operating leases are as follows:
september 30,
$
83,828
83,306
41,653
$
208,786
for the years ended december31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, rent expense amounted to approximately
$130,806 and $144,954 respectively.  (2) contract manufacturing arrangement
milestone has informal arrangements for the manufacture of its products. sta, single tooth anesthesia, compudent and
compumed instruments are manufactured for milestone by tricor systems, inc. pursuant to specific purchase orders. the wand disposable handpiece is manufactured for milestone in mexico pursuant to scheduled production requirements. the
sta and the wand handpiece with needle is supplied to milestone by a contractor in the united states, which arranges for its manufacturer in china. these contractors provide an informal long term financing basis for the company.
the termination of the manufacturing relationship with any of the above manufacturers could have a material adverse effect on
milestones ability to produce and sell its products. although alternate sources of supply exist and new manufacturing relationships could be established, milestone would need to recover its existing tools or have new tools produced.
establishment of new manufacturing relationships could involve significant expense and delay. any curtailment or interruption of the supply, whether or not as a result of termination of such a relationship, would adversely affect milestone.
(3) other commitments  the technology underlying the safetywand and compuflo, and an improvement to the controls for compudent were developed by the director of clinical affairs and assigned to us.
milestone purchased this technology pursuant to an agreement dated january1, 2005, for 43,424 shares of restricted common stock and $145,000 in cash, payable on april1, 2005. in addition, the director will receive additional payments of
2.5% of the total sales of products using certain of these technologies, and 5% of the total sales of products using certain other of the technologies. in addition, he is granted, pursuant to the agreement, an option to purchase, at fair market
value on the date of the grant, 8,333 shares of the common stock upon the issuance of each additional patent relating to these technologies. if products produced by third parties use any of these technologies (under license from us) then he will
receive the corresponding percentage of the consideration received by milestone for such sale or license. milestone expensed the directors royalty fees of $291,783 and $344,786 in 2011 and 2010, respectively. additionally, milestone expensed
consulting fee to the director $156,000 for year ended 2011 and 2010, and granted him 16,666 options, in 2010.  in january
2010, the company issued a purchase order to tricor instruments for the purchase of 12,000 sta instruments to be delivered over the next three years. the purchase order is for $5,261,640. the company will be required to make periodic payments
over the next eighteen months to purchase the parts necessary to complete this production. as of december31, 2011, the companys production and sales of instruments to this commitment has been delayed. consequently, advances to contractor
has been classified as current and long term at december31, 2011.
f-19
table of contents
(4) subsequent events
on february1, 2012, milestone, announced that it closed on a $150,000 offshore offering of common stock at $1.40 per share. this
offering resulted in the issuance of 107,142 shares of common stock. the company has reviewed events for inclusion in their financial statements through the date of filing its financial statements with the sec.
note p  pension plan
milestone has a defined contribution plan that allows eligible employees to contribute part of their salary through
payroll deductions. milestone does not contribute to this plan, but does pay the administrative costs of the plan.
f-20
