10-k
a2040883z10-k.htm
10-k
prepared by merrill corporation www.edgaradvantage.com
united states
securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
/x/
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december30, 2000,
//
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period fromto.
commission file number 0-6217
intel corporation (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
94-1672743
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
2200 mission college boulevard, santa clara, california, 95052-8119
(address of principal executive offices, zip code)
registrant's
telephone number, including area code (408)765-8080
securities
registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on
which registered
none
securities
registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act:
common
stock, $0.001 par value
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yes/x/no//
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.//
aggregate
market value of voting stock held
by non-affiliates of the registrant as of february23, 2001
$194.2billion
6,718million
shares of common stock outstanding as of february23, 2001
documents
incorporated by reference
(1)portions
of annual report to stockholders for fiscal year ended december30, 2000parts i, ii and iv.
(2)portions
of the company's proxy statement relating to its 2001 annual meeting of stockholders, to be filed subsequentlypartiii
part i **
item 1. business
industry
intel corporation, the world's largest semiconductor chip maker, supplies the computing and communications industries with chips, boards, and systems building
blocks that are integral to computers, servers, and networking and communications products. our products are offered at various levels of integration and are used by industry members to create
advanced computing and communications systems. intel was incorporated in california in 1968 and reincorporated in delaware in 1989.
products
our major products include microprocessors, chipsets, flash memory products, networking and communications products, embedded processors and microcontrollers,
and pc peripheral products. our component-level products consist of integrated circuits used to process information. integrated circuits are silicon chips, known as semiconductors, etched with
interconnected electronic switches.
our
customers are:
original
equipment manufacturers (oems) who make computer systems, telecommunications and data communications equipment, and peripherals;
pc
and computing appliance users (including individual consumers, large and small businesses, and internet service providers) who buy intel's pc
enhancement products, business communications products and networking products through retail and industrial distributors and resellers throughout the world;
other
manufacturers, including makers of a wide range of industrial and communications equipment; and
businesses
that are building or enhancing internet data centers or providing e-commerce services to their customers or clients.
we
are organized into five operating segments according to our various product lines: the intel architecture group, the wireless communications and computing group, the network
communications group, the communications products group, and the new business group. each group has a vice president who reports directly to intel's chief executive officer. the intel architecture
group is the only reportable operating segment for financial statement purposes. no other operating segment represents 10% or more of our revenues or operating profit. operating results of segments
that are not individually reportable are included in the "all other" category for financial statement segment reporting purposes. the information regarding revenues and operating profit by reportable
segments, and revenues from unaffiliated customers by geographic region, under the headings "operating segment and geographic information" on page 33 of our 2000 annual report to stockholders and
"management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" on pages 36 to 41 of the 2000 annual report is incorporated by reference.
**page
references to the 2000 annual report to stockholders under items1 and 2 in parti and items5, 6, 7, 7a and 8 in partii; and item14 in
partiv relate to the bound, printed versions of the annual report, not to the electronic version appearing at the intel internet site (www.intc.com/intel/annual00/). however, all
data referred to also appears in the electronic version.
intel architecture group
the intel architecture group (iag) develops platform solutions around our microprocessors and chipsets for all major computing segments worldwide, using a
tiered branding approach. our strategy is to provide the best price for performance through a broad range of microprocessors, chipsets, boards and systems for end products in the desktop, mobile and
server market segments.
desktop and mobile platforms incorporate our microprocessor and chipset products in desktop computers,
notebooks, entry-level servers and workstations, and internet appliances.
server platform products are targeted for mid-range to high-end servers and
workstations. servers are powerful systems, often with multiple microprocessors working together, that house large amounts of data, direct data traffic, and control central functions in local and wide
area networks and on the internet. workstations offer higher performance than standard desktop pcs, especially in graphics processing and in the ability to carry out several tasks at the same time.
iag
products include processors and board- and system-level products based on the p6 micro-architecture (including the intel celeron, pentium  iii and pentium iii xeon processors) as well as the intel
netburst micro-architecture with the release of the pentium 4 processor. we also provide core-logic chipsets for most of our microprocessor products, which
improve ease of use for our oem customers, provide new capabilities and enable system performance to scale as the processor performance increases. in addition, to further enhance the acceptance and
deployment of these products by our customers, we provide e-business enabling solutions.
microprocessors.a microprocessor is the central processing unit of a computer system. it
processes system data and controls other devices in the system, acting as the brains of the computer. one indicator of microprocessor performance is its clock speed, the rate at which its internal
logic operates, which is measured in units of hertz, or cycles processed per second. one megahertz (mhz) equals one million cycles processed per second, and one gigahertz (ghz) equals one billion
cycles processed per second. other indicators of chip performance are memory storage and access. the memory stored on a chip is measured in bytes, with 1,024 bytes equaling one kilobyte (kb),
1.049million bytes equaling one megabyte (mb), and 1.074billion bytes equaling one gigabyte (gb). cache is a memory subsystem in which frequently used data is duplicated for quick
access. a second level of cache (l2) located directly on the microprocessor, can also be used to further increase system performance.
our
developments in semiconductor design and manufacturing have made it possible to decrease the size of circuits etched into silicon, permitting a greater number of transistors to be
used on each
microprocessor die, and a greater number of microprocessors to be made from each silicon wafer. the result is smaller, faster microprocessors that consume less power and cost less to manufacture. the
width of the individual transistors on a chip is measured in microns; one micron equals one millionth of a meter. in 2000, we finished converting substantially all of our microprocessor manufacturing
to the 0.18-micron process technology, and in november we announced completion of the development of the 0.13-micron process technology. see the discussion of manufacturing
process technologies under the heading "manufacturing, assembly and test" in parti, item 1 of this form10-k.
in
2000, we announced several new microprocessor products aimed at the various computing market segments ranging from value pcs (systems costing less than $1,000) to
high-performance workstations and servers.
value pcs.the intel celeron processor meets the core computing needs and affordability requirements common to many new
pc users. during 2000, we introduced several higher speed versions of the celeron processor running at speeds ranging from 533 to 766 mhz. the 566 mhz and 600 mhz versions, introduced in
march2000, were the first celeron processors to integrate internet
streaming simd extensions, which help improve multimedia performance significantly over previous versions. in january2001, we introduced an 800-mhz version of the celeron
processor, our first desktop value pc processor to include a 100-mhz system bus. this technology provides a wider communications path between the processor and the rest of the system,
resulting in faster overall system performance.
performance desktop pcs.the pentium iii processor is aimed at desktop
pc users who need powerful performance for a variety of demanding applications and internet functions. this processor features an integrated l2 cache that runs at the full speed of the processor core.
l2 cache, also known as advanced transfer cache, enables the performance of applications to scale with increasing clock frequencies. in march2000, we introduced the pentium  iii processor running at 1
ghz. during 2000, we also introduced versions running at 850, 866 and 933 mhz.
in
november2000, we introduced the pentium 4 processor running at 1.5 and 1.4 ghz. at the end of 2000, this was our highest performance processor for the desktop pc segment.
the pentium 4 processor is our first completely new desktop processor design since the p6 micro-architecture was introduced in 1995. the pentium 4 processor incorporates the intel netburst
micro-architecture to deliver improved performance for video and audio, 3d graphics, and a variety of internet technologies, including streaming video, speech processing and other multimedia
processing tasks.
mobile pcs.we design our products for mobile pcs to provide notebook and laptop pc users with the performance they
need while meeting the power consumption and size constraints of mobile pcs. as with our desktop products, mobile products are available at a variety of price/performance points which allows our oem
customers to meet the demands of all notebook pc designs. these notebook designs include full size, thin and light and ultra-portable. in 2000, we introduced several mobile celeron processors ranging
from 400 to 700 mhz, aimed at the value mobile pc market segment. in january2000, we introduced mobile pentium iii processors featuring
intel speedstep technology running at 600 and 650 mhz. intel speedstep technology allows the processor to switch to a lower voltage and clock speed when the user is
disconnected from an ac power source in order to extend the system's battery life; the chip resumes full speed when the user plugs back into an outlet or docking station. in june2000, we
introduced two more pentium iii processors featuring intel speedstep technology, including one that consumes less than one watt of power on average. in
september2000, we introduced 800- and 850-mhz versions of the mobile pentium iii processor, which use intel speedstep
technology to drop power consumption down to as low as 1.35 volts.
in
january2001, we introduced the ultra low voltage mobile pentium iiiprocessor running at 500 mhz. designed for mobile
pcs weighing less than 3 pounds and measuring one inch in height, it is the industry's first processor to operate at under 1 volt while consuming less than half a watt of power. at the same time, we
announced the ultra low voltage mobile celeron processor running at 500 mhz. in february2001, we introduced the low voltage mobile pentium iii
processor running at 700 mhz capable at operating at 1.1 volts while consuming less than 1 watt of power. the ultra low voltage processors are targeted for the sub-notebook market while
the low voltage processors are targeted for the mini-notebook market, both in the ultra-portable design category.
servers and workstations.in may2000, we announced new pentium  iii xeon processors for use in high-performance
multiprocessing servers, which use between four and eight processors per system. the
700-mhz processors were the first "large cache" pentium iii xeon processors built on our 0.18-micron manufacturing technology,
and have either 1 or 2 mb of l2 cache on the die. the 2-mb version integrates 140million transistors on a single microprocessor die. in august2000, we introduced the
industry's first ghz processor for servers and high-end workstations. oemsbegan offering systems featuring the pentium iii xeon
processor running at 1 ghz in the third quarter of 2000, targeting the high-end workstation and front-end server segments. front-end or internet servers, featuring
one or
two processors, have become a common solution for companies conducting e-business over the internet.
in
february2001, we announced that the next generation of our 32-bit processor line for servers, formerly codenamed foster, will be branded intel
xeon, dropping the pentium portion in the name. the intel xeon processor is based on the intel netburst micro-architecture. we expect to introduce products under the intel xeon name in 2001.
we
continued development of our next-generation 64-bit processor for high-end servers and workstations, the intel itanium processor.
this microprocessor will expand the capabilities of the intel architecture to address the high-performance server and workstation market segments, while still running the software that
currently operates on machines based on our 32-bit processors. a 64-bit microprocessor is more complex than a 32-bit microprocessor and requires a more complex
system architecture, but it can handle twice as much data in each clock cycle. thus, a 64-bit processor enables most data-intensive applications, such as enterprise resource
planning and intensive graphics modeling, to run much faster than they would on a 32-bit processor. in october2000, we hosted the exchange e-business summit, at which
many oemsdemonstrated server systems based on a prototype version of the itanium processor. more than 400 applications are in development, and we have shipped thousands of prototype systems
and processors since november1999. in 2000, we began to ship processors for systems used by information technology end users in pilot installations and we expect the release of production
systems during 2001.
also
during 2000, we announced e-business enabling solutions designed to further enhance the acceptance and deployment of intel architecture-based systems. these services
will be deployed through our intel solution centers and include hardware, software, lab testing equipment and engineering services that web integrators can use to validate and deploy comprehensive
e-business solutions in conjunction with leading industry suppliers.
chipsets.chipsets perform essential logic functions supporting the central processing unit,
and extend the graphics, audio, video and other capabilities of many systems based on our processors. our chipsets are compatible with one or more of a variety of industry-accepted buses, such as the
peripheral components interconnect (pci) local bus specification and the accelerated graphics port (agp) specification. a bus is a circuit that carries data between parts of the system, for example,
between the processor and main memory.
to
help computer makers accelerate their products' time-to-market, we design, manufacture and sell chipsets for each computing market segment. in 2000, we
introduced the intel 820e, 815 and 815e chipsets for pentium iii processor-based pcs, each with a new input/output controller hub
delivering greater system performance and flexibility. we also introduced the intel 815em mobile chipset with integrated graphics for mobile pcs based on the pentium  iii and celeron processors, and the
intel 850 chipset supporting the pentium 4 processor.
in
january2001, we introduced the intel 810e2 chipset for celeron processors, which enables pc makers to provide faster disk drive performance, more universal
serial bus (usb) ports and surround sound audio in systems priced at less than $1,000.
for
workstation and server makers, we provide the intel 840 chipset, which supports the pentium iii xeon processor to
enhance system features and capabilities allowing greater texturing, more fluid movements, and better display output in demanding workstations and servers. we also offer the profusion
chipset, supporting up to eight pentiumiii xeon processors, designed to help oem customers build advanced multiprocessing servers.
intel's customers demand alternatives in the area of memory architecture. in response to that demand intel chipsets currently support rambus dynamic random access memory (rdram) and
synchronous dram (sdram). in the future intel expects to add support for double data rate dram (ddr) to its product line. intel has adopted rdram as the primary memory solution for its flagship
desktop pentium 4 processors and is actively working with the industry to promote rdram as the highest performance desktop memory solution.
board-level products.while many of our oem customers use our microprocessors as components in
designing their own computer products, some use board-level products that we design and build as basic building blocks in their products. oemsmay buy at this level of integration to accelerate
their time-to-market and direct their own investments to other areas of their product lines. we provide board-level products to give our oem customers flexibility, and
board-level products based on our microprocessors are available for most computing market segments.
sales and gross margin.during 2000 and 1999, sales of microprocessors and related board-level
products, including chipsets, based on the p6 micro-architecture comprised a substantial majority of our consolidated net revenues and gross margin. for 1998, these products represented a majority of
our consolidated net revenues and a substantial majority of gross margin. sales of pentium family processors, including pentium processors with mmx technology were rapidly
declining but still a significant portion of our revenues and gross margin for 1998. in 2000, we initiated a program to replace motherboards that had a defective memory translator hub component that
enabled sdram to work with the intel 820 chipset. the total impact on gross margin for this program was approximately $253million.
wireless communications and computing group
the wireless communications and computing group (wccg) provides a variety of component-level hardware and software used in digital cellular communications
products and other applications using both low-power processing and flash memory. wccg products support handheld devices such as mobile phones, two-way pagers and personal
digital assistants.
flash memory.flash memory is a specialized type of memory component used to store user data
and program code; it retains this information even when the power is off. our flash memory is used predominantly in mobile phones, but is also found in other products including mp3 music players,
handheld pc organizers, handheld voice recorders and digital answering machines, in addition to industrial products such as network routers and communications systems. in may2000, we reached a
significant milestone, shipping our billionth flash memory chip since the product's introduction in 1988.
in
april2000, we announced the intel 0.18-micron advanced+ boot block flash memory, our first flash memory product using our 0.18-micron
manufacturing process. this fourth-generation boot block memory product includes next-generation advanced security features that minimize the risk of cloning and other types of fraud in
digital mobile phones and internet appliances. in october2000, we announced the intel 1.8 volt wireless flash memory, with four times higher performance than previous flash
products and low-voltage features that allow internet-enabled cellular phones to save up to 60% of their energy, thus extending battery life.
embedded solutions for handheld devices.in august2000, we introduced the
intel xscale micro-architecture, a new chip architecture designed to be used in a wide variety of advanced handheld devices, wireless internet devices and networking
infrastructure applications. building on intel strongarm technology which we license from arm,ltd., the intel xscale micro-architecture offers low-power operation (as
low as 1/10,000th of a watt) and fast clock speeds (approaching 1ghz), supplying the needs of a diverse set of internet client devices as well as networking and storage equipment. the
low-power capabilities of the intel xscale micro-architecture are enhanced with our
dynamic voltage management and intel media processing technology. dynamic voltage management allows developers to scale the clock frequency and voltage dynamically to adjust performance
to application needs, while maintaining battery life. intel media processing technology is a co-processor engine that enables more power-efficient multimedia processing for internet
applications.
in
december2000, we joined with analog devices,inc. to introduce the integrated micro signal architecture, which incorporates digital signal processor (dsp) and
microcontroller features in a single platform. the architecture improves ease of programmability, performance and power consumption, and is optimized for processing modem, audio, video, image and
voice signals in battery-powered communications applications.
other wireless technologies.in september2000, we introduced a new platform
architecture designed to accelerate the development of next-generation internet applications for wireless devices. the intel personal internet client architecture (pca) is a
blueprint that defines specifications for building new wireless solutions capable of processing advanced internet applications such as those envisioned for internet-ready cell phones and other
wireless handheld devices. this architecture allows parallel development of software and hardware, resulting in faster time-to-market for oems.
in
may2000, we announced that we would work with mitsubishi electric corporation to co-develop a cellular chipset for the third-generation (3g) wireless technology
market, integrating high-speed internet access with more traditional phone functions. this relationship is part of a broader strategy to advance wireless technologies around the world. in
2000, we announced the formation of two wireless competence centers, in tsukuba, japan and beijing, china. the mission of these centers is to promote development of wireless internet technology
through cooperation with leading companies in the local cellular phone industries.
network communications group
the network communications group (ncg) provides component-level networking silicon building blocks for networking and communications systems. ncg delivers
networking products to oemsbuilding communications systems for home and small and mid-sized businesses. ncg's products include network connectivity products including wireless
products, network processors, high-speed adapters for internet access, and optical networking components. ncg also offers embedded microprocessors and microcontrollers for networking and
communications as well as other applications.
during
2000, we continued to execute our strategy of acquiring companies with key technologies to extend and accelerate our product offerings in networking and communications. in
march2000, we acquired ambient technologies,inc. ambient develops highly integrated digital subscriber line (dsl) silicon solutions and analog modems designed to bring
high-speed internet access to home users and small businesses.
also
in march2000, we acquired giga a/s, headquartered in copenhagen, denmark. giga provides high-performance networking chips enabling the rapid development of
the fiber-optic infrastructure necessary to support internet growth.
in
may2000, we acquired basis communications corporation, a maker of advanced semiconductors and other products for a range of network access systems such as switches linking
local area networks to the internet.
in
august2000, we acquired trillium digital systemsinc., a supplier of communications software products, support and services that will help us accelerate our ability
to offer networking and telecommunications customers a more complete platform-level solution.
in january2001, we announced that we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire xircom, inc and in march we successfully completed the tender offer. xircom is a supplier
of pc cards and other products used to connect mobile computing devices to corporate networks and the internet.
in
february2001, we announced that we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire privately held vxtelinc. for approximately $550million in a cash
transaction. vxtel develops voice-over-packet products that deliver high-quality voice and data communications over next-generation optical networks.
the completion of this acquisition is subject to regulatory review and normal closing conditions.
networking connectivity products.in 2000, we continued to introduce enhanced versions of
networking connectivity products. in january2000, we announced our new family of fast ethernet intel pro/100 s network security-enabled adapters, which are designed to produce
higher performance and end-to-end security within the local area network (lan). all of the intel pro network connections feature the intel
singledriver technology, which is designed to lower network support costs and complexity by providing a common set of software drivers for servers, desktops, network pcs and mobile
clients. ethernet, fast ethernet and gigabit ethernet refer to a local network used to transfer information at 10, 100 and 1,000million bits per second, respectively. in june2000, we
introduced the intel pro/1000 fserver adapter, which provides gigabit ethernet over fiber-optic cables, as well as the intel pro/1000 tserver adapter,
delivering high-performance network connections over copper wiring. at the heart of these new gigabit ethernet products is the intel 82543gc gigabit ethernet controller, which
includes integrated support for ethernet, fast ethernet and gigabit ethernet network connections in a single chip. this controller allows these technologies to interact seamlessly on the same network
and provides a clear migration path from older ethernet networks to the next-generation gigabit ethernet networks.
in
june2000, we introduced wireless lan (wlan) solutions based on the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee) 802.11b high-rate industry standard.
we introduced the intel pro/wireless 2011 lan pc card, a credit-card-size product that can be inserted into a laptop, allowing secure, high-speed,
reliable wireless network and internet transmissions to be sent and received. along with this product introduction, we introduced the intel pro/wireless 2011 lan access point, which
functions as a wireless hub to the mobile pc cards, connecting the wired network and the wireless devices. these wireless devices are the first products resulting from the joint development agreement
announced in february2000 between intel and symbol technologies,inc.
we
also introduced optical networking products in 2000. in june, we introduced seven optical networking chips for applications such as voice, lan and wide area network (wan) data
traffic,
storage area networks (sans) and virtual private networks (vpns). these new components are aimed at the telecommunications infrastructure, from the access point of the optical network to the network
core, and include receiver chips, transmitter chips, chips that improve transmission quality, chips providing packet framing, multiplexer chips and channel-mapping chips.
in
august2000, we introduced the intel gigablade network accelerator. this device is designed to provide greater intelligence about the type of
traffic that flows over an optical network, enabling service providers to offer enhanced services to their customers. server cards based on the intel gigablade network accelerator connect wans to
metropolitan area networks (mans) and lans. by acting as a monitor on the optical fiber, the intel gigablade network accelerator is capable of viewing traffic flows and extracting data, which can then
be processed by a wide range of standard applications running on the server, including billing, provisioning, hacker intrusion detection and asset deployment.
network processors.our intel ixa architecture provides a flexible platform for the networking
and communications industry to build faster, more intelligent networks using reprogrammable silicon. in may2000, we announced a new higher performance network processor based on our ixp1200
product line. the new version is capable of processing 3million packets of data per second. the ixp1200 chips have the intel strongarm technology, allowing them to consume less than 5 watts of
power. in november2000, we extended this line with the intel ixp225 dsl and ixp220 dsl network processors. the former combines voice and data in dsl-based internet
access devices and gateways, while the latter brings network processing to data-only equipment, such as entry-level bridges and routers.
embedded control products.our embedded control products include a range of components used to
control functions in networking and communications applications, such as telecommunications, hubs, routers and wan systems. our embedded control chips are also used in laser printers, imaging, storage
media, point-of-sale systems, industrial automation equipment, automotive systems and other applications.
adding
to our embedded product line offerings, in may2000, we introduced a range of higher speed pentium iii and celeron
processors for applied computing applications, consisting of high-performance connected systems designed for networking and communications, and commercial and industrial market segments.
in
june2000, we introduced the first input/output (i/o) processor to offer an integrated 64-bit, 66-mhz pci-to-pci bridge,
which doubles pci speed and bandwidth over previous generations. the intel 80303 i/o processor is our third-generation i/o processor, successor to the popular i960 rn i/o
processor. the 80303 is optimized for data-intensive applications, such as sans, communications systems and networking line cards.
other networking products.in january2000, we announced the intel pro/dsl
3100 modem. this modem is based on two industry standards that allow access to the internet at speeds up to 150 times faster than the fastest analog modems.
in
april2000, we launched our first wireless anypoint home networking products, which allow several pcs or laptops in a home to share files, printers and a single
simultaneous internet connection without wires.
communications products group
the communications products group provides system-level communications products directed at service providers running e-business data centers.
these products include hubs, routers and switches for ethernet and fast ethernet networks, e-commerce infrastructure appliances and computer telephony components. computer telephony is a
term used to encompass a wide variety of technologies and applications that use the information processing capabilities of a computer to add intelligence to telephone functions and to combine these
functions with data processing.
in
february2000, we introduced the intel netstructure family of communications products and services designed to help businesses improve their
e-commerce capabilities through faster online connections, security authentication and improved server response time. in may2000, we announced intel netstructure products that
intelligently and more reliably control secure extensible markup language (xml)-based internet transactions for business-to-business e-commerce. in
december2000, we announced that hewlett-packard would be the first major oem customer to adopt the intel netstructure product line. this announcement reflects a strategic transition that we
announced in november2000, shifting the intel netstructure product line from a branded product strategy to an oem sales model.
in
april2000, we acquired picazo communications,inc., a computer telephony solutions provider. this acquisition provides us and our dialogic subsidiary with channel
expertise and intellectual property to accelerate customer deployment of communications solutions based on ct media server software. ct media is a software platform for building advanced
telecommunications servers that support
communications applications such as ip telephony, network communications, integrated messaging, fax, contact management and other applications from different companies.
in september2000, we announced key new technology building blocks for accessing web sites using speech commands. the new products have a voice portal capability that provides
the first standardized platform for speech-enabled application development in the internet-based voice servers.
in
october2000, we acquired ziatech corporation. ziatech designs and markets a full range of intel architecture-based circuit boards, hardware platforms and development
systems.
new business group
the new business group (nbg) focuses on nurturing and growing opportunities in new market segments, including businesses based on the internet and the pc. the
group currently offers web hosting, e-commerce data center services and connected peripherals.
in
2000, intel online services,inc. opened seven data centers in the united states, europe, india, japan, korea and australia, offering web hosting and data center services.
these services include facilities, servers and other services needed to help customers maintain and grow their e-business activities.
also
in 2000, nbg products included four new offerings in our intel pc camera series; the intel wireless series of pc peripherals, including an intel branded
game pad, mouse, keyboard and base station; and innovative pc enhanced toys including the intel play computer sound morpher.
in
december2000, intel and excalibur technologies corporation formed a new company, convera corporation. we contributed our interactive media services division and cash to
convera in exchange for a retained interest in the company. convera provides advanced technologies, products and services to digital content owners, allowing them to manage, enhance and securely
distribute digital content over the internet, intranets, set-top boxes and wireless devices.
manufacturing, assembly and test
the majority of our wafer production, including microprocessor, flash memory and networking silicon fabrication, is conducted within the united states at our
facilities in new mexico, oregon, arizona, california and massachusetts. a significant portion of our wafer production, primarily microprocessor and chipset fabrication, is conducted outside the
united states at facilities in israel and ireland. for the fourth quarter of 2000, the israel and ireland facilities accounted for approximately 30% of our total wafer fabrication.
as
of year-end 2000, substantially all of our microprocessors were built using the 0.18-micron process technology. we are manufacturing wafers using the
0.18-micron process technology in arizona, california, ireland, israel, new mexico and oregon. in november2000, we announced the completion of the development of the
0.13-micron (130 nanometer) process technology. the 0.13-micron process technology features structures that are smaller than 1/1,000th the thickness of a human hair (0.18
microns is 1/500th the thickness of a human hair). we expect to begin manufacturing our first product using 0.13-micron process technology in production volumes in the second half of 2001,
enabling us to continue to deliver new generations of high-performance microprocessors. we believe that we were the first company to complete development of the 0.13-micron
process technology and to demonstrate manufacturing readiness with complex integrated circuits.
in
2000, we announced that we would begin building high-volume 300mm (12-inch wafer) fabrication facilities. some of these facilities will begin production on
0.13-micron process technology. the largest wafer size we currently use in wafer production is 200mm (8-inch wafer). we expect the larger 300mm wafer size to cut die
manufacturing costs by more than 30%. we plan to start production using 300mm wafers in 2002.
during
the first quarter of 2000, we purchased a fabrication facility in colorado. during 2000, we made substantial retrofitting changes and process improvements at this facility,
including equipment installations to manufacture flash memory. we expect to begin manufacturing at the colorado facility in the second quarter of 2001.
we
also manufacture microprocessor- and networking-related board-level products and systems at facilities in malaysia, oregon and washington. in addition, we manufacture board-level
products in puerto rico; however, in january2001, we announced that we would phase out our manufacturing operations in puerto rico during the first half of 2001. based on an assessment across
our worldwide
board-level manufacturing facilities, we concluded that the operations in puerto rico were less cost competitive than our other operations.
a
substantial majority of our components assembly and testing, including assembly and testing for microprocessors, is performed at facilities in costa rica, malaysia and the
philippines. we also perform components assembly and testing at a facility in china, and in august2000 announced plans to expand this facility.
to
augment capacity in the united states as well as internationally, we use subcontractors to perform assembly of certain products and wafer fabrication for certain components,
primarily flash memory, chipsets, and networking and communications component products. we also use subcontractors for the manufacture of some board-level products and systems, and purchase certain
communication networking products and pc peripherals from external vendors.
in
general, if we were unable to manufacture wafers or to assemble and test our products abroad, or if air transportation between our foreign facilities and the united states were
disrupted, there could be a material adverse effect upon our operations. in addition to normal manufacturing, assembly and test risks, our operations outside the united states are subject to certain
additional exposures, including currency controls and fluctuations; tariff, import and other restrictions and regulations; and
political instability, such as unrest in israel. to date, we have not experienced significant difficulties related to these foreign business risks.
manufacturing
of integrated circuits is a complex process. normal manufacturing risks include errors and interruptions in the production process and defects in raw materials, as well
as other risks, all of which can affect yields. a substantial decrease in yields would result in higher manufacturing costs and the possibility of not being able to produce sufficient volume to meet
specific product demand.
employees
as of december30, 2000, we employed approximately 86,100 people worldwide.
sales
most of our products are sold or licensed through sales offices located near major concentrations of users throughout north america, europe,
asia-pacific, japan and other parts of the world.
we
also use industrial and retail distributors and representatives to distribute our products both within and outside the united states. typically, distributors handle a wide variety
of products, including those that compete with our products, and fill orders for many customers. most of our sales to distributors are made under agreements allowing for price protection on unsold
merchandise and right of return on stipulated quantities of unsold merchandise. sales representatives generally do not offer directly competitive products but may carry complementary items
manufactured by others. representatives do not maintain a product inventory; instead, their customers place orders directly with us or through distributors. we conducted business with more than 2,500
customers worldwide in 2000, including customers of our acquired companies. compaq computer corporation and dell computer corporation each contributed approximately 13% to our total sales in 2000. a
substantial majority of the sales to these two customers consisted of intel architecture group products. no other customer accounted for more than 10% of our total revenues. sales to our five largest
customers accounted for approximately 42% of total revenues. the information regarding revenues and operating profit by reportable segments and revenues from unaffiliated customers by geographic
region under the heading "operating segment and geographic information" on page 33 of our 2000 annual report to stockholders, is incorporated by reference.
backlog
our sales are made primarily pursuant to standard purchase orders for delivery of standard products. we have some agreements that give a customer the right to
purchase a specific number of products during a specified time period. although not generally obligating the customer to purchase any particular number of such products, some of these agreements do
contain billback clauses. under these clauses, customers who do not purchase the full volume agreed to are liable for billback on previous shipments up to the price appropriate for the quantity
actually purchased. as a matter of industry practice, billback clauses are difficult to enforce. the quantity actually purchased by the customer, as well as the shipment schedules, are frequently
revised during the agreement term to reflect changes in the customer's needs. in light of industry practice and experience, we do not believe that such agreements are meaningful for determining
backlog amounts. we believe that only a small portion of our order backlog is noncancellable and that the dollar amount associated with the noncancellable portion is not material. therefore, we do not
believe that backlog as of any particular date is indicative of future results.
competition
our goal is to be the preeminent building block supplier to the worldwide internet economy. our primary focus areas are the desktop and mobile platforms, the
server platform, and networking and communications including wireless communications, as well as new business opportunities around the internet. in each of these market segments, we compete, to
various degrees, on the basis of functionality, performance, quality, price and availability. we are engaged in a rapidly advancing field of technology in which our ability to compete depends upon our
ability to improve our products and processes, develop new products to meet changing customer requirements and reduce costs. prices decline rapidly in the semiconductor industry as unit volumes grow,
further competition develops and production experience is accumulated. many companies compete with us in the various computing, networking and communications market segments and are engaged in the
same basic fields of activity, including research and development. both within and outside the united states, these competitors range in size from large multinational companies to smaller companies
competing in specialized market segments.
the
intel architecture group operating segment supports the desktop, mobile and server platform initiatives. our strategy for the desktop, mobile and server platforms is to introduce
ever-higher performance microprocessors and chipsets, developed for different market segments of the worldwide computing market, using a tiered branding approach. to further enhance the
acceptance and deployment of these products by our customers, we also provide e-business enabling solutions. in line with our strategy, we seek to develop higher performance
microprocessors based on the p6 micro-architecture specifically for each computing segment. we also plan to introduce higher performance versions of processors based on the intel netburst
micro-architecture.
our
financial results are substantially dependent on sales of microprocessors by the intel architecture group. a number of competitors market software-compatible products intended to
compete with intel architecture-based processors. we also face significant competition from companies offering rival microprocessor architectures. the celeron processor competes with existing and
future products in the highly competitive value pc market segment. the pentium iii processor and the pentium 4 processor compete with existing and
future products in the performance desktop and entry-level workstation market segment. competitive product offerings in the performance desktop market segment have recently increased. the
pentiumiii xeon processor competes in the mid-range and high-end server and workstation market segments with established
products based on rival architectures.
many
of our competitors are licensed to use our patents. furthermore, based on current case law, our competitors can design microprocessors that are compatible with our
microprocessors and avoid our patent rights through the use of foundry services that have licenses with us. competitors' products may add features, increase performance or sell at lower prices. we
cannot predict whether our products will continue to compete successfully with such existing rival architectures or whether new architectures will
establish or gain market acceptance or provide increased competition with our products. future distortion of price maturity curves could occur if software-compatible products enter the market segment
in significant volume or alternative architectures gain market acceptance.
we
plan to cultivate new businesses as well as continue to work with the computing industry to expand internet capabilities and product offerings, and develop compelling software
applications that can take advantage of higher performance microprocessors and chipsets, increasing demand for intel's newer products in each computing market segment. we may continue to take various
steps, including reducing microprocessor prices and offering rebates at such times as we deem appropriate, in order to increase acceptance of our latest technology and to remain competitive within
each relevant market segment.
in the networking and communications infrastructure area, our strategy is to deliver both system-level communications building blocks at various levels of integration and
component-level silicon building blocks for networking and communications systems. we have made acquisitions and expect to make additional acquisitions to grow the networking and communications areas.
the network communications silicon and network connectivity products from the network communications group face competition from both established and emerging companies. the competitors in these areas
use aggressive product and acquisition plans in efforts to achieve leading-edge market positions. the communications products group operating segment supports initiatives to deliver the
system-level communications products directed at service providers running e-business data centers. the communications products group focuses on selling its intel netstructure products to
oem customers. the communications products group also provides component-level products for converged voice and data communications systems for the telecommunications industry. these products compete
in the small and mid-sized enterprise market segments with established products and leading-edge internet communications systems and server products. we cannot predict whether
our networking and communications products will continue to compete successfully with products from existing competitors or products from new entrants to these market segments.
in
the cellular wireless communications business, our strategy is to deliver feature-rich, enhanced flash memory products and high-speed processors for
handheld wireless devices that require high performance and low power. in supplying these products, our wireless communications and computing group faces competition from established companies in the
flash memory, applications processor and baseband chipset market segments.
research and development
our competitive position has developed to a large extent because of our emphasis on research and development. this emphasis has enabled us to deliver
leading-edge technology and has permitted our customers to commit to the use of these new products in the development of their own products. our research and development activities are
directed toward developing new products, hardware technologies and manufacturing processes, as well as improving existing products and lowering costs.
a
substantial majority of the design and development of components and other products is performed in the united states at our facilities in california, oregon, arizona and
washington. outside the united states, we have product development facilities at various locations, including israel, denmark and malaysia. we also maintain research and development facilities
dedicated to improving manufacturing processes in arizona, california and oregon.
in
2000, we shipped thousands of prototype processors based on the ia-64 architecture for high-end servers, under the itanium brand, and began to ship
processors for systems used by information technology end users in pilot installations. we expect the release of production systems during 2001. the itanium processor is built on the
0.18-micron process technology. during 2000, approximately half of our microprocessor research and development budget was spent on initiatives related to the server and workstation market
segment.
in
addition to microprocessor and chipset research and development, we have research and development initiatives in wireless devices, networking and communications products, connected
peripherals and other areas. these research and development initiatives include projects surrounding the intel xscale micro-architecture for wireless devices and the intel ixa architecture for
networking and communications products. we have also acquired ongoing research and development activities in these areas with businesses acquired in 2000.
our
expenditures for research and development were $3,897million in fiscal year 2000, $3,111million in fiscal year 1999 and $2,509million in fiscal year 1998.
these amounts exclude charges for purchased in-process research and development related to acquisitions of $109million for fiscal year 2000, $392million for fiscal year
1999 and $165million for fiscal year 1998. at december2000, we had approximately 20,500 employees engaged in research and development. the success of our research and development
activities is dependent upon competitive circumstances as well as our ability to bring new
products to market in each computing market segment and in our other businesses in a timely and cost-effective manner.
acquisitions and strategic investments
during 2000, we acquired 16 businesses for more than $2.7billion, augmenting our capabilities in a number of strategic areas. the companies acquired
included ambient, giga, picazo, basis, trillium and ziatech. these acquisitions are discussed under the "products" heading in parti, item 1 of this form10-k in connection
with each related business group.
under
our intel capital program, we also make equity investments to further our strategic objectives and to support our key business initiatives in the areas of desktop and mobile
platforms, server platforms, networking and communications, and internet services. we want to stimulate growth in computing, communications and the internet, and to grow the total information
infrastructure, in order to create and expand markets for our products. this strategic investment program helps advance our overall mission of being a leading provider of key building blocks to the
internet economy. while financial returns are not our primary goal, our strategic investment program seeks to invest in companies that can succeed and have an impact on their market segment. when the
strategic objectives of an investment have been achieved, or if the investment diverges from our strategic objectives, we may decide to dispose of the investment. as of year-end 2000, our
strategic equity portfolio was valued
at approximately $3.7billion, including marketable investments at their market value and non-marketable investments at cost.
intellectual property and licensing
intellectual property rights that apply to our various products include patents, copyrights, trade secrets, trademarks and maskwork rights. intel has
established an active program to protect its investment in technology by enforcing its intellectual property rights. we do not intend to license our intellectual property rights broadly unless we can
obtain adequate consideration. we also refer to information appearing under the heading "competition" in parti, item 1 of this form10-k.
we
have filed and obtained a number of patents in the united states and abroad, and we have entered into patent cross-license agreements with many of our major competitors and other
parties. while our
intellectual property rights are important to our success, our business as a whole is not materially dependent upon any particular patent or license. we and other companies in the computer,
telecommunications and related high-technology fields typically apply for and receive, in the aggregate, thousands of patents annually in the united states and other countries. in
addition, because of the fast pace of innovation and product development, our products are often obsolete before the patents related to them expire. as a result, we believe that the duration of the
applicable patents is adequate relative to the expected lives of our products.
we
protect many of our computer programs by copyrighting them. we have registered numerous copyrights with the united states copyright office. the ability to protect or copyright
software in some foreign jurisdictions is not clear. however, it is our policy to require customers to obtain a software license contract before we provide them with certain computer programs. certain
components contain embedded computer programs, and we have also obtained copyright protection for some of these programs. in addition, we have obtained protection for the maskworks for a number of our
components under the chip protection act of 1984.
we
have obtained certain trademarks and trade names for our products to distinguish genuine intel products from our competitors' products, and we are currently engaged in a
cooperative program with oemsto identify with the intel inside logo certain personal computers containing genuine intel microprocessors. we maintain certain details about our
processes, products and strategies as trade secrets.
like
many companies in the semiconductor and other high-technology industries, we have from time to time been notified of claims that we may be infringing certain
intellectual property rights of others. these claims have been referred to counsel, and they are in various stages of evaluation and negotiation. if it appears necessary or desirable, we may seek
licenses for these intellectual property rights. we can give no assurance that licenses will be offered by all claimants, that the terms of any offered licenses will be acceptable to us or that in all
cases the dispute will be resolved without litigation, which may be time consuming and expensive, and may result in injunctive relief or the payment of damages by us. we also refer to the information
appearing under the heading "legal proceedings" in parti, item 3 of this form10-k.
compliance with environmental regulations
to our present knowledge, compliance with federal, state and local provisions enacted or adopted for protection of the environment has had no material effect
upon our operations. reference is made to the information appearing under the heading "legal proceedings" in parti, item 3 of this form10-k.
executive officers
the following sets forth certain information with regard to executive officers of intel (ages are as of december30, 2000):
craig
r. barrett (age 61)has been a director of intel since 1992, chief executive officer since 1998 and president since 1997. prior to that, dr.barrett was chief
operating officer from 1993 to 1998 and executive vice president from 1990 to 1997.
andrew
s. grove (age 64)has been a director of intel since 1974 and chairman of the board since 1997. dr.grove was chief executive officer from 1987 to 1998 and
president from 1979 to 1997.
gordon
e. moore (age 71)has been a director of intel since 1968 and chairman emeritus of the board since 1997. prior to that, dr.moore was chairman of the board from
1979 to 1997.
leslie
l. vadasz (age 64)has been a director of intel since 1988 and executive vice president and president, intel capital, since january2000. prior to that,
mr.vadasz was senior vice president and director of corporate business development from 1991 to january2000.
paul
s. otellini (age 50)has been executive vice president and general manager, intel architecture group, since 1998. prior to that, mr.otellini was executive vice
president and director, sales and marketing group, from 1996 to 1998, and senior vice president and director, sales and marketing group, from 1994 to 1996.
gerhard
h. parker (age 57)has been executive vice president and general manager, new business group, since 1998. prior to that, dr.parker was executive vice president
and general manager, technology and manufacturing group, from 1996 to 1998, and senior vice president and general manager, technology and manufacturing group, from 1992 to 1996.
andy
d. bryant (age 50)has been executive vice president and chief financial and enterprise services officer since january2001, and senior vice president and chief
financial and enterprise services officer from 1999 to january2001. prior to that, mr.bryant was senior vice president and chief financial officer for 1999 and vice president and chief
financial officer from 1994 to 1999.
sean
m. maloney (age 44)has been executive vice president and director, sales and marketing group, since january2001, senior vice president and director, sales and
marketing group, from 1999 to january2001, and vice president and director, sales and marketing group, from 1998 to 1999. prior to that, mr.maloney was vice president, sales, and
general manager, asia-pacific operations, from 1995 to 1998.
michael
r. splinter (age 50)has been executive vice president and general manager, technology and manufacturing group, since january2001; senior vice president and
general manager, technology and manufacturing group, from 1999 to january2001; and vice president and general manager, technology and manufacturing group, from 1998 to 1999. prior to that,
mr.splinter was vice president and assistant general manager, technology and manufacturing group, from 1996 to 1998.
albert
y. c. yu (age 59)has been senior vice president and general manager, optoelectronics, since october2000. prior to that, mr.yu was senior vice president
and general manager, microprocessor products group, from 1993 to october2000.
f.
thomas dunlap, jr. (age 49)has been senior vice president, general counsel and secretary since january2001 and vice president, general counsel and secretary from
1987 to january2001.
arvind
sodhani (age 46)has been vice president and treasurer since 1990.
item 2. properties
at december30, 2000, we owned the major facilities described below:
no. of
bldgs.
location
total sq. ft.
use
united states
21,223,000
executive and administrative offices, wafer fabrication, research and development, sales and marketing, computer and service functions, e-commerce data center services, boards and systems manufacturing, and
warehousing.
ireland
1,982,000
wafer fabrication, warehousing and administrative offices.
malaysia (a)
1,781,000
components assembly and testing, boards and systems manufacturing, research and development, warehousing and administrative offices.
israel (b)
1,599,000
wafer fabrication, research and development, warehousing and administrative offices.
philippines (c)
1,364,000
components assembly and testing, warehousing and administrative offices.
costa rica
735,000
components assembly and testing, warehousing and administrative offices.
puerto rico
426,000
boards manufacturing, warehousing and administrative offices.
people's republic of china (d)
187,000
components assembly and testing and administrative offices.
united kingdom
175,000
sales and marketing and administrative offices.
japan
167,000
sales and marketing and administrative offices.
germany
80,000
sales and marketing and administrative offices.
as
of december30, 2000, we also leased 61 major facilities in the united states totaling approximately 2,586,000 square feet, and 47 facilities in other countries totaling
approximately 1,440,000 square feet. leased facilities increased during 2000, primarily due to overall growth of operations. these leases expire at varying dates through 2013 and include renewals at
our option. we believe that our existing facilities are suitable and adequate for our present purposes, and that the productive capacity in such facilities is substantially being utilized; however, in
january2001, we announced that we would phase out our manufacturing operations in puerto rico during the first half of 2001. we also have approximately 3.4million square feet of
building space in the united states and approximately 1.5million square feet of building space in various international sites under various stages of construction for manufacturing and
administrative purposes.
we
do not identify or allocate assets or depreciation by operating segment. information on net property, plant and equipment by country under the heading "operating segment and
geographic information" on page 33 of the registrant's 2000 annual report to stockholders, is incorporated by reference.
(a)leases
on portions of the land used for these facilities expire in 2003 through 2057.
(b)lease
on a portion of the land used for these facilities expires in 2039.
(c)leases
on portions of the land used for these facilities expire in 2008 through 2046.
(d)lease
on a portion of the land used for these facilities expires in 2046.
item 3. legal proceedings
a. litigation
intergraph
corporation v. intel u.s. district court, northern district of alabama, northeastern division (cv-97-n-3023-ne)
in
november1997, intergraph corporation filed suit in federal district court in alabama, generally alleging that intel attempted to coerce intergraph into relinquishing certain patent rights.
the suit alleges that intel infringes five intergraph microprocessor-related patents and includes alleged violations of antitrust laws and various state law claims. the suit seeks injunctive relief,
damages and prejudgment interest, and further alleges that intel's infringement is willful and that any damages awarded should be trebled. intergraph's expert witness has claimed that intergraph is
entitled to damages of approximately $2.2billion for intel's alleged patent infringement, $500million for the alleged antitrust violations and an undetermined amount for alleged state
law violations. intel believes that it does not infringe intergraph's patents and believes those patents are invalid and unenforceable. intel has counterclaimed that the intergraph patents are invalid
and further alleges infringement of seven intel patents, breach of contract and misappropriation of trade secrets. in october1999, the court reconsidered an earlier adverse ruling and granted
intel's motion for summary judgment that the intergraph patents are licensed to intel, and dismissed all of intergraph's patent infringement claims with prejudice. this ruling has been reversed by the
court of appeals for the federal circuit, and as a result, the patent issues are returned to the district court. in march2000, the district court granted intel's motion for summary judgment on
intergraph's federal antitrust claims, and in april2000, intergraph appealed this ruling. intergraph's state law claims remain at issue in the trial court. the company disputes intergraph's
claims and intends to defend the lawsuit vigorously.
b. environmental proceedings
we
have been named to the california and u.s. superfund lists for three of our sites and have completed, along with two other companies, a remedial investigation/feasibility study with the u.s.
environmental protection agency (epa) to evaluate the groundwater in areas adjacent to one of our former sites. the epa has issued a record of decision with respect to a groundwater cleanup plan at
that site, including expected costs to complete. under the california and u.s. superfund statutes, liability for cleanup of this site and the adjacent area is joint and several. we, however, have
reached agreement with those same two companies that significantly limits our liabilities under the proposed cleanup plan. also, we have completed extensive studies at our other sites and are engaged
in cleanup at several of these sites. in the opinion of management, including internal counsel, the potential losses to us in excess of amounts already accrued arising out of these matters would not
have a material adverse effect on our financial position or overall trends in results of operations, even if joint and several liability were to be assessed.
we
are currently party to various legal proceedings, including those noted above. while management, including internal counsel, currently believes that the ultimate outcome of these
proceedings, individually and in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial position or overall trends in results of operations, litigation is subject to inherent
uncertainties. were an unfavorable ruling to occur, there exists the possibility of a material adverse impact on the net income of the period in which the ruling occurs. the estimate of the potential
impact on our financial position or overall results of operations for the above legal proceedings could change in the future.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
part ii **
item 5. market for the registrant's common equity and related stockholder matters
(a)the
information regarding market, market price range and dividend information appearing under "financial information by quarter (unaudited)" on page 35 of the company's 2000 annual
report to stockholders is incorporated by reference.
(b)as
of february23, 2001, there were approximately 258,000 registered holders of record of intel's common stock.
(c)unregistered
sales of equity securities.
in
connection with the acquisition of level one communications, incorporated, intel assumed level one's obligations from its prior acquisition of sf telecom,inc. in complete satisfaction of
these obligations to the former stockholders of sf telecom,inc., intel issued 23,685 shares of intel common stock to the former stockholders of sf telecom in november2000. this
transaction was made, without general solicitation or advertising, pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by section4(2) of the securities act of 1933. the company believes that
each purchaser (i)was an accredited investor or a sophisticated investor (either alone or through its representative) with access to all relevant information necessary, (ii)was
acquiring the intel common stock solely for his or her own account and for investment, and (iii)does not intend to offer, sell or dispose of such shares except in compliance with the
securities act of 1933.
item 6. selected financial data
the information regarding selected financial data for the fiscal years 1996 through 2000, under the heading "financial summary" on page 17 of the company's
2000 annual report to stockholders, is incorporated by reference.
in
addition, the ratios of earnings to fixed charges for each of the five years in the period ended december30, 2000 are as follows:
fiscal year
108x
206x
167x
166x
171x
fixed
charges consist of interest expense and the estimated interest component of rent expense.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
the information appearing under the heading "management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" on pages 36 through 41 of
our 2000 annual report to stockholders is incorporated by reference.
in
january2001, we announced that we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire xircom, inc and in march we successfully completed the tender offer. xircom is a supplier
of pc cards and other products used to connect mobile computing devices to corporate networks and the internet.
in
february2001, we announced that we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire privately held vxtelinc. for approximately $550million in a cash
transaction. vxtel develops voice-over-packet products that deliver high-quality voice and data communications over next-generation optical networks.
the completion of this acquisition is subject to regulatory review and normal closing conditions.
status of outlook and related risk factor statements
we expect that our corporate representatives will meet privately from time to time with investors, the media, investment analysts and others. at these meetings
we may reiterate the outlook as published in our outlook release of march8, 2001, including portions that are repeated or incorporated by reference into this annual report. at the same time,
we will keep our outlook release and outlook publicly available on our web site (www.intc.com). prior to the start of the quiet period (described below), the public can continue to rely on the outlook
on the web site as still being our current expectations on matters covered, unless we publish a notice stating otherwise.
beginning
march10, 2001, we will observe a "quiet period" when we no longer publish, or update, outlook as our current expectations and intel representatives will not comment
concerning outlook or intel's financial results and expectations. the quiet period will extend until the day when our next quarterly earnings release is published, presently scheduled for
april17, 2001.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
the information appearing under the subheading "financial market risks" under the heading "management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations" on pages 38 and 39 of the company's 2000 annual report to stockholders is incorporated by reference.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
consolidated financial statements of intel at december30, 2000 and december25, 1999, and for each of the three years in the period ended
december30, 2000 and the report of independent auditors thereon, and the company's unaudited quarterly financial data for the two-year period ended december30, 2000 are
incorporated by reference from the company's 2000 annual report to stockholders, on pages 17 through 35.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
part iii **
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
the information regarding directors and executive officers appearing under the heading "election of directors" and "section16(a) beneficial ownership
reporting compliance" of the company's proxy statement relating to its 2001 annual meeting of stockholders (the "2001 proxy statement") is incorporated by reference.
item 11. executive compensation
the information appearing under the headings "directors' compensation," "employment contracts and change of control arrangements," "compensation committee
report on executive compensation," "stock price performance graph," and "executive compensation" of the 2001 proxy statement is incorporated by reference.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
the
information appearing in the 2001 proxy statement under the heading "security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management" is incorporated by reference.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
not applicable.
part iv **
item 14. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
(a)
1.
financial statements
the financial statements listed in the accompanying index to financial statements and financial statement schedules are filed or incorporated by reference as part of this annual report.
2.
financial statement schedule
the financial statement schedule listed in the accompanying index to financial statements and financial statement schedules is filed as part of this annual report.
3.
exhibits
the exhibits listed in the accompanying index to exhibits are filed or incorporated by reference as part of this annual report.
(b)
reports on form8-k
on october20, 2000, intel filed a report on form8-k relating to financial information for intel corporation for the quarter ended september30, 2000 and forward-looking statements relating to the fourth
quarter of 2000 and the second half of 2000, as presented in a press release of october17, 2000.
on december8, 2000, intel filed a report on form8-k relating to an announcement regarding an update to forward-looking statements relating to 2000 and the fourth quarter of 2000 as presented in a press release
of december7, 2000.
index to financial statements and financial statement schedules
(item 14 (a))
reference page
form 10-k
2000 annual reportto stockholders
consolidated balance sheets at
december30, 2000 and december25, 1999
consolidated statements of income for
the years ended december30, 2000,
december25, 1999 and december26, 1998
consolidated statements of cash flows
for the years ended december30, 2000,
december25, 1999 and december26, 1998
consolidated statements of stockholders'
equity for the years ended december30, 2000,
december25, 1999 and december26, 1998
notes to consolidated financial statements for
december30, 2000, december25, 1999 and
december26, 1998
22-33
report of ernst& young llp, independent auditors
supplemental information
financial information by quarter (unaudited)
schedule for the years ended december30, 2000,
december25, 1999 and december26, 1998:
iivaluation and qualifying accounts
schedules
other than the one listed above are omitted for the reason that they are not required or are not applicable, or the required information is shown in the financial statements
or notes thereto.
the
consolidated financial statements listed in the above index, which are included in our 2000 annual report to stockholders, are incorporated by reference. with the exception of the
pages listed in the above index and the portions of such report referred to in items 1, 5, 6, 7, 7a and 8 of this form10-k, the 2000 annual report to stockholders is not to be
deemed filed as part of this report.
intel corporation
schedule iivaluation and qualifying accounts
december26,
1998, december25, 1999 and december30, 2000
(in millions)
balance at
beginning
of year
additions
charged to
costs and
expenses
deductions (a)
balance
at end
of year
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
(a)uncollectible
accounts written off, net of recoveries.
index to exhibits
(item
14(a))
description
3.1
intel corporation restated certificate of incorporation dated may11, 1993, certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation dated june2, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1
of registrant's form10-k as filed on march27, 1998) and certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation dated may18, 2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 of registrant's form10-q as filed
on august14, 2000).
3.2
intel corporation bylaws as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 of registrant's form10-q for the quarter ended june26, 1999 as filed on august2, 1999).
4.1
agreement to provide instruments defining the rights of security holders (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 of registrant's form10-k as filed on march28, 1986).
10.1*
intel corporation 1984 stock option plan as amended and restated, effective july16, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 of registrant's form10-q for the quarter ended june27, 1998 as filed on august11,
1998).
10.2*
intel corporation 1988 executive long-term stock option plan as amended and restated, effective july16, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 of registrant's form10-q for the quarter ended june27, 1998 as filed on
august11, 1998).
10.3*
intel corporation executive officer bonus plan as amended and restated effective january1, 2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibita of registrant's proxy statement on schedule14a as filed on april12, 2000).
10.4*
intel corporation sheltered employee retirement plan plus, as amended and restated effective july15, 1996 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1.1 of registrant's post-effective amendment no.1 to registration statement on form
s-8 as filed on july17, 1996).
10.5*
special deferred compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 of registrant's registration statement on forms-8 as filed on february2, 1998).
10.6*
intel corporation deferral plan for outside directors, effective july1, 1998 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.6 of the registrant's form10-k as filed on march26, 1999).
12.
statement setting forth the computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges.
13.
portions of the annual report to stockholders for the fiscal year ended december30, 2000, as specified elsewhere in this document, are expressly incorporated by reference herein.
21.
intel subsidiaries.
23.
consent of ernst& young llp, independent auditors.
*compensation
plans or arrangements in which directors and executive officers are eligible to participate.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on
its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
intel corporation registrant
by
/s/f. thomas dunlap, jr. f. thomas dunlap, jr.
senior vice president, general counsel
and secretary
march12, 2001
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
/s/craig r. barrett craig r. barrett
president, chief executive officer and director, principal executive officer
march12, 2001
/s/gordon e. moore gordon e. moore
chairman emeritus of the board and director
march12, 2001
/s/john p. browne john p. browne
director
march12, 2001
/s/david s. pottruck david s. pottruck
director
march12, 2001
/s/andy d. bryant andy d. bryant
executive vice president, chief financial officer and principal accounting officer
march12, 2001
/s/jane e. shaw jane e. shaw
director
march12, 2001
/s/winston h. chen winston h. chen
director
march12, 2001
/s/leslie l. vadasz leslie l. vadasz
executive vice president director
march12, 2001
/s/andrew s. grove andrew s. grove
chairman of the board and director
march12, 2001
/s/david b. yoffie david b. yoffie
director
march12, 2001
/s/d. james guzy d. james guzy
director
march12, 2001
/s/charles e. young charles e. young
director
march12, 2001
