10-k
c68469e10-k.htm
form 10-k for fiscal year ended december 31, 2001
unitedhealth group inc form 10-k
table of contents
________________________________________________________________________________
united states securities and exchange
commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2001
commission file number: 1-10864
unitedhealth group incorporated
(exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
minnesota
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
41-1321939
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
unitedhealth group center
9900 bren road east
minnetonka, minnesota
(address of principal executive
offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including
area code:
(952)936-1300
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
(title of each class)
(name of each exchange on which registered)
common stock, $.01 par value
new york stock exchange, inc.
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check
mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports
required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by
checkmark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of regulations-k is not contained herein,
and will not be contained, to the best of registrants
knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
the aggregate
market value of voting stock held by non-affiliates of the
registrant as of march18, 2002, was approximately
$22,769,207,112 (based on the last reported sale price of $74.93
per share on march18, 2002, on the newyork stock
exchange).*
as of
march18, 2002, 307,949,440 shares of the registrants
common stock, $.01 par value per share, were issued and
outstanding.
note that in
partii of this report on form10-k, we
incorporate by reference certain information from
our annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2001, and in partiii we
incorporate by reference certain information from
our definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on may15, 2002.
these documents
have been filed with the securities and exchange commission
(sec). the sec allows us to disclose important information by
referring to it in that manner. please refer to such information.
*
only shares of common stock held beneficially by
directors, executive officers and subsidiaries of the company
have been excluded in determining this number.
table of contents
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
introduction
description of business segments
expansion and divestiture of operations
government regulation
marketing
competition
employees
cautionary statements
executive officers of the registrant
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5. market for registrants common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operation
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
part iv
item 14. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
signatures
exhibit index
articles of amendment to articles of incorporation
1998 broad-based stock incentive plan
amended and resated 1991 stock and incentive plan
nonemployee director stock option plan
2001 executive savings plan
directors' compensation deferral plan
employment agreement - robert j. sheehy
portions of the company's annual report
subsidiaries of the company
consent of independent public accountants
powers of attorney
letter re: representations by arthur andersen llp
table of contents
table of contents
page
part i
item1.
business
introduction
description of business segments
expansion and divestiture of operations
government regulation
marketing
competition
employees
cautionary statements
executive officers of the registrant
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity and
related stockholder matters
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
part iv
item14.
exhibits, financial statement schedules and
reports on form8-k
signatures
exhibitindex
table of contents
part i
item
1.business
introduction
unitedhealth group is a leader in the health and
well-being industry, serving more than 38million
americans. through our family of businesses, we combine clinical
insight with consumer-friendly services and advanced technology
to help people achieve optimal health and well-being through all
stages of life. our revenues are derived from premium revenues
on insured (risk-based) products, fees from management,
administrative and consulting services, and investment and other
income. we conduct our business primarily through operating
divisions in the following business segments:
uniprise;
health care services, which includes our
unitedhealthcare and ovations businesses;
specialized care services; and
ingenix.
while separate, our businesses remain
interrelated as part of our health and well-being enterprise.
our businesses share customers, and in most instances, use
common information systems and share administrative services.
for a discussion of our results by segment see item7
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations.
unitedhealth group incorporated is a minnesota
corporation incorporated in january 1977. the terms
we, our or the company refer
to unitedhealth group incorporated and its subsidiaries. our
executive offices are located at unitedhealth group center,
9900bren road east, minnetonka, minnesota 55343; telephone
(952)936-1300. our home page on the internet is at
www.unitedhealthgroup.com. you can learn more about us by
visiting that site.
description of business segments
uniprise
uniprise serves the employee benefit needs of
large organizations by developing technology and service-driven
solutions tailored to the specific needs of each corporate
customer. uniprise offers consumers access to a wide spectrum of
health and well-being products and services. together with its
affiliates, uniprises core business provides
comprehensive, integrated health benefit services to
multi-location employers with more than 5,000 employees,
specializing in large volume transaction management, large-scale
benefit design, care management programs and administration for
large organizations, and innovative technology solutions
designed to manage and control medical care costs, facilitate
delivery of care, and transform complex administrative processes
into simpler, efficient, high quality automated processes.
uniprise is the business through which large employers can
access not only uniprise services, but also all of unitedhealth
groups provider-based medical, insurance and specialty
services, with a large variety of funding arrangements. as of
december31, 2001, uniprise provided services to nearly
300clients, representing approximately eight million
individuals, including approximately 150 of the fortune 500
companies.
uniprise also offers human resources and benefit
administration outsourcing services to large organizations,
including but not limited to call center services, enrollment
services, and defined health benefit and contribution plan
support services. uniprise provides claim and customer services
and technological solutions for six independent, or
unaffiliated, non-unitedhealthcare health plans, which serve
approximately one million individuals.
we believe that internet technology has created a
new channel for providing health information and transaction
services to consumers, enrollees, physicians and employers.
uniprise has developed industry
table of contents
leading internet applications for physician
inquiries and transactions, customer-specific data analysis for
employers, and consumer access to personal information and
service applications. for example, one of these applications
gives employers instant, real-time, online access to add, update
or verify employee benefits information at any time. another
application allows consumers to make real-time inquiries into
the status and history of their health claims, to view and
search for care providers through an on-line provider directory,
to view eligibility information and to access health and
well-being information tailored to their specific needs and
interests.
health care services
our health care services segment consists of the
unitedhealthcare and ovations businesses.
unitedhealthcare
unitedhealthcare coordinates health and
well-being services on behalf of local employers and consumers
nationwide. unitedhealthcares products are primarily
marketed to small and mid-size employers with up to
5,000employees. as of december31, 2001, this
business served approximately 7.6million individuals. as
of december31, 2001,unitedhealthcare also served
approximately 345,000 medicare individuals in 10states
with medicare+choice products and approximately
640,000medicaid eligible individuals in 11states.
with some of these product offerings, unitedhealthcare assumes
the risk of both medical and administrative costs for its
members in return for premium revenue. unitedhealthcare offers
its products through subsidiaries that are usually licensed as
health maintenance organizations (hmos), preferred
provider organizations (ppos) or insurers, depending
upon state regulations. it also provides administrative and
other management services to health plans and self-funded
customers for which unitedhealthcare receives a fee, as it does
not assume the risk of health care costs.
unitedhealthcare arranges for access to care
through more than 360,000 physicians and 3,100 hospitals across
the united states. the consolidated purchasing power represented
by the individuals unitedhealthcare serves makes it possible for
unitedhealthcare to contract for cost-effective access to a
large number of conveniently located care providers. through its
family of companies, unitedhealthcare offers:
a broad range of benefit plans integrating
medical, ancillary and alternative products so customers can
choose what is right for them;
access to broad and diverse numbers of health
care providers, including benefit plans that give customers
direct access to specialists without obtaining referrals;
innovative programs that facilitate integrated
care delivery;
convenient self-service for customer
transactions, pharmacy services and health information;
clinical information that physicians can use in
working with their patients;
simplified electronic transactions for customers;
and
economic benefits of the purchasing power of
millions of people.
we believe that unitedhealthcares history
of innovation distinguishes its product offerings from the
competition. unitedhealthcare designs consumer-oriented health
benefits and services that value individual choice and control
in accessing health care. one of the goals is to make it easier
for people to get the care they need, when they need it.
unitedhealthcare has programs that provide health education;
admission counseling before hospital stays; care advocacy to
help avoid delays in patients stays in the hospital;
support for individuals at risk of needing intensive treatment;
continuous coordination for people with chronic conditions; and
prescription drug management, which promotes safe use of
medications. we want consumers to be engaged and active
participants in managing their own health and well-being. for
example, unitedhealthcares multi-layered pharmacy benefit
program provides access to a wide range of generic and
brand-name drugs. individuals who choose to use generic drugs
pay less, while those who
table of contents
prefer to use brand-name drugs pay more. our
agreement with merck medco managed care l.l.c. is an important
part of this program. in addition, unitedhealthcare was an early
leader in offering open access products, which allow individuals
to schedule appointments directly with specialists without a
referral from a primary care physician. further,
unitedhealthcare offers web sites that enable access to a
variety of information, including a directory of network
physicians and hospitals, reports on thousands of health topics
and a health profile tailored to individual interests.
ovations
ovations helps americans in the second half of
life address their unique needs for preventative and acute
health care services, deal with chronic disease and respond to
specialized issues relating to their overall well-being.
ovations is one of the few enterprises fully dedicated to this
market segment. as a part of this business, in january 1998, we
began a 10-year partnership with aarp, the nations largest
organization for older americans, and currently provide medicare
supplement and hospital indemnity insurance to more than
3.5million aarp members. ovations expanded services by
instituting aarp eye health services, which offers affordable
eye exams, complimentary glaucoma screenings and discounts on
eyewear to aarp members. in addition, ovations medicare
supplement pharmacy service addresses one of the most
significant cost problems facing older americans
prescription drug costs, providing aarp members cost-savings and
greater access to prescription drugs and health and well-being
products. ovations also developed an offering with lower cost
medicare supplement coverage that provides consumers with a
hospital network and 24-hour access to health care information
from nurses. in june 2001, ovations expanded its service
relationship with aarp to include aarp pharmacy services, the
countrys largest pharmacy discount card program, offering
prescription drugs, over-the-counter products and drug store
products through a retail network and mail order service. aarp
pharmacy services is part of ovations health and
well-being division, which provides consumers with access to
health care products, services and supporting health
information. in february 2002, ovations expanded its aarp nurse
healthline services to cover beneficiaries of all aarp medicare
products, providing 24-hour access to health information from
nurses. ovations, through its licensed affiliates, provides its
products and services in all 50states, the district of
columbia, puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands.
the evercare division of ovations provides
a broad spectrum of health care services to older americans. in
february 2001, evercare merged its operations with those of
lifemark corporation to become the one of the nations
leaders in offering complete, individualized care-planning, care
coordination and care benefits for aging, vulnerable and
chronically ill individuals living on their own, in
community-based settings and in nursing facilities. through
medicare, medicaid and private-pay long-term care products and
programs, evercare is dedicated to enhancing the quality of life
and maximizing well-being for this unique population, while
preserving financial resources and ultimately minimizing
associated costs. evercare offers a continuum of services
through innovative programs such as evercare choice, evercare
select and evercare connections. evercare choice is a medicare
product that offers enhanced medical coverage to frail, elderly
and chronically ill populations in both nursing homes and
community settings. these services are provided primarily
through nurse practitioners, physicians assistants and
physicians. evercare select is a medicaid, long-term health care
product for elderly, physically disabled and other needy
individuals. evercare connections is a comprehensive eldercare
service program providing service coordination, consultation,
underwriting support services, claim management and information
and resources linkage nationwide.
specialized care services
specialized care services is a portfolio of
specialized health and well-being companies, each serving a
specific market need with a unique blend of benefits, provider
networks, services and resources. specialized care services is
uniquely positioned to provide comprehensive products and
services that are focused on highly specialized health care
needs such as mental health and chemical dependency, employee
assistance, organ transplants, vision and dental services,
chiropractic services, life insurance, health related
information and other health and well-being services. these
offerings are sold directly to employers and consumers and
table of contents
indirectly through other unitedhealth group
businesses, as well as through unrelated entities, including
hmos, ppos, insurers, reinsurers, third-party administrators
(tpas), labor unions and state and federal
government customers. our products and services include both
risk-based products, in which we assume financial responsibility
for health care costs, and management and administrative service
fees. most of our businesses operate on a national scale and are
subject to the economic and regulatory conditions of various
states and regions.
through united behavioral health
(ubh) and its affiliated companies, we provide
behavioral health care benefit services, employee assistance
programs and psychiatric disability benefit services. ubhs
care management staff and extensive network of contracted mental
health professionals represent the core of its product
offerings. ubhs services and products reach over
22million individuals.
optum provides health information
assistance, support and related services all designed to improve
the health and well-being of the approximately 19million
individuals it serves. through multiple access points, including
the internet, telephone, audio tapes, print and in-person
consultations, we help consumers address daily living concerns,
make informed health care decisions and become more effective
health care consumers.
dental benefit providers (dbp) and
its affiliates provide management services for dental care
benefits. through an extensive relationship with contracted
dental providers, dbp and its affiliates manage dental benefit
offerings for approximately three million individuals.
dbps products are distributed primarily through
unaffiliated hmos and insurers to commercial, medicare and
medicaid populations. dbp also offers its products and services
to and through unitedhealth group affiliates and has expanded
its offering of both network based and indemnity dental care
plan designs.
united resource networks (urn) is the
gateway to highly specialized critical care programs at more
than 55 of the most widely recognized medical centers in the
united states. urn negotiates fixed, competitive rates for
high-cost, complex health care services. access to urns
programs and services is available to over 2,200payers
representing approximately 40million individuals.
national benefit resources (nbr) is a
managing general underwriter that originates and administers
medical stop loss insurance provided to employers with
self-funded employee benefit plans. nbr markets stop loss
coverage primarily through over 250 third party administrators
located throughout the united states. nbr distributes to its
customer base certain products and services of other specialized
care services businesses, including those of urn and optum.
spectera inc. represents specialized care
services operating platform for the vision care market.
spectera and its licensed subsidiaries specialize in building
vision care benefit partnerships with physicians, employer
groups and benefit consultants. spectera administers vision
benefits for more than six million individuals through more than
1,400 employer groups. spectera provides comprehensive vision
care services through its national network of more than 9,700
private doctors offices and retail store locations. in
addition, our vision business enhances the value of existing
vision benefits through coordinating the delivery of vision care
services and ophthalmic materials for unitedhealthcare customers.
american chiropractic network, inc.
(acn), provides consumers with access to networks of
chiropractic, physical therapy and other complementary and
alternative health care services as well as selected health care
products.
specialized care services also manages units that
market the sale of group life and accident insurance to small
and medium-sized employer groups.
ingenix
our ingenix businesses are leaders in the field
of health care data and information, research, analysis and
application. ingenix serves multiple health care market segments
on a business-to-business basis, including pharmaceutical
companies, health insurers and other payers, physicians and
other health care
table of contents
providers, large employers and government
agencies. ingenix maintains two primary operating divisions:
ingenix health intelligence and ingenix pharmaceutical services.
ingenix health intelligence offers three broad
types of products and services: data and software products and
services, consulting and publishing services. ingenix health
intelligence provides a wide variety of data and software
services and products, including databases for benchmarking and
reimbursement methodology development, software to analyze and
report costs and utilization of services, data management
services, hedis reporting, fraud and abuse detection and
prevention services, claims editing software and reimbursement
systems audits. the consulting services business focuses on
actuarial and financial disciplines, product development,
provider contracting and medical policy and management. ingenix
health intelligence also publishes print and electronic media
products that provide information regarding coding,
reimbursement, billing, compliance and other general health care
issues.
ingenix pharmaceutical services offers product
development and marketing-related services for pharmaceutical,
biotechnology and medical device manufacturers on a global
basis. ingenix pharmaceutical services provides global clinical
research services including strategic planning, research
protocol development, investigator identification and training,
patient recruitment, regulatory assistance, project management,
data management and biostatistical analysis, quality assurance
and medical writing. ingenix pharmaceutical services addresses
real world product questions through economic and
outcomes research, safety and research and patient registries.
ingenix pharmaceutical services also provides medical education
and communications through scientific publications, medical
symposia and interactive web-based technologies.
expansion and divestiture of
operations
we continually evaluate expansion opportunities
and, in the normal course of business, often consider whether to
sell certain businesses or stop offering certain products or
services. expansion opportunities may include acquiring
businesses that are complementary to our existing operations.
during 2001, we completed several acquisitions and ceased
offering some products in certain markets, all as part of our
ongoing emphasis on our strategic focus. further, we devote
significant attention to internally developing new products and
services in the health and well-being sector as we have broadly
defined it.
if we were to make any particular acquisition, it
may affect our ability to integrate and manage our overall
business effectively. integration activities relating to
acquisitions may increase costs, affect revenue and earnings
growth and adversely affect our financial results.
government regulation
most of our health and well-being services are
heavily regulated. this regulation can vary significantly from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction. federal and state regulatory
agencies generally have discretion to issue regulations and
interpret and enforce laws and rules. changes in applicable laws
and regulations are continually being considered, and the
interpretation of existing laws and rules also may change
periodically. these revisions could affect our operations and
financial results. enactment of federal and state health benefit
laws and regulations can also affect our businesses. examples of
such laws and regulations include: health plan liability laws;
physician and provider prompt pay laws; data privacy; mandated
benefits; limits on contractual terms with physicians and other
health care providers, including audit, payment and termination
provisions; implementation of a mandatory third party review
process for coverage denials; and other laws and limits on
utilization management and restrictions on our ability to carve
out certain categories of risk, such as acts of terrorism.
further, as our businesses continue to implement their
e-commerce initiatives, uncertainty surrounding the regulatory
authority and requirements in this area will make compliance an
important focus.
table of contents
federal programs
our health care services segment, which includes
unitedhealthcare and ovations, has medicare+choice contracts
that are regulated by the centers for medicare and medicaid
services (cms). cms has the right to audit such
health plans in order to determine each plans compliance
with cms contracts and regulations and the quality of care
being given to members. the significant level of regulations
surrounding medicare and medicaid makes compliance in this
product line a continuing challenge. our health care services
segment also has medicaid and state childrens health
insurance program contracts that are subject to federal and
state regulation regarding services to be provided to medicaid
enrollees, payment for those services, and other aspects of
these programs. we believe we are in compliance in all material
respects with these regulations.
state regulation
all of the states in which our subsidiaries offer
insurance and hmo products regulate the activities of those
products and operations. most states require periodic financial
reports and impose minimum capital or restricted cash reserve
requirements. many of unitedhealthcares health plans and
each of our insurance subsidiaries are regulated under state
insurance holding company regulations. such regulations
generally require registration with the state department of
insurance and the filing of reports that describe capital
structure, ownership, financial condition, certain inter-company
transactions and general business operations. some state
insurance holding company laws and regulations require prior
regulatory approval or, in some circumstances, prior notice of
acquisitions and material inter-company transfers of assets, as
well as transactions between the regulated companies and their
parent holding companies or affiliates. in addition, some of our
subsidiaries or products may by subject to ppo, managed care
organization (mco) or third party administrator
(tpa) related regulations and licensure
requirements. these regulations differ greatly from state to
state, but generally contain network, contracting, financial and
reporting requirements. many states also have enacted laws
and/or adopted regulations governing utilization review and
external appeals activities, and these laws may apply to some of
our operations. additionally, there are laws and regulations
that set specific standards for delivery of services, prompt
payment of claims, confidentiality of consumer health
information and covered benefits and services. to date, these
various laws and regulations have not materially affected our
financial position or results of operations.
hipaa
the administrative simplification provisions of
the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996
(hipaa) apply to both the group and individual
health insurance markets, including self-funded employee benefit
plans. covered entities must be compliant with standards for
electronic transactions and code sets by october 2002, and with
standards for privacy of protected health information by april
2003. new standards for health information security and national
provider and employer identifiers are currently being developed
by regulators. we are in the process of updating our business
practices to comply with these standards. we plan to be in
material compliance by the enforcement dates; however, the law
is far-reaching and complex and the governments delay in
providing guidance may affect the timeliness of our compliance
efforts. additionally, different approaches to hipaas
provisions and varying enforcement philosophies in the different
states may adversely affect our ability to standardize our
products and services across state lines.
erisa
the employee retirement income security act of
1974, as amended (erisa), regulates how goods and
services are provided to or through certain types of
employer-sponsored health benefit plans. erisa is a complex set
of laws and regulations that is subject to periodic
interpretation by the united states department of labor
(dol) as well as the federal courts. erisa places
controls on how our business units may do business with
employers who sponsor employee benefit health plans,
particularly those that maintain self-funded plans. new erisa
claim regulations, effective july 2002, require changes
table of contents
to operations and may lead to increased
litigation activity. we plan to be in material compliance with
the new regulations by the enforcement dates.
fraud and abuse
the regulations and contractual requirements
applicable to participants in federal government health care
programs such as medicare and medicaid are complex and changing.
we have re-emphasized our regulatory compliance efforts for
these programs, but ongoing vigorous law enforcement and the
highly technical regulations mean that compliance efforts in
this arena will continue to require significant resources.
additionally, states have also begun to focus their anti-fraud
efforts on insurance companies and health maintenance
organizations. some states now require filing and approval of
anti-fraud plans and may monitor compliance as part of any
market conduct examination.
audits and investigations
we are regularly subject to governmental audits,
investigations and enforcement actions. any such government
actions can result in assessment of damages, civil or criminal
fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including loss of
licensure or exclusion from participation in government
programs. in addition, a state department of insurance or other
state or federal authority (including cms, the office of the
inspector general and state attorneys general) may from time to
time begin a special audit of one of our health plans, our
insurance plans and products or one of our other operations
regarding issues such as utilization management; financial,
eligibility or other data reporting; prompt claims payment; or
coverage of medically necessary care, including emergency room
care. we are currently involved in various governmental
investigations, audits and reviews. these include routine,
regular and special investigations, audits and reviews by cms,
state insurance departments and state attorneys general, the
office of personnel management, the office of the inspector
general and u.s. attorneys. we do not believe the results of any
of the current investigations, audits or reviews, individually
or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on our
financial position or results of operations.
international regulation
our ingenix and unitedhealthcare segments both
have limited international operations. as of december31,
2001, ingenix had provided services to customers for trials
occurring in over 40 countries, and unitedhealthcares
international division operated health companies or offered
consulting services in nine markets around the world. these
international operations are subject to different legal and
regulatory requirements in local jurisdictions, including
various tax, tariff and trade regulations, as well as
employment, intellectual property and investment rules and laws.
marketing
our marketing strategy is defined and coordinated
by each business dedicated marketing staff. within these
segments, primary marketing responsibility generally resides
with a marketing leader and a direct sales force. in addition,
several of the segments also rely upon independent insurance
agents and brokers to sell some of their products. marketing
efforts also include public relations efforts and advertising
programs that may use television, radio, newspapers, magazines,
billboards, direct mail and telemarketing.
competition
as a diversified health and well-being services
company with a scope that extends far beyond the boundaries of
traditional managed health care companies, we operate in highly
competitive markets. our competitors include managed health care
companies, insurance companies, health care providers which have
formed networks to directly contract with employers and various
information and consulting companies. new entrants into the
markets in which we compete as well as consolidation within
these markets also contribute to this competitive environment.
we believe that the principal competitive factors
table of contents
affecting us and the sales and pricing of our
products and services include product innovation, consumer
satisfaction, the level and quality of products and services,
network capabilities, price, market share, product distribution
systems, efficient administration operations, financial strength
and marketplace reputation.
we believe that our competitive strengths include
the customer focus resulting from our operational realignment.
each unitedhealth group business represents a strategic platform
from which we can penetrate more deeply into specific markets.
these businesses are anchored in a common pursuit of improved
health and well being, exploiting three core competencies:
network management, knowledge and information and service
infrastructure. other strengths include the breadth and quality
of our products, our geographic scope and diversity, our
effective use of proprietary tools and products to coordinate
and facilitate programs designed to realize appropriately lower
health care costs, our disciplined underwriting and pricing
practices and staff, our significant market position in certain
geographic areas, the strength of our distribution network, our
financial strength, our generally large provider networks that
provide more consumer choice and minimize barriers to access our
point-of-service products and our strong marketplace reputation.
however, in some markets we may be at a disadvantage for a
number of reasons, including competitors with more resources,
longer operating histories, larger market shares, broader
networks, narrower networks (which may allow greater cost
control and lower prices) or more established names and
reputations. these competitive factors could adversely affect
our business and operating results.
employees
as of december31, 2001, we employed
approximately 30,000 individuals. the company believes its
employee relations are good.
cautionary statements
the statements contained in this annual report on
form10-k and the managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations and other
sections of our annual report to shareholders incorporated by
reference in this document, include forward-looking statements
within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform
act of 1995 (the pslra). when used in this annual
report on form10-k and in future filings by the company
with the securities and exchange commission, in our press
releases, presentations to securities analysts or investors, and
in oral statements made by or with the approval of one of our
executive officers, the words or phrases believes,
anticipates, intends, will likely
result, estimates, projects or
similar expressions are intended to identify such
forward-looking statements. any of these forward-looking
statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause our
actual results to differ materially from the results discussed
in the forward-looking statements.
the following discussion contains certain
cautionary statements regarding our business that investors and
others should consider. this discussion is intended to take
advantage of the safe harbor provisions of the
pslra. except to the extent otherwise required by federal
securities laws, in making these cautionary statements, we are
not undertaking to address or update each factor in future
filings or communications regarding our business or operating
results, and are not undertaking to address how any of these
factors may have caused results to differ from discussions or
information contained in previous filings or communications. in
addition, any of the matters discussed below may have affected
our past, as well as current, forward-looking statements about
future results. any or all forward-looking statements in this
report, in the 2001 annual report and in any other public
statements we make may turn out to be wrong. they can be
affected by inaccurate assumptions we might make or by known or
unknown risks and uncertainties. many factors discussed below
will be important in determining future results. consequently,
no forward-looking statement can be guaranteed. actual future
results may vary materially from those expressed in our
communications.
table of contents
health care costs
we use a large portion of our premium revenues to
pay the costs of health care services or supplies delivered to
our customers. total health care costs are affected by the
number of individual services rendered and the cost of each
service. much of our premium revenue is priced before services
are delivered and the related costs are incurred, usually on a
prospective annual basis. although we base the premiums we
charge on our estimate of future health care costs over the
fixed premium period, inflation, regulations and other factors
may cause actual health care costs to exceed what was estimated
and reflected in premiums. these factors may include increased
use of services, increased cost of individual services,
catastrophes, epidemics, the introduction of new or costly
treatments, new mandated benefits or other regulatory changes,
insured population characteristics and seasonal changes in the
level of health care use. in addition, the financial results we
report for any particular period include estimates of costs
incurred that have not yet been reported to us. because of these
estimates, our earnings may be adjusted later to reflect the
actual costs. relatively small changes in medical costs as a
percentage of premium revenues and our ability to properly
estimate future health care costs over fixed premium periods can
create significant changes in our financial results because of
the relatively narrow margins of our insurance products.
industry factors
the managed care industry receives significant
negative publicity and has been the subject of large jury
awards. this publicity has been accompanied by litigation,
legislative activity, regulation and governmental review of
industry practices. these factors may adversely affect our
ability to market our products or services, may require us to
change our products and services, and may increase the
regulatory burdens under which we operate, further increasing
our costs of doing business and adversely affecting our
profitability.
competition
in many of our geographic or product markets, we
compete with a number of other entities, some of which may have
certain characteristics or capabilities that give them a
competitive advantage. we believe the barriers to entry in these
markets are not substantial, so the addition of new competitors
can occur relatively easily, and consumers enjoy significant
flexibility in moving to new providers of health and well-being
services. certain of our customers may decide to perform for
themselves functions or services we provide, which would
decrease our revenues. certain of our contracted physicians and
other health care providers may decide to market products and
services to our customers in competition with us. in addition,
significant merger and acquisition activity has occurred in the
industry in which we operate as well as in industries that act
as suppliers to us, such as the hospital, physician,
pharmaceutical, medical device and health information systems
industries. to the extent that there is strong competition or
that competition intensifies in any market, our ability to
retain or increase customers or contracted physicians and other
health care providers, or maintain or increase our revenue
growth, pricing flexibility, control over medical cost trends
and marketing expenses may be adversely affected.
aarp contract
under our long-term contract with aarp, we
provide medicare supplement and hospital indemnity health
insurance and other products to aarp members. as of
december31, 2001, our portion of aarps insurance
program represented approximately $3.5billion in annual
net premium revenue from approximately 3.5million aarp
members. the success of our aarp arrangement depends, in part,
on our ability to service these customers, develop additional
products and services, price the products and services
competitively, and respond effectively to federal and state
regulatory changes. additionally, events that adversely affect
aarp or one of its other business partners for its member
insurance program could have an adverse effect on the success of
our arrangement with aarp.
table of contents
medicare operations
in response to medical cost increases that
exceeded medicare program reimbursement rate growth, we have
withdrawn our medicare+choice product offerings from a number of
counties and filed significant benefit adjustments in other
counties. these and other actions have reduced medicare+choice
enrollment and may result in further withdrawals of
medicare+choice product offerings, when and as permitted by our
contracts with the cms. we are precluded from re-entering the
counties from which we have withdrawn our medicare+choice
product offerings until two years after the effective date of
withdrawal.
we will continue to offer medicare+choice
products in economically viable markets and are exploring
alternative arrangements to provide health benefits to seniors.
however, the financial results of our medicare+choice operations
depend on a number of factors, including future medicare program
reimbursement increases, government regulations, benefit design,
physician and other health care provider contracting and other
factors. there can be no assurance that our medicare+choice
operations will be profitable in future periods.
government programs and regulation
our business is heavily regulated domestically at
the federal, state and local levels and internationally. the
laws and rules governing our business and interpretations of
those laws and rules are subject to frequent change. broad
latitude is given to the agencies administering those
regulations. existing or future laws and rules could force us to
change how we do business, restrict revenue and enrollment
growth, increase our health care and administrative costs and
capital requirements, and increase our liability in federal and
state courts for coverage determinations, contract
interpretation and other actions. we must obtain and maintain
regulatory approvals to market many of our products. delays in
obtaining or failure to obtain or maintain these approvals could
adversely affect our revenue or could increase our costs. we
participate in federal, state and local government health care
coverage programs. these programs generally are subject to
frequent change, including changes that may reduce the number of
persons enrolled or eligible, reduce the amount of reimbursement
or payment levels, or increase our administrative or health care
costs under such programs. such changes have adversely affected
our financial results and willingness to participate in such
programs in the past and may also do so in the future.
state legislatures and congress continue to focus
on health care issues. congress is considering patients
bill of rights legislation that, if adopted, could fundamentally
alter erisas treatment of liability for noncompliance,
fiduciary breach of contract and improper benefit coverage
denials. other bills and regulations at state and federal levels
may affect certain aspects of our business including physician
and other health care provider contracting, claim payments and
processing, confidentiality of health information and
government-sponsored programs. while we cannot predict if any of
these initiatives will ultimately become binding law or
regulation, or if enacted, what their terms will be, their
enactment could increase our costs, expose us to expanded
liability, require us to revise the ways in which we conduct
business or put us at risk for a loss of business to new health
care funding arrangements. further, as our businesses continue
to implement their e-commerce initiatives, uncertainty
surrounding the regulatory authority and requirements in this
area will make it difficult to ensure compliance.
we are also subject to various governmental
reviews, audits and investigations. such oversight could result
in the loss of licensure or the right to participate in certain
programs, or the imposition of civil or criminal fines,
penalties and other sanctions. in addition, disclosure of any
adverse investigation or audit results or sanctions could damage
our reputation in various markets and make it more difficult for
us to sell our products and services. we are currently involved
in various governmental investigations, audits and reviews.
these include routine, regular and special investigations,
audits and reviews by the cms, state insurance departments and
state attorneys general, the office of personnel management, the
office of the inspector general and u.s. attorneys. we do not
believe the results of any of the current investigations, audits
or reviews, individually or in the aggregate, will have a
material adverse effect on our financial position or results of
operations.
table of contents
our operations are conducted through our wholly
owned subsidiaries, which include health maintenance
organizations and insurance companies. these companies are
subject to state regulations that, among other things, may
require the maintenance of minimum levels of statutory capital,
as defined by each state, and may restrict the timing and amount
of dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their
respective parent companies. generally, the amount of dividend
distributions that may be paid by our regulated subsidiaries,
without prior approval by state regulatory authorities, is
limited based on the subsidiarys level of statutory net
income, statutory capital and surplus.
physician, hospital and other health care
provider relations
one of the significant techniques we use to
contain health care costs and facilitate care delivery is
contracting with physicians, hospitals and other health care
providers. because our health plans are geographically diverse
and most of those health plans contract with a large number of
these providers, we believe our aggregate exposure to provider
relations issues is limited. a number of organizations are
advocating for legislation that would exempt certain of these
providers from federal and state antitrust laws, the adoption of
which could affect this assessment. in any particular market,
these providers could refuse to contract, demand higher
payments, or take other actions that could result in higher
health care costs, less desirable products for customers or
difficulty meeting regulatory or accreditation requirements. in
some markets, certain providers, particularly hospitals,
physician/hospital organizations or multi-specialty physician
groups, may have significant market positions or near monopolies.
litigation and insurance
we may be a party to a variety of legal actions
that affect any business, such as employment and employment
discrimination-related suits, employee benefit claims, breach of
contract actions, tort claims, shareholder suits, including
securities fraud, and intellectual property related litigation.
in addition, because of the nature of our businesses, we are
routinely party to a variety of legal actions related to the
design, management and offerings of our services. these matters
include: claims related to health care benefits coverage;
medical malpractice actions; allegations of anti-competitive and
unfair business activities; disputes over compensation and
termination of contracts including those with physicians and
other health care providers; disputes related to our
administrative services, including actions alleging claim
administration errors and failure to disclose rate discounts and
other fee and rebate arrangements; disputes over benefit
copayment calculations; claims related to disclosure of certain
business practices; and claims relating to customer audits and
contract performance. in 1999, a number of class action lawsuits
were filed against us and virtually all major entities in the
health benefits business. the suits are purported class actions
on behalf of certain customers and physicians for alleged
breaches of federal statutes, including erisa and the racketeer
influenced corrupt organization act (rico). while we
believe these suits against us are without merit and we intend
to defend our position vigorously, we will incur expenses in the
defense of these matters and we cannot predict their outcome.
recent court decisions and legislative activity
may increase our exposure for any of these types of claims. in
some cases, substantial non-economic, treble or punitive damages
may be sought. we currently have insurance coverage for some of
these potential liabilities. other potential liabilities may not
be covered by insurance, insurers may dispute coverage, or the
amount of insurance may not be enough to cover the damages
awarded. in addition, certain types of damages, such as punitive
damages, may not be covered by insurance and insurance coverage
for all or certain forms of liability may become unavailable or
prohibitively expensive in the future.
information systems
our businesses depend significantly on effective
information systems. our information systems require an ongoing
commitment of significant resources to maintain and enhance
existing systems and develop new systems to keep pace with
continuing changes in information processing technology,
evolving industry and regulatory standards, and changing
customer preferences. for example, the administrative
simplification provisions of hipaa and the department of
labors erisa claim processing regulations may require
table of contents
changes to current systems. in addition, we
obtain significant portions of our systems-related or other
services or facilities from independent third parties, which may
make our operations vulnerable to such third parties
failure to perform adequately. as aresult of our
acquisition activities, we have acquired additional systems and
have been taking steps to reduce the number of systems and have
upgraded and expanded our information systems capabilities.
failure to maintain effective and efficient information systems
could cause the loss of existing customers, difficulty in
attracting new customers, issues in determining medical cost
estimates, customer and physician and other health care provider
disputes, regulatory problems, increases in administrative
expenses or other adverse consequences.
data and proprietary information
many of our products and services depend
significantly on the integrity of the data on which they are
based. if the information contained in our databases were found
or perceived to be inaccurate, or if such information were
generally perceived to be unreliable, commercial acceptance of
our database-related products would be adversely and materially
affected. furthermore, the use of individually identifiable data
by our businesses is regulated at international, federal, state
and local levels. these laws and rules are changed frequently by
legislation or administrative interpretation. these restrictions
could adversely affect revenues from certain of our products or
services and, more generally, affect our business, financial
condition and results of operations.
there are various recently adopted state laws
that address the use and maintenance of individually
identifiable health data. most enact privacy provisions from the
federal gramm-leach-bliley act. additionally, new federal
regulations promulgated pursuant to hipaa are now effective with
compliance required by april 2003. compliance with these
proposals and new regulations could result in cost increases due
to necessary systems changes and the development of new
administrative processes and may impose further restrictions on
our use of patient identifiable data that is housed in one or
more of our administrative databases. the success of our
knowledge and information-related businesses also depends
significantly on our ability to maintain proprietary rights to
our databases and related products. we rely on our agreements
with customers, confidentiality agreements with employees, and
our trade secrets, copyrights and patents to protect our
proprietary rights. we cannot assure that these legal
protections and precautions will prevent misappropriation of our
proprietary information. in addition, substantial litigation
regarding intellectual property rights exists in the software
industry, and we expect software products to be increasingly
subject to third-party infringement claims as the number of
products and competitors in this industry segment grows. such
litigation could have an adverse effect on the ability of our
businesses to market and sell products and services and on our
financial condition and results of operations.
administration and management
efficient and cost-effective administration of
our operations is essential to our profitability and competitive
positioning. while we manage expenses, staff-related and other
administrative expenses may increase from time to time due to
business or product start-ups or expansions, growth or changes
in business or the mix of products purchased by customers,
acquisitions, regulatory requirements or other reasons.
unanticipated expense increases may adversely affect our
financial results. further, we believe we currently have an
experienced, capable management and technical staff. the market
for management and technical personnel, including information
systems professionals, in the health care industry is very
competitive. loss of certain key employees or a number of
managers or technical staff could adversely affect our ability
to administer and manage our business.
marketing
we market our products and services through both
employed sales people and independent sales agents. although we
have many sales employees and agents, the departure of certain
key sales employees or agents or a large subset of these
individuals could impair our ability to retain existing
customers. in addition, certain of our customers or potential
customers consider our debt ratings, accreditation or
certification by various private or governmental bodies or
rating agencies necessary or important. certain of
table of contents
our health plans or other business units may not
have obtained or maintained, or may not desire or be able to
obtain or maintain, such ratings, accreditation or
certification, which could adversely affect our ability to
obtain or retain business with these customers.
acquisitions and dispositions
we have an active ongoing acquisition and
disposition program under which we may engage in transactions
involving the acquisition or disposition of assets, products or
businesses, some or all of which may be material. these
transactions may entail certain risks and uncertainties and may
affect ongoing business operations because of unknown
liabilities, unforeseen administrative needs or increased
efforts to integrate the acquired operations. failure to
identify liabilities, anticipate additional administrative needs
or effectively integrate acquired operations could result in
reduced revenues, increased administrative and other costs and
customer dissatisfaction.
terrorist attacks
the terrorist attacks launched on
september11, 2001, the war on terrorism, the threat of
future acts of terrorism and the related concerns of customers
and providers have negatively affected, and may continue to
negatively affect, the u.s.economy in general and our
industry specifically. depending on the governments
actions and the responsiveness of public health agencies and
insurance companies, future acts of terrorism and bio-terrorism
could adversely affect our company through, among other things,
increased use of health care services including, without
limitation, hospital and physician services, ancillary testing
and procedures, increased prescriptions for certain drugs,
mental health and other services; loss of membership as a result
of lay-offs or other reductions of employment; adverse effects
upon the financial condition or business of employers who
sponsor health care coverage for their employees; disruption of
our information and payment systems; increased health care costs
due to restrictions on our ability to carve out certain
categories of risk, such as acts of terrorism; and disruption of
the financial and insurance markets in general.
financial outlook
from time to time in press releases and
otherwise, we may publish forecasts or other forward-looking
statements regarding our future results, including estimated
revenues, net earnings and other operating and financial
metrics. any forecast of our future performance reflects various
assumptions. these assumptions are subject to significant
uncertainties, and as a matter of course, any number of them may
prove to be incorrect. further, the achievement of any forecast
depends on numerous risks and other factors (including those
described in this discussion), many of which are beyond our
control. as a result, we cannot assure that our performance will
be consistent with any management forecasts or that the
variation from such forecasts will not be material and adverse.
you are cautioned not to base your entire analysis of our
business and prospects upon isolated predictions, but instead
are encouraged to utilize the entire publicly available mix of
historical and forward-looking information, as well as other
available information affecting us and our services, when
evaluating our prospective results of operations.
general economic conditions
changes in economic conditions could affect our
business and results of operations. the state of the economy
could affect our employer group renewal prospects and our
ability to increase prices in some of our businesses. although
we are continuously striving to diversify our product offerings
to address the changing needs of consumers, there can be no
assurance that the effects of the current or a future downturn
in economic conditions will not cause our existing customers to
seek health coverage alternatives that we do not offer or will
not result in significant loss of customers, or decreased
margins on our continuing customers.
table of contents
stock market
the market prices of the securities of the
publicly-held companies in the industry in which we operate have
shown volatility and sensitivity in response to many factors,
including general market trends, public communications regarding
managed care, litigation and judicial decisions, legislative or
regulatory actions, health care cost trends, pricing trends,
competition, earnings, membership reports of particular industry
participants and acquisition activity. we cannot assure the
level or stability of the price of our securities at any time or
the affect of the foregoing or any other factors on such prices.
executive officers of the registrant
first elected as
name
age
position
executive officer
william w. mcguire, m.d.
chairman, chief executive officer and director
stephen j. hemsley
president, chief operating officer and director
patrick j. erlandson
chief financial officer and chief accounting
officer
david j. lubben
general counsel and secretary
lois e. quam
chief executive officer, ovations
jeannine m. rivet
executive vice president and chief executive
officer, ingenix
robert j. sheehy
chief executive officer, unitedhealthcare
r. channing wheeler
chief executive officer, uniprise
the companys board of directors elects
executive officers annually. the companys executive
officers serve until their successors are duly elected and
qualified.
dr.mcguire is
the chairman of the board of directors and chief executive
officer of unitedhealth group. dr.mcguire joined
unitedhealth group as executive vice president in november 1988
and became its chief executive officer in february 1991.
dr.mcguire also served as unitedhealth groups chief
operating officer from may 1989 to june 1995 and as its
president from november 1989 until may 1999.
mr.hemsley is
the president and chief operating officer of unitedhealth group
and has been a member of the board of directors since february
2000. mr.hemsley joined unitedhealth group in may 1997 as
senior executive vice president. he became chief operating
officer in september 1998 and was named president in may 1999.
prior to joining unitedhealth group, mr.hemsley was with
arthur andersen llp where he served since 1974 in various
capacities, including chief financial officer and managing
partner, strategy and planning.
mr.erlandson
joined unitedhealth group in 1997. he
became controller and chief accounting officer in september 1998
and was named chief financial officer in january 2001. prior to
joining unitedhealth group, mr.erlandson was a partner
with arthur andersen llp where he served from 1981 to 1997.
mr.lubben
became unitedhealth groups
general counsel and secretary in october 1996. prior to joining
unitedhealth group, he was a partner in the law firm of dorsey
& whitney llp. mr.lubben first became associated with
dorsey & whitney in 1977.
ms.quam joined
unitedhealth group in 1989 and became the chief executive
officer of ovations in april 1998. prior to april 1998,
ms.quam served in various capacities including chief
executive officer, aarp division; vice president, public sector
services; and director, research. prior to joining unitedhealth
group, ms.quam served as research director from 1987-1989
for partners national health plan.
table of contents
ms.rivet
joined unitedhealth group in june 1990
and became executive vice president of unitedhealth group and
chief executive officer of ingenix in january 2001.
ms.rivet was an executive vice president of
unitedhealthcare from october 1994 to march 1998 and served as
the chief executive officer of unitedhealthcare from april 1998
to december 2000. she served as unitedhealth groups senior
vice president, health plan operations from september 1993 to
september 1994 and its vice president of health service
operations from june 1990 to september 1993.
mr.sheehy
joined unitedhealth group in 1992 and
became chief executive officer of unitedhealthcare in january
2001. from april 1998 to december 2000, he was president of
unitedhealthcare. prior to april 1998, mr.sheehy served in
various capacities with unitedhealth group, including chief
executive officer of united healthcare of ohio.
mr.wheeler
joined unitedhealth group in march
1995 and became chief executive officer of uniprise in may 1998.
prior to may 1998, he served in various capacities with
unitedhealth group including chief executive officer, northeast
health plans.
item
2.properties
as of december31, 2001, the company leased
approximately 1.7million aggregate square feet of space
for its principal administrative offices in the greater
minneapolis/ st.paul, minnesota area and in hartford,
connecticut. excluding these areas, as of december31,
2001, the company leased approximately 4.9million
aggregate square feet in the united states and europe. such
space accommodates health plans, managed care services,
specialty programs or satellite administrative offices. the
companys leases expire at various dates through
may31, 2025. as of december31, 2001, the company
owned approximately 241,000 aggregate square feet of space for
administrative offices in various states. our administrative
offices are accessed by our various businesses.
item 3.legal
proceedings
in september 1999, a group of plaintiffs
trial lawyers publicly announced that they were targeting the
managed care industry by way of class action litigation. since
that time, we have received several purported class action
matters that generally challenge managed care practices
including cost containment mechanisms, disclosure obligations
and payment methodologies. we intend to defend vigorously all of
these cases.
in re: managed care litigation: mdl
no.1334. the multi-district litigation panel has
consolidated several litigation matters involving unitedhealth
group and its affiliates in the southern district of florida,
miami division. the unitedhealth group matters have been
consolidated with litigation involving other industry members
for the coordination of pre-trial proceedings. the litigation
has been divided into two tracks, with one track comprising
consumer claims and the other health care provider claims.
generally, the claims made in this consolidated litigation
allege violations of erisa and rico in connection with alleged
undisclosed policies intended to maximize profits. the
litigation also asserts breach of state prompt payment laws and
breach of contract claims alleging that unitedhealth group
affiliates fail to timely reimburse providers for medical
services rendered. the consolidated suits seek injunctive,
compensatory and equitable relief as well as restitution, costs,
fees and interest payments. following the courts initial
decisions on industry members motions to dismiss the
complaints, amended complaints were filed in both tracks. on
february20, 2002 the court granted in part and denied in
part the industry defendants motion to dismiss the amended
complaint in the member track litigation. in significant part,
the court limited the rico and erisa claims that could be
brought by the plaintiffs, and dismissed entirely the common law
claims for civil conspiracy and unjust enrichment. on march 14,
2002, the court certified to the 11th circuit the threshold
issue of whether plaintiffs have standing to assert their rico
claims. the 11th circuit has not ruled as to whether they will
review the issue. all activity was stayed in the health care
provider track pending resolution of a threshold appeal to
determine which of the health care provider claims must be
arbitrated. on march14, 2002, the 11th circuit affirmed
the trial courts arbitration ruling and it is anticipated
that the stay will be lifted. in both tracks, decisions are
pending on
table of contents
plaintiffs motions for class certification.
additionally, a decision is pending on industry members
motion to dismiss in the health care provider track.
the american medical association et al. v.
metropolitan life insurance company, united healthcare services,
inc. and unitedhealth group was filed on march15, 2000 in
the supreme court of the state of new york, county of new york.
on april13, 2000, we removed this case to federal court.
the suit alleges breach of contract and the implied covenant of
good faith and fair dealing, deceptive acts and practices, and
trade libel in connection with the calculation of reasonable and
customary reimbursement rates for non-network providers. the
suit seeks declaratory, injunctive, exemplary and compensatory
relief as well as costs, fees and interest payments. an amended
complaint was filed on august25, 2000, which alleged two
classes of plaintiffs, an erisa class and a non-erisa class.
after the court dismissed certain erisa claims and the claims
brought by the american medical association, a third amended
complaint was filed. we have filed a motion to dismiss the third
amended complaint.
because of the nature of our business, we are
routinely subject to suits alleging various causes of action.
some of these suits may include claims for substantial
non-economic or punitive damages. although the results of
pending litigation are always uncertain, we do not believe that
any such actions, including those described above, or any other
types of actions, currently threatened or pending will,
individually or in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect
on our financial position or results of operations.
item
4.submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
none
part ii
item 5.market
for registrants common equity and related stockholder
matters
the information contained under the heading
investor information in the companys annual
report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2001, is incorporated herein by reference. as
of march18, 2002, the company had 12,954 shareholders of
record.
pursuant to rule416 under the securities
act of 1933, the number of shares of the companys common
stock registered for sale under the securities act by our
registration statement on forms-4 filed on
january21, 1998, have been deemed to be increased
accordingly to reflect the two-for-one split of the
companys common stock in the form of a stock dividend
effected on december22, 2000.
item 6.
selected financial data
the information contained under the heading
results of operations in the companys annual
report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2001, is incorporated herein by reference.
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operation
the information contained under the heading
results of operations in the companys annual
report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended
december31, 2001, is incorporated herein by reference.
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk
the information contained under the heading
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk in the companys annual report to shareholders
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2001, is
incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
the companys consolidated financial
statements, together with the report of independent public
accountants thereon, appearing on pages 38 through 57 of the
companys annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2001, are incorporated herein by
reference.
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the
registrant
the information included under the headings
election of directors and section16(a)
beneficial ownership reporting compliance in the
companys definitive proxy statement for its annual meeting
of shareholders to be held may15, 2002, is incorporated
herein by reference.
pursuant to general instruction g(3) to
form10-k and instruction 3 to item 401(b) of
regulations-k, information regarding executive officers of
the company is provided in part i of this annual report on
form10-k under the caption executive officers of the
registrant.
item 11.
executive compensation
the information included under the heading
executive compensation in the companys
definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of
shareholders to be held may15, 2002, is incorporated
herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management
the information included under the heading
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management in the companys definitive proxy
statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held
may15, 2002, is incorporated herein by reference.
item13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
information regarding certain relationships and
related transactions that appears under the heading
certain relationships and transactions in the
companys definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting
of shareholders to be held may15, 2002, is incorporated
herein by reference.
part iv
item14.
exhibits, financial statement schedules and
reports on form8-k
(a)1.financial statements
the following consolidated financial statements
of the company are included in the companys annual report
to shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2001
and are incorporated herein by reference:
consolidated statements of operations for the
years ended december31, 2001, 2000 and 1999.
consolidated balance sheets as of
december31, 2001 and 2000.
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity for the years ended december31,
2001, 2000 and 1999.
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended december31, 2001, 2000 and 1999.
table of contents
notes to consolidated financial statements.
report of independent public accountants.
(a)2.financial statement schedules
none
(a)3.exhibits
3(a)
articles of amendment to second restated articles
of incorporation of the company
3(b)
second restated articles of incorporation of the
company (incorporated by reference to exhibit3(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1995 and exhibit3(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1999)
3(c)
amended and restated bylaws of the company
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.2 to the
companys registration statement on forms-8 (sec file
no.333-55666))
4(a)
senior indenture, dated as of november15,
1998, between the company and the bank of newyork
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to the
companys registration statement on forms-3 (sec file
no.333-44569))
4(b)
amendment to senior indenture, dated as of
november6, 2000, between the company and the bank of
newyork (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to
the companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended september30, 2001)
4(c)
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of
regulations-k, copies of instruments defining the rights
of certain holders of long-term debt are not filed. the company
agrees to furnish copies thereof to the securities and exchange
commission upon request.
*10(a)
united healthcare corporation
1998broad-based stock incentive plan, as amended
*10(b)
united healthcare corporation amended and
restated 1991stock and incentive plan, amended and
restated effective may9, 2001
*10(c)
unitedhealth group incorporated nonemployee
director stock option plan, amended and restated effective
october30, 2001
*10(d)
unitedhealth group incorporated leadership
results plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(d) to
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10(e)
unitedhealth group incorporated
2001executive savings plan
*10(f)
supplemental long term executive compensation
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(f) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10(g)
unitedhealth group directors compensation
deferral plan
*10(h)
employment agreement, dated as of
october13, 1999, between united healthcare corporation and
williamw. mcguire, m.d. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(f) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1999)
*10(i)
letter to williamw. mcguire, m.d., dated as
of february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(h) of the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10(j)
employment agreement dated as of october13,
1999, between united healthcare corporation and stephenj.
hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(g) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1999)
*10(k)
letter to stephenj. hemsley, dated as of
february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(j) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10(l)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998 , between united healthcare services, inc.
and robertj. sheehy, as amended
table of contents
*10(m)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc.
and loise. quam, as amended, and memorandum of
understanding, effective as of october11, 1999, between
loise. quam and united healthcare services, inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(l) of the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10(n)
employment agreement, dated as of october1,
1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and
patrickj. erlandson (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(m) of the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2000)
*10(o)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc.
and jeannine rivet (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(h) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1998)
*10(p)
employment agreement, dated as of may20,
1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and r. channing
wheeler (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(c) to the
companys quarterly report of form10-q for the
quarter ended june30, 1998)
*10(q)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc.
and davidj. lubben, as amended (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10(p) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2000)
10(r)
information technology services agreement between
the metrahealth companies, inc. and integrated systems solutions
corporation dated as of november1, 1995 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10(t) to the companys annual
report on form10-k for the year ended december31,
1995)
10(s)
aarp health insurance agreement by and among
american association of retired persons, trustees of the aarp
insurance plan and united healthcare insurance company dated as
of february26, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(p) to the companys annual report on
form10-k/ a for the year ended december31, 1996)
10(t)
first amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10(a) to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the quarter period ended
june30, 1998)
10(u)
second amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10(b) to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the quarter ended
june30, 1998)
10(v)
information technology services agreement between
united healthcare services, inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of
the company, and unisys corporation dated june1, 1996
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10 to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended march31, 1998)
10(w)
pharmacy benefit management agreement between
united healthcare services, inc. and merck medco managed care,
l.l.c. (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(v) of the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
statement regarding computation of per share
earnings (incorporated by reference to the information contained
under the heading net earnings per common share in
note2 to the notes to consolidated financial statements
included in the companys annual report to shareholders for
the fiscal year ended december31, 2001 and which is
included as part of exhibit13 hereto)
portions of the companys annual report to
shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2001
subsidiaries of the company
consent of independent public accountants
powers of attorney
letter from the company to the securities and
exchange commission confirming certain quality assurance
representations made by arthur andersen to the company
table of contents
pursuant to rule24b-2 of the securities
exchange act of 1934, as amended, confidential portions of these
exhibits have been deleted and filed separately with the
securities and exchange commission pursuant to a request for
confidential treatment.
*
denotes management contracts and compensation
plans in which certain directors and named executive officers
participate and which are being filed pursuant to
item601(b)(10)(iii)(a) of regulations-k.
(b)reports on form8-k
none
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
unitedhealth group incorporated
by
/s/ william w. mcguire, m.d.
william w. mcguire, m.d
chief executive officer
dated: april1, 2002
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ william w. mcguire, m.d.
william w. mcguire, m.d.
director, chief
executive officer
(principal executive officer)
april1, 2002
/s/ patrick j. erlandson
patrick j. erlandson
chief financial officer and
chief accounting officer
(principal financial and accountingofficer)
april1, 2002
*
william c. ballard, jr.
director
april1, 2002
*
richard t. burke
director
april1, 2002
*
stephen j. hemsley
director
april1, 2002
*
james a. johnson
director
april1, 2002
*
thomas h. kean
director
april1, 2002
*
douglas w. leatherdale
director
april1, 2002
*
walter f. mondale
director
april1, 2002
table of contents
signature
title
date
*
mary o. mundinger
director
april1, 2002
*
robert l. ryan
director
april1, 2002
*
gail r. wilensky
director
april1, 2002
*by
/s/ david j. lubben
david j. lubben
as attorney-in-fact
table of contents
exhibit index
number
description
3(a
)
articles of amendment to second restated articles
of incorporation of the company
3(b
)
second restated articles of incorporation of the
company (incorporated by reference to exhibit3(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1995 and exhibit3(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1999)
3(c
)
amended and restated bylaws of the company
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.2 to the
companys registration statement on forms-8 (sec file
no.333-55666))
4(a
)
senior indenture, dated as of november15,
1998, between the company and the bank of new york (incorporated
by reference to exhibit4.1 to the companys
registration statement on forms-3 (sec file
no.333-44569))
4(b
)
amendment to senior indenture, dated as of
november6, 2000, between the company and the bank of new
york (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended september30, 2001)
4(c
)
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of
regulations-k, copies of instruments defining the rights
of certain holders of long-term debt are not filed. the company
agrees to furnish copies thereof to the securities and exchange
commission upon request.
10(a
)
united healthcare corporation 1998 broad-based
stock incentive plan, as amended
10(b
)
united healthcare corporation amended and
restated 1991 stock and incentive plan, amended and restated
effective may9, 2001
10(c
)
unitedhealth group incorporated nonemployee
director stock option plan, amended and restated effective
october30, 2001
10(d
)
unitedhealth group incorporated leadership
results plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(d) to
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
10(e
)
unitedhealth group incorporateds 2001
executive savings plan
10(f
)
supplemental long term executive compensation
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(f) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
10(g
)
unitedhealth group directors compensation
deferral plan
10(h
)
employment agreement, dated as of
october13, 1999, between united healthcare corporation and
william w. mcguire, m.d. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(f) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1999)
10(i
)
letter to william w. mcguire, m.d., dated as of
february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(h) of the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
10(j
)
employment agreement dated as of october13,
1999, between united healthcare corporation and stephen j.
hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(g) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1999)
10(k
)
letter to stephen j. hemsley, dated as of
february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(j) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
10(l
)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998 , between united healthcare services, inc.
and robert j. sheehy, as amended
10(m
)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc.
and lois e. quam, as amended, and memorandum of understanding,
effective as of october11, 1999, between lois e. quam and
united healthcare services, inc. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(l) of the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2000)
table of contents
number
description
10(n
)
employment agreement, dated as of october1,
1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and patrick j.
erlandson (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(m) of
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
10(o
)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc.
and jeannine rivet (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(h) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1998)
10(p
)
employment agreement, dated as of may20,
1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and r. channing
wheeler (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(c) to the
companys quarterly report of form10-q for the
quarter ended june30, 1998)
10(q
)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc.
and david j. lubben, as amended (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(p) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2000)
10(r
)
information technology services agreement between
the metrahealth companies, inc. and integrated systems solutions
corporation dated as of november1, 1995 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10(t) to the companys annual
report on form10-k for the year ended december31,
1995)
10(s
)
aarp health insurance agreement by and among
american association of retired persons, trustees of the aarp
insurance plan and united healthcare insurance company dated as
of february26, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(p) to the companys annual report on
form10-k/ a for the year ended december31, 1996)
10(t
)
first amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10(a) to the companys quarterly
report on form10-q for the quarter period ended
june30, 1998)
10(u
)
second amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10(b) to the companys quarterly
report on form10-q for the quarter ended june30,
1998)
10(v
)
information technology services agreement between
united healthcare services, inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of
the company, and unisys corporation dated june1, 1996
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10 to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended march31, 1998)
10(w
)
pharmacy benefit management agreement between
united healthcare services, inc. and merck medco managed care,
l.l.c. (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(v) of the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
statement regarding computation of per share
earnings (incorporated by reference to the information contained
under the heading net earnings per common share in
note 2 to the notes to consolidated financial statements
included in the companys annual report to shareholders for
the fiscal year ended december31, 2001 and which is
included as part of exhibit13 hereto)
portions of the companys annual report to
shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2001
subsidiaries of the company
consent of independent public accountants
powers of attorney
letter from the company to the securities and
exchange commission confirming certain quality assurance
representations made by arthur andersen to the company
pursuant to rule24b-2 of the securities
exchange act of 1934, as amended, confidential portions of these
exhibits have been deleted and filed separately with the
securities and exchange commission pursuant to a request for
confidential treatment.
