10-k
c82635e10vk.htm
form 10-k
e10vk
table of contents
united states securities and exchange
commission
washington,d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 or
15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 for the fiscal year
ended december31, 2003
commission file number: 1-10864
unitedhealth group incorporated
(exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
minnesota
41-1321939
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
unitedhealth group center
9900 bren road east
minnetonka, minnesota
(address of principal executive
offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including
area code:
(952)936-1300
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
(title of each class)
(name of each exchange on which registered)
common stock, $.01 par value
new york stock exchange,inc.
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act:
none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by checkmark if disclosure of delinquent
filers pursuant to item405 of regulations-k is not
contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.yes
indicate by checkmark whether the registrant is
an accelerated filer (as defined in the exchange act
rule12b-2).yesnoo
the aggregate market value of stock held by
non-affiliates of the registrant as of june30, 2003, was
approximately $29,612,414,897 (based on the last reported sale
price of $50.25per share on june30, 2003, on the
newyork stock exchange).*
as of march1, 2004, 620,897,092shares
of the registrants common stock, $.01par value per
share, were issued and outstanding.
note that in partii of this report on
form10-k, we incorporate by reference certain
information from our annual report to shareholders for the
fiscal year ended december31, 2003, and in partiii
we incorporate by reference certain information from
our definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on may12, 2004. these documents
will be filed with the securities and exchange commission (sec)
within the time period permitted by the sec. the sec allows us
to disclose important information by referring to it in that
manner. please refer to such information.
*
only shares of common stock held beneficially by
directors, executive officers and subsidiaries of the company
have been excluded in determining this number.
table of contents
page
parti
item1.
business
introduction
description of
business segments
expansion and
divestiture of operations
government
regulation
marketing
competition
employees
executive
officers of the registrant
cautionary
statements
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
partii
item5.
market for registrants
common equity and related stockholder matters
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and
supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements
with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
partiii
item10.
directors and executive
officers of the registrant
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of
certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item13.
certain relationships and
related transactions
item14.
principal accountant fees
and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial
statement schedules and reports on form8-k
signatures
exhibitindex
first amendment to executive savings plans (1998)
executive savings plans (2004)
amendment to directors' compensation deferral plan
employment agreement - david s. wichmann
amendments to the aarp health insurance agreement
amendment - information technology services agrmt.
portions of the annual report to shareholders
subsidiaries of the company
independent auditors' consent
powers of attorney
certifications pursuant to section 302
certifications pursuant to section 906
table of contents
parti
item1.
business
introduction
unitedhealth group is a leader in the health and
well-being industry, serving approximately 52million
americans. we provide individuals with access to quality,
cost-effective health care services and resources through more
than 400,000 physicians and 3,600 hospitals across the united
states. we manage approximately $50billion in aggregate
health care spending on behalf of more than
170,000employer-customers and the consumers we serve. our
primary focus is on improving the american health care system by
simplifying the administrative components of health care
delivery, promoting evidence-based medicine as the standard for
care, and providing relevant, actionable data that physicians,
health care providers, consumers, employers and other
participants in health care can use to make better, more
informed decisions.
our revenues are derived from premium revenues on
risk-based products, fees from management, administrative and
consulting services, and investment and other income. we conduct
our business primarily through operating divisions in the
following business segments:
uniprise;
health care services, which includes our
unitedhealthcare, ovations and americhoice businesses;
specialized care services;and
ingenix.
for a discussion of our results by segment see
item7, managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations.
unitedhealth group incorporated is a minnesota
corporation incorporated in january 1977. the terms
we, our or the company refer
to unitedhealth group incorporated and our subsidiaries. our
executive offices are located at unitedhealth group center, 9900
bren road east, minnetonka, minnesota 55343; telephone
(952)936-1300. our home page on the internet can be
accessed at www.unitedhealthgroup.com. you can learn more
about us by visiting that site. you can download and print
copies of our annual reports to shareholders, annual reports on
form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q, and current
reports on form8-k, along with amendments to those
reports, from that site. you can also download from our website
our articles of incorporation, bylaws and corporate governance
policies, including our principles of governance, board of
directors committee charters, and code of business conduct and
ethics. we make periodic reports and amendments available, free
of charge, as soon as reasonably practicable after we file or
furnish these reports to the securities and exchange commission
(sec). we will also provide a copy of any of our
corporate governance policies published on our website free of
charge, upon request. to request a copy of any of these
documents, please submit your request to: unitedhealth group
incorporated, 9900 bren road east, minnetonka, mn 55343, attn:
corporate secretary.
description of business segments
uniprise
uniprise serves the employee benefit needs of
large organizations by developing cost-effective health care
access and benefit strategies and programs, technology and
service-driven solutions tailored to the specific needs of each
customer. uniprise offers consumers access to a wide spectrum of
health and well-being products and services. together with its
affiliates, uniprises core business provides
comprehensive, integrated health benefit services to
multi-location employers with more than 5,000 employees, and
specializes in large volume transaction management, large-scale
benefit design, and innovative technology
table of contents
solutions designed to manage and control medical
care costs, facilitate access to care, and transform complex
administrative processes into simpler, efficient, high quality
automated processes. in addition to or as part of the functions
described above, uniprise has developed internet-based
administrative and financial applications for physician
inquiries and transactions, customer-specific data analysis for
employers, and consumer access to personal information and
services. uniprise customers generally retain the risk of
financing the medical benefits of their employees and their
dependents, and uniprise provides the management and
administrative services described above for a fixed fee per
members served.
large employers can also access through uniprise
all of unitedhealth groups network-based medical,
insurance and specialty services, through a wide variety of
product arrangements. as of december31, 2003, uniprise
served over 320 clients, representing approximately
9.1million individuals, including approximately 160 of the
fortune 500 companies. uniprise also provides claim, call and
other complex transaction processing services to consumers
served by unitedhealthcare.
health care services
our health care services segment consists of our
unitedhealthcare, ovations and americhoice businesses.
unitedhealthcare
unitedhealthcare coordinates health and
well-being services on behalf of local employers and consumers
nationwide. unitedhealthcares products are primarily
marketed to small and mid-size employers with up to 5,000
employees. as of december31, 2003, this business served
approximately 8.3million individuals. with its risk-based
product offerings, unitedhealthcare assumes the risk of both
medical and administrative costs for its customers in return for
a monthly premium, which is typically at a fixed rate for a
one-year period. unitedhealthcare also provides administrative
and other management services to customers that self-insure the
medical costs of their employees and their dependents, for which
unitedhealthcare receives a fee. these customers retain the risk
of financing medical benefits for their employees, and
unitedhealthcare administers the payment of customer funds to
physicians and other health care providers from customer-funded
bank accounts. small employer groups are more likely to purchase
risk-based products because they are generally unable or
unwilling to bear a greater potential liability for health care
expenditures. unitedhealthcare offers its products through
affiliates that are usually licensed as insurance companies or
as health maintenance organizations, depending upon a variety of
factors, including state regulations.
unitedhealthcare arranges for discounted access
to care through more than 400,000 physicians and 3,600 hospitals
across the united states. the consolidated purchasing power
represented by the individuals unitedhealthcare serves makes it
possible for unitedhealthcare to contract for cost-effective
access to a large number of conveniently located care providers.
directly or through unitedhealth groups family of
companies, unitedhealthcare offers:
a broad range of benefit plans integrating
medical, ancillary and alternative care products so customers
can choose benefits that are right for them;
affordability by leveraging the economic benefits
of the purchasing power of millions of people;
access to broad and diverse numbers of health
care providers through benefit plans that give customers direct
access to specialists without obtaining referrals;
innovative programs that facilitate integrated
care delivery;
convenient self-service for customer
transactions, pharmacy services and health information;
clinical information that physicians can use in
working with their patients;and
simplified electronic transactions for customers.
table of contents
we believe that unitedhealthcares
innovation distinguishes its product offerings from the
competition. unitedhealthcare designs consumer-oriented health
benefits and services that value individual choice and control
in accessing health care. unitedhealthcare has programs that
provide health education; admission counseling before hospital
stays; care advocacy to help avoid delays in patients
stays in the hospital; support for individuals at risk of
needing intensive treatment; care coordination for people with
chronic conditions; and prescription drug management, which
promotes safe use of medications. unitedhealthcare has designed
its programs to encourage consumers to be engaged and active
participants in managing their own health and well-being.
further, unitedhealthcare offers web sites that provide access
to a variety of information, including a directory of network
physicians and hospitals, reports on thousands of health topics,
a treatment cost estimator, and a health profile tailored to
individual interests.
in november 2003, we acquired golden
rulefinancial corporation, a company which, through its
subsidiaries, offers a broad range of health and life insurance
and annuity products to the individual consumer market, with
approximately 430,000 individual members. golden rule is a
freestanding business unit within unitedhealthcare.
in february 2004, we acquired mid atlantic
medical services,inc. (mamsi), a company which, through
its subsidiaries, provides health, administrative and
network-based services in the mid-atlantic region of the united
states, directly serving approximately 955,000 people in
maryland, washington d.c., virginia, delaware, west virginia,
northern north carolina and southeast pennsylvania.
ovations
ovations provides health and well-being services
for americans age50 and older, addressing their unique
needs for preventative and acute health care services, for
services dealing with chronic disease and for responding to
specialized issues relating to their overall well-being.
ovations is one of few enterprises fully dedicated to this
market segment, providing products and services in all
50states, the district of columbia, puerto rico and the
u.s.virgin islands through licensed affiliates.
in january 1998, ovations initiated a 10-year
contract with aarp, the nations largest organization for
older americans. ovations offers a range of health insurance
products and services to aarp members, and has expanded the
scope of services and programs offered over the past several
years.
ovations operates the nations largest
medicare supplement business, providing medicare supplement and
hospital indemnity insurance, from its insurance company
affiliates, to approximately 3.8million aarp members.
ovations services also include an expanded aarp nurse
health line service to cover beneficiaries of all aarp medicare
supplement and certain hospital indemnity products, providing
24-hour access to health information from nurses. ovations
developed an offering with lower cost medicare supplement
coverage that provides consumers with a hospital network and
24-hour access to health care information from nurses. during
2003, ovations piloted a new health insurance program focused on
persons between 50 and 64years of age. ovations
revenues from the aarp insurance offerings were approximately
$4.1billion in 2003.
ovations addresses one of the most significant
cost problems facing older americans prescription
drug costs. ovations offers the nations largest pharmacy
discount card program, with approximately 1.8million
users, providing access to retail and mail order pharmacy
services, and a complimentary health and well-being catalog
offering. these services offer cost savings and greater access
to prescription drugs and health and well-being products for
older americans. through its group retiree solutions division,
ovations offers innovative products for companies that provide
health care coverage to their retirees. ovations group retiree
solutions coordinates all ovations group retiree sales
activities and spearheads new product development efforts for
group retiree coverage.
ovations senior& retiree services
division, through its affiliates, provides health care coverage
for the seniors market primarily through the medicare advantage
(formerly medicare+choice) program administered by the centers
for medicare and medicaid services (cms). during 2003,
ovations senior& retiree services offered
13new preferred provider organizations (ppo)pilot
projects in
table of contents
10states, in addition to its established
health plan products. under these programs, ovations provides
health insurance coverage to eligible medicare beneficiaries in
exchange for a fixed monthly premium per member from cms that
varies based on the geographic areas in which the members
reside. through these programs, approximately 230,000 medicare
beneficiaries were served as of december31, 2003.
through its evercare division, ovations is
one of the nations leaders in offering complete,
individualized care planning and care benefits for aging,
vulnerable and chronically ill individuals, serving
approximately 65,000 persons across the nation in nursing homes,
community-based settings and private homes. evercare offers a
continuum of services through innovative programs such as
evercare choice, evercare select and evercare connections.
evercare choice is a medicare product that offers enhanced
medical coverage to frail, elderly and chronically ill
populations in both nursing homes and community settings. these
services are provided primarily through nurse practitioners,
physicians assistants and physicians. evercare select is a
medicaid, long-term health care product for elderly, physically
disabled and other needy individuals. evercare connections is a
comprehensive eldercare service program providing service
coordination, consultation, claim management and information
resource nationwide.
americhoice
americhoice is a leading health care organization
engaged in facilitating health care benefits and services for
state medicaid and other government-sponsored health care
programs and their beneficiaries, through its licensed
affiliates. americhoice is a dedicated business unit of our
health care services segment working exclusively with selected
states to address the needs of their medically vulnerable
populations under their medicaid and other programs for the
uninsured. americhoice provides health insurance coverage to
eligible medicaid beneficiaries in exchange for a fixed monthly
premium per member from the applicable state. as of
december31, 2003, americhoice organized health care
resources and benefits for more than 1.1million
beneficiaries of medicaid and other government-sponsored health
care programs in 10states through licensed affiliates.
specialized care services
specialized care services is a portfolio of
specialized health and well-being companies, each serving a
specific market need with an offering of benefits, provider
networks, services and resources. specialized care services
provides comprehensive products and services that are focused on
highly specialized health care and financial assurance needs,
such as mental health and chemical dependency, employee
assistance, work life balance, critical care programs, disease
management, care management, vision and dental services,
physical therapy services, health-related information, income
replacement and life insurance and other health and well-being
services. various specialized care services products are
marketed under different brands through multiple sales channels,
including directly to employers, health plan insurers and
consumers and through affiliates, as well as on a private label
basis. specialized care services products and services
include both risk-based products, in which specialized care
services assumes financial responsibility for health care and
income replacement costs, and products for which specialized
care services receives management and administrative fees.
through united behavioral health
(ubh) and its affiliated companies, specialized care
services provides behavioral health care benefit services,
employee assistance programs and psychiatric disability benefit
services. ubhs care management capabilities and extensive
network of contracted mental health professionals represent the
core of its product offerings. ubhs services and products
reach more than 23million individuals. through its working
solutions business, ubh offers employee assistance, work life,
and other services and resources to assist consumers in managing
a variety of personal issues.
optum provides personalized health services
through its care management, condition management, and
longitudinal care management products, and health information
assistance, support and related services designed to improve the
health and well-being of the more than 24million
individuals it serves. through multiple access points, including
the internet, telephone, audio tapes, print and in-person
consultations, optum helps consumers address daily living
concerns, make informed health care decisions and become
table of contents
more effective health care consumers. optum also
interfaces with health care consumers and physicians by
providing evidence-based and best practices health information
in an effort to improve outcomes and reduce health care costs.
united resource networks (urn) is the
gateway to highly specialized critical care programs at more
than 120 medical centers in the united states. urn negotiates
competitive rates for high-cost, complex health care services.
access to urns programs and services is available to more
than 42million individuals through over 2,200 payers.
dental benefit providers (dbp) and
its affiliates provide dental benefit management and related
services. through relationships with nearly
60,000contracted dental providers, dbp manages dental
benefit offerings for approximately four million individuals.
dbps products serve commercial, medicare and medicaid
populations through both unaffiliated insurers and unitedhealth
group affiliates.
national benefit resources (nbr) is a
managing general underwriter that originates and administers
medical stop loss insurance provided to employers with
self-funded employee benefit plans. nbr markets stop loss
coverage primarily through third party administrators
(tpas) located throughout the united states. nbr
distributes to its customer base certain products and services
of other specialized care services businesses, including
those of urn and optum.
spectera is specialized care services
operating platform for the vision benefit market. spectera and
its licensed subsidiaries specialize in building vision care
benefit relationships with ophthalmologists, optometrists,
employer groups and benefit consultants. spectera administers
vision benefits for approximately eight million individuals
through more than 2,500 employer groups. spectera provides
comprehensive vision care services through its national network
of more than 15,000 private doctors offices and retail
store locations.
acn group provides benefit administration,
network management and access to chiropractic, physical therapy
and other complementary and alternative health care services
through its network of contracted providers to approximately
18million consumers.
through its unimerica workplace benefits group
and licensed insurance company, specialized care services
markets the sale of group life and accident insurance and
complementary group insurance products to small, medium and
large employer groups. unimerica workplace benefits also offers
consumers a health value card product.
ingenix
ingenix is a leader in the field of health care
information, serving multiple health care markets on a
business-to-business basis. ingenix customers include other
unitedhealth group businesses, pharmaceutical, biotechnology and
medical device companies, health insurers and other payers,
physicians and other health care providers, large employers and
government agencies.
ingenix provides a wide variety of data and
software analytics, warehousing, and technology services and
products that help customers simplify the complex business of
health care delivery and enhance their insight into the
financial and clinical aspects of their operations. ingenix
products include databases for benchmarking and reimbursement
methodology development, software to analyze and report costs
and utilization of services, data management services, physician
credentialing and provider directory services, hedis reporting,
fraud and abuse detection and prevention services, and claims
editing software.
ingenix consulting services focuses on
actuarial and financial disciplines, product development,
provider contracting and medical policy and management. ingenix
also publishes print and electronic media products that provide
customers with information regarding coding, reimbursement,
billing, compliance and other general health care issues.
ingenix i3 research division offers product
development-related services to pharmaceutical, biotechnology
and medical device manufacturers on a global basis. such
services include global clinical research services, and related
protocol development, investigator identification and training,
regulatory
table of contents
assistance, project management, data management
and biostatistical analysis, quality assurance, medical writing
and staffing resource services. ingenix also addresses
pharmaceutical, biotechnology or medical device product
questions through economic and outcomes research, data analysis,
safety studies and research and patient registries.
ingenix health education group provides pharmaceutical,
biotechnology and medical device manufacturers with medical
symposia, product communications and scientific publications.
expansion and divestiture of
operations
we continually evaluate expansion opportunities
in all our businesses and, in the normal course of business,
often consider whether to sell certain businesses or stop
offering certain products or services. expansion opportunities
may include acquiring businesses that are complementary to our
existing operations. we also devote significant attention to
internally developing new products and services for the health
and well-being sector as we have broadly defined it. during
2003, we completed several acquisitions and ceased offering some
products in certain markets, all as part of our ongoing emphasis
on our strategic focus.
government regulation
most of our health and well-being services are
regulated. this regulation can vary significantly from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction. federal and state regulatory
agencies generally have discretion to issue regulations and
interpret and enforce laws and rules. changes in applicable laws
and regulations are continually being considered, and the
interpretation of existing laws and rules also may change
periodically. these revisions could affect our consolidated
operations and financial results. enactment of federal and state
health benefit laws and regulations can also affect our
businesses.
federal regulation
our health care services segment, which includes
unitedhealthcare, ovations, and americhoice. ovations has
medicare advantage contracts that are regulated by cms. cms has
the right to audit our performance in order to determine
compliance with cms contracts and regulations and the
quality of care being given to members. our health care services
segment also has medicaid and state childrens health
insurance program contracts that are subject to federal and
state regulations regarding services to be provided to medicaid
enrollees, payment for those services, and other aspects of
these programs. there is a significant level of regulation
surrounding medicare and medicaid compliance. in addition,
because a portion of ingenix business includes clinical
research, it is subject to regulation by the fda. we believe we
are in compliance with the applicable regulations. we believe we
are in compliance with these regulations.
state regulation
all of the states in which our subsidiaries offer
insurance and health maintenance products regulate those
products and operations. these states require periodic financial
reports from us and impose minimum capital or restricted cash
reserve requirements. many of our health plans and each of our
insurance subsidiaries are regulated under state insurance
holding company regulations. such regulations generally require
registration with applicable state departments of insurance and
the filing of reports that describe capital structure,
ownership, financial condition, certain inter-company
transactions and general business operations. some state
insurance holding company laws and regulations require prior
regulatory approval of acquisitions and material inter-company
transfers of assets, as well as transactions between the
regulated companies and their parent holding companies or
affiliates. in addition, some of our subsidiaries or products
may be subject to ppo, managed care organization
(mco) or tpa-related regulations and licensure
requirements. these regulations differ greatly from state to
state, but generally contain network, contracting, product and
rate, financial and reporting requirements. many states also
have enacted laws and/or adopted regulations governing
utilization review and external appeals activities, and these
laws may apply to some of our operations. additionally, there
are laws and regulations that set specific standards for
table of contents
delivery of services, prompt payment of claims,
confidentiality of consumer health information and covered
benefits and services.
hipaa
the administrative simplification provisions of
the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996,
as amended (hipaa), apply to both the group and
individual health insurance markets, including self-funded
employee benefit plans. federal regulations promulgated pursuant
to hipaa are now effective. these regulations include minimum
standards for electronic transactions and code sets, and for the
privacy and security of protected health information. we believe
that we are in compliance with these regulations. new standards
for national provider and employer identifiers are currently
being developed by regulators. we intend to be in compliance by
the enforcement dates. however, where the law is far-reaching
and complex or the government delays in providing guidance on
some aspects of the law, the timeliness of our compliance
efforts may be affected. additionally, different approaches to
hipaas provisions and varying enforcement philosophies in
the different states may adversely affect our ability to
standardize our products and services across state lines.
erisa
the employee retirement income security act of
1974, as amended (erisa), regulates how goods and
services are provided to or through certain types of
employer-sponsored health benefit plans. erisa is a complex set
of laws and regulations that is subject to periodic
interpretation by the united states department of labor as well
as the federal courts. erisa places controls on how our business
units may do business with employers who sponsor employee
benefit health plans, particularly those that maintain
self-funded plans. during 2003, we processed and administered
the payment of approximately $25billion of medical claims
on behalf of customers that self-insure the medical costs of
their employees and their employees dependents. erisa
claim regulations which became effective july 2002 require
ongoing modifications to our operations. we believe that we are
in compliance with the regulations.
fraud and abuse
the regulations and contractual requirements
applicable to participants in federal government health care
programs such as medicare and medicaid are complex and changing.
we continue to emphasize our regulatory compliance efforts for
these programs, but ongoing vigorous law enforcement and the
highly technical nature of the regulations mean that compliance
efforts in this arena will continue to require significant
resources. additionally, states have begun to focus their
anti-fraud efforts on insurance companies and health maintenance
organizations. some states now require filing and approval of
anti-fraud plans and may monitor compliance as part of any
market conduct examination. we believe that we are in compliance
with these regulations and contractual requirements.
audits and investigations
we are regularly subject to governmental audits,
investigations and enforcement actions. any such government
actions can result in assessment of damages, civil or criminal
fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including loss of
licensure or exclusion from participation in government
programs. in addition, a state department of insurance or other
state or federal authority (including cms, the office of the
inspector general and state attorneys general) may from time to
time begin a special audit of one of our health plans, our
insurance plans or one of our other operations to investigate
issues such as utilization management; financial, eligibility or
other data reporting; prompt claims payment; or coverage
determinations for medical services, including emergency room
care. we are currently involved in various governmental
investigations, audits and reviews. these include routine,
regular and special investigations, audits and reviews by cms,
state insurance departments and state attorneys general, the
office of personnel management, the office of the inspector
general, the office of civil rights, and u.s.attorneys. we
do not believe the results of any of the current investigations,
audits or reviews,
table of contents
individually or in the aggregate, will have a
material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position
or results of operations.
international regulation
our ingenix, uniprise and health care services
segments have limited international operations. these
international operations are subject to different legal and
regulatory requirements in different jurisdictions, including
various tax, tariff and trade regulations, as well as
employment, intellectual property and investment rules and laws.
marketing
our marketing strategy is defined and coordinated
by each business dedicated marketing staff. within these
businesses, primary marketing responsibility generally resides
with a marketing leader and a direct sales force. in addition,
several of the segments also rely upon independent insurance
agents and brokers to sell some of their products. marketing
efforts also include public relations efforts and advertising
programs that may use television, radio, newspapers, magazines,
billboards, direct mail and telemarketing.
competition
as a diversified health and well-being services
company we operate in highly competitive markets. our
competitors include managed health care companies, insurance
companies, third party administrators and business services
outsourcing companies, health care providers that have formed
networks to directly contract with employers, specialty benefit
providers, government entities, and various information and
consulting companies. for our uniprise and health care services
businesses, competitors include aetna, anthem, cigna, coventry,
humana, pacificare, oxford, wellpoint, numerous for profit and
not for profit organizations operating under licenses from the
blue cross blue shield association and other enterprises
concentrated in more limited geographic areas. our specialized
care services and ingenix business segments also compete with a
number of businesses. new entrants into the markets in which we
compete, as well as consolidation within these markets, also
contribute to a competitive environment. we believe the
principal competitive factors affecting us and the sales and
pricing of our products and services include product innovation,
consumer satisfaction, the level and quality of products and
services, network capabilities, price, market share, product
distribution systems, efficient administration operations,
financial strength and marketplace reputation.
we believe that our competitive strengths are
enhanced by our customer focus resulting from our operational
alignment. each unitedhealth group business represents a
strategic platform from which we can penetrate more deeply into
specific markets using our three core competencies: network
management, knowledge and information and service
infrastructure. other strengths include the breadth and quality
of our products, our geographic scope and diversity, the scope
and depth of our data and information about health care costs
and consumption, our effective use of proprietary tools and
products to coordinate and facilitate programs designed to
realize appropriately lower health care costs, our disciplined
underwriting and pricing practices and staff, our significant
market position in certain geographic areas, the strength of our
distribution network, our financial strength, our generally
large provider networks that provide more consumer choice and
minimize barriers to access, our point-of-service products and
our strong marketplace reputation. however, in some markets we
may be at a disadvantage for a number of reasons, including
competitors with more resources, longer operating histories,
larger market shares, broader networks, narrower networks (which
may allow greater cost control and lower prices) or more
established names and reputations.
employees
as of december31, 2003, we employed
approximately 33,000 individuals. we believe our employee
relations are favorable.
table of contents
executive officers of the registrant
first elected as
name
age
position
executive officer
william w. mcguire,m.d.
chairman, chief executive officer and director
stephen j. hemsley
president, chief operating officer and director
patrick j. erlandson
chief financial officer
david j. lubben
general counsel and secretary
lois e. quam
chief executive officer, ovations
robert j. sheehy
chief executive officer, unitedhealthcare
r. channing wheeler
chief executive officer, uniprise
david s. wichmann
chief executive officer, specialized care services
our board of directors elects executive officers
annually. our executive officers serve until their successors
are duly elected and qualified.
dr.mcguire is
the chairman of the board of directors and chief executive
officer of unitedhealth group. dr.mcguire joined
unitedhealth group as executive vice president in november 1988
and became its chairman and chief executive officer in 1991.
dr.mcguire also served as unitedhealth groups chief
operating officer from may 1989 to june 1995 and as its
president from november 1989 until may 1999.
mr.hemsley is
the president and chief operating officer of unitedhealth group
and has been a member of the board of directors since february
2000. mr.hemsley joined unitedhealth group in may 1997 as
senior executive vice president. he became chief operating
officer in september 1998 and was named president in may 1999.
mr.erlandson
joined unitedhealth group in 1997 as
vice president of process, planning, and information channels.
he became controller and chief accounting officer in september
1998 and was named chief financial officer in january 2001.
mr.lubben
joined unitedhealth group in october
1996 as general counsel and secretary. prior to joining
unitedhealth group, he was a partner in the law firm of
dorsey& whitney llp.
ms.quam joined
unitedhealth group in 1989 and became the chief executive
officer of ovations in april 1998. prior to april 1998,
ms.quam served in various capacities including chief
executive officer, aarp division; vice president, public sector
services; and director, research.
mr.sheehy
joined unitedhealth group in 1992 and
became chief executive officer of unitedhealthcare in january
2001. from april 1998 to december 2000, he was president of
unitedhealthcare. prior to april 1998, mr.sheehy served in
various capacities with unitedhealth group, including chief
executive officer of united healthcare of ohio.
mr.wheeler
joined unitedhealth group in march
1995 and became chief executive officer of uniprise in may 1998.
prior to may 1998, he served in various capacities with
unitedhealth group, including chief executive officer, northeast
health plans.
mr.wichmann
joined unitedhealth group in 1998 and
became chief executive officer of specialized care services in
june 2003. from 2001 to june 2003, he was president and chief
operating officer of specialized care services. since he joined
unitedhealth group in 1998, mr.wichmann has also served as
senior vice president of corporate development.
table of contents
cautionary statements
the statements contained in this annual report on
form10-k, and in the managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations and
other sections of our annual report to shareholders incorporated
by reference in this form10-k, include forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995 (the pslra). when used
in this annual report on form10-k and in future filings by
us with the securities and exchange commission, in our press
releases, presentations to securities analysts or investors, and
in oral statements made by or with the approval of one of our
executive officers, the words or phrases believes,
anticipates, intends, will likely
result, estimates, projects or
similar expressions are intended to identify such
forward-looking statements. these forward-looking statements
involve risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual
results to differ materially from the results discussed in the
forward-looking statements.
the following discussion contains certain
cautionary statements regarding our business that investors and
others should consider. this discussion is intended to take
advantage of the safe harbor provisions of the
pslra. except to the extent otherwise required by federal
securities laws, in making these cautionary statements, we do
not undertake to address or update each factor in future filings
or communications regarding our business or operating results,
and do not undertake to address how any of these factors may
have caused results to differ from discussions or information
contained in previous filings or communications. in addition,
any of the matters discussed below may have affected our past,
as well as current, forward-looking statements about future
results. any or all forward-looking statements in this
form10-k, in the 2003 annual report to shareholders, and
in any other public statements we make may turn out to be wrong.
they can be affected by inaccurate assumptions we might make or
by known or unknown risks and uncertainties. many factors
discussed below will be important in determining future results.
consequently, no forward-looking statement can be guaranteed.
actual future results may vary materially from expectations
expressed in our prior communications.
we must effectively manage our health care
costs.
under risk-based product arrangements, we assume
the risk of both medical and administrative costs for our
customers in return for monthly premiums. premium revenues from
risk-based products (excluding aarp) comprise approximately 75%
of our total consolidated revenues. we use approximately 80% to
85% of our premium revenues to pay the costs of health care
services delivered to our customers. the profitability of our
risk-based products depends in large part on our ability to
accurately predict, price for, and effectively manage health
care costs. total health care costs are affected by the number
of individual services rendered and the cost of each service.
our premium revenue is typically fixed in price for a 12-month
period and is generally priced one to four months before
contract commencement. services are delivered and related costs
are incurred when the contract commences. although we base the
premiums we charge on our estimate of future health care costs
over the fixed premium period, inflation, regulations and other
factors may cause actual costs to exceed what was estimated and
reflected in premiums. these factors may include increased use
of services, increased cost of individual services,
catastrophes, epidemics, the introduction of new or costly
treatments and technology, new mandated benefits or other
regulatory changes, insured population characteristics and
seasonal changes in the level of health care use. relatively
small differences between predicted and actual medical costs as
a percentage of premium revenues can result in significant
changes in our financial results. for example, if medical costs
increased by one percent for unitedhealthcares commercial
insured products, our annual net earnings for 2003 would have
been reduced by approximately $75million. in addition, the
financial results we report for any particular period include
estimates of costs incurred for which the underlying claims have
not been received by us or for which the claims have been
received but not processed. if these estimates prove too high or
too low, the effect of the change will be included in future
results.
table of contents
we face intense competition in many of our
markets and customers have flexibility in moving between
competitors.
our businesses compete throughout the united
states and face significant competition in all of the geographic
markets in which they operate. for our uniprise and health care
services businesses, competitors include aetna, anthem, cigna,
coventry, humana, pacificare, oxford, wellpoint, numerous for
profit and not for profit organizations operating under licenses
from the blue cross blue shield association and other
enterprises concentrated in more limited geographic areas. our
specialized care services and ingenix businesses also compete
with a number of businesses. moreover, we believe that barriers
to entry in many markets are not substantial, so the addition of
new competitors can occur relatively easily, and customers enjoy
significant flexibility in moving between competitors. in
particular markets, these competitors may have capabilities that
give them a competitive advantage. greater market share,
established reputation, superior supplier arrangements, existing
business relationships, and other factors all can provide a
competitive advantage. in addition, significant merger and
acquisition activity has occurred in the industries in which we
operate, both as to our competitors and suppliers in these
industries. this level of consolidation makes it more difficult
for us to retain or increase customers, to improve the terms on
which we do business with our suppliers, and to maintain or
advance profitability.
our relationship with aarp is significant to
our ovations business.
under our 10-year contract with aarp which we
entered into in 1998, we provide medicare supplement and
hospital indemnity health insurance and other products to aarp
members. as of december31, 2003, our portion of
aarps insurance program represented approximately
$4.1billion in annual net premium revenue from
approximately 3.8million aarp members. the aarp contract
may be terminated early by us or aarp under certain
circumstances, including a material breach by either party,
insolvency of either party, a material adverse change in the
financial condition of either party, and by mutual agreement.
the success of our aarp arrangement depends, in part, on our
ability to service aarp and its members, develop additional
products and services, price the products and services
competitively, and respond effectively to federal and state
regulatory changes. additionally, events that adversely affect
aarp or one of its other business partners for its member
insurance program could have an adverse effect on the success of
our arrangement with aarp. for example, if customers were
dissatisfied with the products aarp offered or its reputation,
if federal legislation limited opportunities in the medicare
market, or if the services provided by aarps other
business partners were unacceptable, our business could be
adversely affected.
the effects of the new medicare reform
legislation on our business are uncertain.
recently enacted medicare reform legislation is
complex and wide-ranging. there are numerous provisions in the
legislation that will influence our business, although at this
early stage, it is difficult to predict the extent to which our
business will be affected. while uncertain as to impact, we
believe the increased funding provided in the legislation will
intensify competition in the seniors health services market.
our business is subject to intense government
scrutiny and we must respond quickly and appropriately to
frequent changes in government regulations.
our business is regulated at the federal, state,
local and international levels. the laws and rules governing our
business and interpretations of those laws and rules are subject
to frequent change. broad latitude is given to the agencies
administering those regulations. existing or future laws and
rules could force us to change how we do business, restrict
revenue and enrollment growth, increase our health care and
administrative costs and capital requirements, and increase our
liability in federal and state courts for coverage
determinations, contract interpretation and other actions. we
must obtain and maintain regulatory approvals to market many of
our products, to increase prices for certain regulated products
and to consummate our acquisitions and dispositions. delays in
obtaining or our failure to obtain or maintain these approvals
could reduce our revenue or increase our costs.
table of contents
we participate in federal, state and local
government health care coverage programs. these programs
generally are subject to frequent change, including changes that
may reduce the number of persons enrolled or eligible, reduce
the amount of reimbursement or payment levels, or increase our
administrative or health care costs under such programs. such
changes have adversely affected our financial results and
willingness to participate in such programs in the past and may
do so in the future.
state legislatures and congress continue to focus
on health care issues. legislative and regulatory proposals at
state and federal levels may affect certain aspects of our
business, including contracting with physicians, hospitals and
other health care professionals; physician reimbursement methods
and payment rates; coverage determinations; claim payments and
processing; use and maintenance of individually identifiable
health information; and government-sponsored programs. we cannot
predict if any of these initiatives will ultimately become
binding law or regulation, or, if enacted, what their terms will
be, but their enactment could increase our costs, expose us to
expanded liability, require us to revise the ways in which we
conduct business or put us at risk for a loss of business.
we are also subject to various governmental
investigations, audits and reviews. such oversight could result
in our loss of licensure or our right to participate in certain
programs, or the imposition of civil or criminal fines,
penalties and other sanctions. in addition, disclosure of any
adverse investigation or audit results or sanctions could damage
our reputation in various markets and make it more difficult for
us to sell our products and services. we are currently involved
in various governmental investigations, audits and reviews.
these include routine, regular and special investigations,
audits and reviews by the centers for medicare and medicaid
services, state insurance and health and welfare departments and
state attorneys general, the office of personnel management, the
office of the inspector general and u.s.attorney general.
we depend on our relationships with
physicians, hospitals and other health care providers.
we contract with physicians, hospitals,
pharmaceutical benefit service providers and pharmaceutical
manufacturers, and other health care providers for favorable
prices. a number of organizations are advocating for legislation
that would exempt certain of these physicians and health care
professionals from federal and state antitrust laws. in any
particular market, these physicians and health care
professionals could refuse to contract, demand higher payments,
or take other actions that could result in higher health care
costs, less desirable products for customers or difficulty
meeting regulatory or accreditation requirements. in some
markets, certain health care providers, particularly hospitals,
physician/hospital organizations or multi-specialty physician
groups, may have significant market positions or near monopolies
that could result in diminished bargaining power on our part.
the nature of our business exposes us to
significant litigation risks and our insurance coverage may not
be sufficient to cover some of the costs associated with
litigation.
periodically, we become a party to the types of
legal actions that can affect any business, such as employment
and employment discrimination-related suits, employee benefit
claims, breach of contract actions, tort claims, shareholder
suits, and intellectual property-related litigation. in
addition, because of the nature of our business, we are
routinely made party to a variety of legal actions related to
the design, management and offerings of our services. these
matters include, but are not limited to, claims related to
health care benefits coverage, medical malpractice actions,
contract disputes and claims related to disclosure of certain
business practices. in 1999, a number of class action lawsuits
were filed against us and virtually all major entities in the
health benefits business. the suits are purported class actions
on behalf of physicians for alleged breaches of federal
statutes, including erisa and the racketeer influenced corrupt
organization act (rico). although the expenses which
we have incurred to date in defending the 1999 class action
lawsuits have not been material to our business, we will
continue to incur expenses in the defense of the 1999 class
action litigation and other matters, even if they are without
merit.
table of contents
following the events of september11, 2001,
the cost of business insurance coverage has increased
significantly. as a result, we have increased the amount of risk
that we self-insure, particularly with respect to matters
incidental to our business. we believe that we are adequately
insured for claims in excess of our self-insurance; however,
certain types of damages, such as punitive damages, are not
covered by insurance. we record liabilities for our estimates of
the probable costs resulting from self-insured matters. although
we believe the liabilities established for these risks are
adequate, it is possible that the level of actual losses may
exceed the liabilities recorded.
our businesses depend significantly on
effective information systems and the integrity of the data in
our information systems.
our ability to adequately price our products and
services, provide effective and efficient service to our
customers, and to accurately report our financial results
depends significantly on the integrity of the data in our
information systems. as a result of our acquisition activities,
we have acquired additional systems. we have been taking steps
to reduce the number of systems we operate and have upgraded and
expanded our information systems capabilities. if the
information we rely upon to run our businesses was found to be
inaccurate or unreliable or if we fail to maintain effectively
our information systems and data integrity, we could lose
existing customers, have difficulty attracting new customers,
have problems in determining medical cost estimates and
establishing appropriate pricing, have customer and physician
and other health care provider disputes, have regulatory
problems, have increases in operating expenses or suffer other
adverse consequences.
we depend on independent third parties, such as
ibm and medco health solutions,inc., with whom we have
entered into agreements, for significant portions of our data
center operations and pharmacy benefits management and
processing, respectively. even though we have appropriate
provisions in our agreement with ibm and medco, including
provisions with respect to specific performance standards,
covenants, warranties, audit rights, indemnification, and other
provisions, our dependence on these third parties makes our
operations vulnerable to their failure to perform adequately
under the contracts, due to internal or external factors.
although there are a limited number of service organizations
with the size, scale and capabilities to effectively provide
certain of these services, especially with regard to pharmacy
benefits processing and management, we believe that other
organizations could provide similar services on comparable
terms. a change in service providers, however, could result in a
decline in service quality and effectiveness or less favorable
contract terms.
we must comply with emerging restrictions on
patient privacy, including taking steps to ensure compliance by
our business associates who obtain access to sensitive patient
information when providing services to us.
the use of individually identifiable data by our
businesses is regulated at international, federal and state
levels. these laws and rules are changed frequently by
legislation or administrative interpretation. various state laws
address the use and maintenance of individually identifiable
health data. most are derived from the privacy provisions in the
federal gramm-leach-bliley act and hipaa. hipaa also imposes
guidelines on our business associates (as this term is defined
in the hipaa regulations). even though we provide for
appropriate protections through our contracts with our business
associates, we still have limited control over their actions and
practices. compliance with these proposals and new regulations
may result in cost increases due to necessary systems changes,
the development of new administrative processes, and the effects
of potential noncompliance by our business associates. they also
may impose further restrictions on our use of patient
identifiable data that is housed in one or more of our
administrative databases.
our knowledge and information-related
businesses depend significantly on our ability to maintain
proprietary rights to our databases and related
products.
we rely on our agreements with customers,
confidentiality agreements with employees, and our trade
secrets, copyrights and patents to protect our proprietary
rights. these legal protections and precautions
table of contents
may not prevent misappropriation of our
proprietary information. in addition, substantial litigation
regarding intellectual property rights exists in the software
industry, and we expect software products to be increasingly
subject to third-party infringement claims as the number of
products and competitors in this industry segment grows. such
litigation and misappropriation of our proprietary information
could hinder our ability to market and sell products and
services.
the effects of the war on terror and future
terrorist attacks could have a severe impact on the health care
industry.
the terrorist attacks launched on
september11, 2001, the war on terrorism, the threat of
future acts of terrorism and the related concerns of customers
and providers have negatively affected, and may continue to
negatively affect, the u.s.economy in general and our
industry specifically. depending on the governments
actions and the responsiveness of public health agencies and
insurance companies, future acts of terrorism and bio-terrorism
could lead to, among other things, increased use of health care
services including, without limitation, hospital and physician
services; loss of membership in health plans we administer as a
result of lay-offs or other reductions of employment; adverse
effects upon the financial condition or business of employers
who sponsor health care coverage for their employees; disruption
of our information and payment systems; increased health care
costs due to restrictions on our ability to carve out certain
categories of risk, such as acts of terrorism; and disruption of
the financial and insurance markets in general.
the market price of our common stock may be
particularly sensitive due to the nature of the business in
which we operate.
the market prices of the securities of the
publicly-held companies in the industry in which we operate have
shown volatility and sensitivity in response to many external
factors, including general market trends, public communications
regarding managed care, litigation and judicial decisions,
legislative or regulatory actions, health care cost trends,
pricing trends, competition, earnings, membership reports of
particular industry participants and acquisition activity.
despite our specific outlook or prospects, the market price of
our common stock may decline as a result of any of these
external factors. by way of illustration, our stock price has
ranged from $35.33 on december31, 2001 to $58.18 on
december31, 2003 (as adjusted to reflect stock splits and
dividends).
item2.
properties
as of december31, 2003, we leased
approximately 6.6million and owned approximately 250,000
aggregate square feet of space in the united states and europe.
our leases expire at various dates through may31, 2025.
our various segments use this space exclusively for their
respective business purposes and we believe these current
facilities are suitable for their respective uses and are
adequate for our anticipated future needs.
item3.
legal proceedings
in re: managed care litigation: mdl
no.1334. beginning in 1999, a
series of class action lawsuits were filed against us and
virtually all major entities in the health benefits business. a
multi-district litigation panel has consolidated several
litigation cases involving unitedhealth group and our affiliates
in the southern district court of florida, miami division. in
december 2000, the unitedhealth group litigation was
consolidated with litigation involving other industry members.
generally, the health care provider plaintiffs allege violations
of erisa and rico in connection with alleged undisclosed
policies intended to maximize profits. other allegations include
breach of state prompt payment laws and breach of contract
claims for failure to timely reimburse providers for medical
services rendered. the consolidated suits seek injunctive,
compensatory and equitable relief as well as restitution, costs,
fees and interest payments. discovery commenced on
september30, 2002. in november 2002, the eleventh circuit
granted the industry defendants petition to review the
class certification order. that appeal is pending. on
april7, 2003, the united states supreme court determined
that the rico claims against pacificare and
table of contents
unitedhealthcare should be arbitrated. on
september15, 2003, the district court granted in part and
denied in part the industry defendants further motion to
compel arbitration. significantly, the court denied the industry
defendants motion with respect to plaintiffs
derivative rico claims. on september19, 2003, the industry
defendants appealed the district courts arbitration order
to the eleventh circuit. a trial date has been set for
september13, 2004.
the american medical association etal.
v. metropolitan life insurance company, united healthcare
services,inc. and unitedhealth
group. this lawsuit was filed on
march15, 2000, in the supreme court of the state of
newyork, county of newyork. on april13, 2000,
we removed this case to the united states district court for the
southern district of newyork. the suit alleges causes of
action based on erisa, as well as breach of contract and the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, deceptive acts
and practices, and trade libel in connection with the
calculation of reasonable and customary reimbursement rates for
non-network providers. the suit seeks declaratory, injunctive
and compensatory relief as well as costs, fees and interest
payments. an amended complaint was filed on august25,
2000, which alleged two classes of plaintiffs, an erisa class
and a non-erisa class. after the court dismissed certain erisa
claims and the claims brought by the american medical
association, a third amended complaint was filed. on
october25, 2002, the court granted in part and denied in
part our motion to dismiss the third amended complaint. we are
engaged in discovery in this matter.
because of the nature of our business, we are
routinely subject to lawsuits alleging various causes of action.
some of these suits may include claims for substantial
non-economic, treble or punitive damages. we record liabilities
for our estimate of probable costs resulting from these matters.
although the results of pending litigation are always uncertain,
we do not believe the results of any such actions, including
those described above, or any other types of actions, currently
threatened or pending, individually or in the aggregate, will
have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial
position or results of operations.
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
none.
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity
and related stockholder matters
the information contained under the heading
investor information in our annual report to
shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003,
is incorporated herein by reference. as of february27,
2004, we had 13,361shareholders of record. the information
required under item201(d) of regulations-k is
included under item12 herein.
on november8, 2001, in reliance on
rule144a under the securities act of 1933, we issued
$100million of floating rate notes due in november 2003
(which have been repaid) and $150million of floating rate
notes due november 2004. the notes were not issued in a public
offering and were not registered under the securities act. the
principal underwriter for the offering was merrill
lynch& co.
item6.
selected financial data
the information contained under the heading
financial highlights in our annual report to
shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003,
is incorporated herein by reference.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations
the information contained under the heading
results of operations in our annual report to
shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003,
is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk
the information contained under the heading
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk in our annual report to shareholders for the fiscal
year ended december31, 2003, is incorporated herein by
reference.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
our consolidated financial statements, together
with the independent auditors report thereon, appearing on
pages40 through 65 of our annual report to shareholders
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003, are
incorporated herein by reference.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
on may15, 2002, our board of directors and
the audit committee ended the companys engagement with
arthur andersen llp as our independent public accountants,
effective may15, 2002, and engaged deloitte&
touche llp, effective may16, 2002, to serve as our
independent auditors for fiscal year 2002.
arthur andersens reports on our
consolidated financial statements for each of the years ended
2001, 2000 and 1999 did not contain an adverse opinion or
disclaimer of opinion, nor were they qualified or modified as to
uncertainty, audit scope or accounting principles.
during the years ended december31, 2001,
2000 and 1999 and through may15, 2002, there were no
disagreements with arthur andersen on any matter of accounting
principle or practice, financial statement disclosure, or
auditing scope or procedure which, if not resolved to arthur
andersens satisfaction, would have caused them to make
reference to the subject matter in connection with their report
on our consolidated financial statements for such years; and
there were no reportable events as defined in
item304(a)(1)(v) of regulations-k.
during the years ended december31, 2001 and
2000 and through may15, 2002, we did not consult with
deloitte& touche with respect to the application of
accounting principles to a specified transaction, either
completed or proposed, or the type of audit opinion that might
be rendered on our consolidated financial statements, or any
other matters or reportable events as set forth in
items304(a)(2)(i) and (ii)of regulations-k.
we reported the change in accountants on a
current report on form8-k filed with the securities and
exchange commission on may16, 2002. the form8-k
contained a letter from arthur andersen llp, addressed to the
sec, stating that arthur andersen llp agreed with the statements
concerning arthur andersen llp contained in the form8-k.
this letter is filed as exhibit16 to this form10-k.
item9a.controls and
procedures
evaluation of disclosure controls and
procedures
as of december31, 2003, an evaluation was
carried out under the supervision and with the participation of
the companys management, including our chief executive
officer and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of the
design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures
(as defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the
securities exchange act of 1934). based upon that evaluation,
the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer
concluded that the design and operation of these disclosure
controls and procedures were effective.
changes in internal control over financial
reporting during the quarter ended december31,
there were no significant changes in our internal
control over financial reporting that occurred during the
companys quarter ended december31, 2003 that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the
registrant
code of ethics
we have adopted a code of business conduct and
ethics which applies to all of our employees and directors. the
code of ethics is published on our website at
www.unitedhealthgroup.com. any amendments to the code of
ethics and waivers of the code of ethics for our chief executive
officer, chief financial officer or controller will be published
on our website. we will provide a copy of our code of business
conduct and ethics, free of charge, upon request. to request a
copy, please submit your request to: unitedhealth group
incorporated, 9900 bren road east, minnetonka, mn 55343, attn:
corporate secretary.
the information included under the headings
election of directors and section16(a)
beneficial ownership reporting compliance in our
definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of
shareholders to be held may12, 2004, is incorporated
herein by reference.
pursuant to general instruction g(3) to
form10-k and instruction3 to item401(b) of
regulations-k, information regarding our executive
officers is provided in item1 of parti of this
annual report on form10-k under the caption
executive officers of the registrant.
item11.
executive compensation
the information included under the heading
executive compensation in our definitive proxy
statement for our annual meeting of shareholders to be held
may12, 2004, is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder
matters
the information included under the heading
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management in our definitive proxy statement for our
annual meeting of shareholders to be held may12, 2004, is
incorporated herein by reference.
equity compensation plan information
(c)
number of
(a)
(b)
securities
number of
weighted-
remaining available
securities to be
average exercise
for future issuance
issued upon
price of
under equity
exercise of
outstanding
compensation plans
outstanding
options,
(excluding
options, warrants
warrants and
securities reflected
plan category
and rights
rights
in column(a))
equity compensation plans approved by
shareholders(1)
86,991,573
$
27.03
46,774,241
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders(2)
total
86,991,573
$
27.03
46,774,241
(1)
consists of the unitedhealth group incorporated
2002 stock incentive plan, as amended, the 1987 supplemental
stock option plan (no additional options may be granted under
this plan), and the 1993 qualified employee stock purchase plan,
as amended.
(2)
excludes 315,112shares underlying stock
options assumed by us in connection with our acquisition of the
companies under whose plans the options originally were granted.
these options have a weighted
table of contents
average exercise price of $13.54 and an average
remaining term of approximately 3.27years. the options are
administered pursuant to the terms of the plan under which the
option originally was granted. no future options or other awards
will be granted under these acquired plans.
(3)
includes 4,916,070shares of common stock
available for future issuance under the employee stock purchase
plan as of december31, 2003, and 41,858,171shares
available under the 2002 stock incentive plan as of
december31, 2003. shares available under the 2002 stock
incentive plan may become the subject of future awards in the
form of stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted
stock, restricted stock units, performance awards and other
stock-based awards, except that only 13,954,700 of these shares
are available for future grants of awards other than stock
options or stock appreciation rights.
item13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
information regarding certain relationships and
related transactions that appears under the heading
certain relationships and transactions in our
definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of
shareholders to be held may12, 2004, is incorporated
herein by reference.
item14.
principal accountant fees and
services
information regarding accountant fees and
services that appears under the heading independent public
auditors in our definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of shareholders to be held may12, 2004, is
incorporated herein by reference.
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules and
reports on form8-k
(a)1.financial statements
the following consolidated financial statements
of the company are included in the companys annual report
to shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
and are incorporated herein by reference:
consolidated statements of operations for the
years ended december31, 2003, 2002 and 2001.
consolidated balance sheets as of
december31, 2003 and 2002.
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity for the years ended december31,
2003, 2002 and 2001.
consolidated statements of cash flows for the
years ended december31, 2003, 2002 and 2001.
notes to consolidated financial statements.
independent auditors reports.
(a)2.financial statement
schedules
none
(a)3.exhibits
(a)
articles of amendment to second restated articles
of incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3(a) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2001)
(b)
articles of merger amending the articles of
incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3(a) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1999)
table of contents
(c)
second restated articles of incorporation of the
company (incorporated by reference to exhibit3(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1996)
(d)
second amended and restated bylaws of the company
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3(d) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2002)
(a)
senior indenture, dated as of november15,
1998, between the company and the bank of newyork
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to the
companys registration statement on forms-3 (sec file
no.333-44569))
(b)
amendment, dated as of november6, 2000, to
senior indenture, dated as of november15, 1998, between
the company and the bank of newyork (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.1 to the companys quarterly
report on form10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2001)
(c)
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of
regulations-k, copies of instruments defining the rights
of certain holders of long-term debt are not filed. the company
agrees to furnish copies thereof to the securities and exchange
commission upon request.
*10
(a)
unitedhealth group incorporated 2002 stock
incentive plan, amended and restated effective may15, 2002
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2002)
*10
(b)
unitedhealth group incorporated executive
incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(b)
to the companys annual report on form10-k for the
year ended december31, 2002)
*10
(c)
unitedhealth group executive savings plans (1998
statement)(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(e) to
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2001)
*10
(d)
first amendment to unitedhealth group executive
savings plans (1998 statement)
*10
(e)
unitedhealth group executive savings plans (2004
statement)
*10
(f)
unitedhealth group directors compensation
deferral plan (2002 statement) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(d) of the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2002)
*10
(g)
first amendment to unitedhealth group
directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement)
*10
(h)
employment agreement, dated as of
october13, 1999, between united healthcare corporation and
william w. mcguire,m.d. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(f) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1999)
*10
(i)
letter to william w. mcguire,m.d., dated as
of february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(h) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10
(j)
employment agreement dated as of october13,
1999, between united healthcare corporation and stephen j.
hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(g) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1999)
*10
(k)
letter to stephen j. hemsley, dated as of
february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(j) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10
(l)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare
services,inc. and robert j. sheehy, as amended
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(l) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2001)
table of contents
*10
(m)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare
services,inc. and lois e. quam, as amended, and memorandum
of understanding, effective as of october11, 1999, between
lois e. quam and united healthcare services,inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(l) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10
(n)
employment agreement, dated as of october1,
1998, between united healthcare services,inc. and patrick
j. erlandson (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(m) to
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10
(o)
employment agreement, dated as of october1,
1998, as amended, between united healthcare services,inc.
and david s. wichmann
*10
(p)
employment agreement, dated as of may20,
1998, between united healthcare services,inc. and r.
channing wheeler (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(c) to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 1998)
*10
(q)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare
services,inc. and david j. lubben, as amended
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(p) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
(r)
aarp health insurance agreement by and among
american association of retired persons, trustees of the aarp
insurance plan and united healthcare insurance company dated as
of february26, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(p) to the companys annual report on
form10-k/ a for the year ended december31, 1996)
(s)
first amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10(a) to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the quarter period ended
june30, 1998)
(t)
second amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10(b) to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the quarter ended
june30, 1998)
(u)
amendments to the aarp health insurance agreement
by and among american association of retired persons, trustees
of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare insurance
company (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(s) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2002)
(v)
amendments to the aarp health insurance agreement
by and between aarp services,inc. and united healthcare
insurance company, entered into between april and october 2003
(w)
information technology services agreement between
united healthcare services,inc. and unisys corporation
dated june1, 1996 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 1998)
(x)
amendments to the information technology services
agreement between united healthcare services,inc. and
unisys corporation (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(u) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2002)
(y)
information technology services agreement between
united healthcare services,inc. and international business
machines corporation dated as of february1, 2003
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10 to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended march31, 2003)
(z)
amendment#1 to the information technology
services agreement between united healthcare services,inc.
and international business machines corporation, dated
december19, 2003
statement regarding computation of per share
earnings (incorporated by reference to the information contained
under the heading net earnings per common share in
note2 to the notes to consolidated financial statements
included in the companys annual report to shareholders for
the fiscal year ended december31, 2003 and which is
included as part of exhibit13 hereto)
table of contents
portions of the companys annual report to
shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
letter from arthur andersen llp to the securities
and exchange commission dated may17, 2002 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit16 to the companys current
report on form8-k/ a filed on may17, 2002)
subsidiaries of the company
independent auditors consent
powers of attorney
certifications pursuant to section302 of
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certifications pursuant to section906 of
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
pursuant to rule24b-2 of the securities
exchange act of 1934, as amended, confidential portions of these
exhibits have been deleted and filed separately with the
securities and exchange commission pursuant to a request for
confidential treatment.
*
denotes management contracts and compensation
plans in which certain directors and named executive officers
participate and which are being filed pursuant to
item601(b)(10)(iii)(a) of regulations-k.
(b)reports on form8-k
the following current reports on form8-k
were filed or furnished, as applicable, during the last fiscal
quarter of 2003.
8-k furnished october16, 2003, together
with a press release, announcing third quarter 2003 earnings
results, under item9 regulationfd
disclosure and item12 results of operations
and financial condition.
8-k filed october27, 2003, together with a
press release and agreement and plan of merger, announcing that
the company entered into an agreement and plan of merger with
mid atlantic medical services,inc., under item2
other events and required fd disclosure.
8-k furnished november19, 2003, together
with a press release, announcing an investor conference and
confirmation of earnings, under item9
regulationfd disclosure.
8-k filed december3, 2003, together with a
press release, underwriting agreement and related documents,
announcing the issuance of debt securities, under item5
other events.
8-k furnished december4, 2003, announcing
the voluntary withdrawal of pre-merger notification and report
form under the hart-scott-rodino antitrustimprovements
act, under item9 regulationfd disclosure.
8-k furnished december12, 2003, announcing
upcoming meetings with investors and analysts, under item9
regulationfd disclosure.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
unitedhealth group incorporated
by
/s/ william w. mcguire, m.d.
william w. mcguire, m.d.
chairman and chief executive officer
dated: march15, 2004
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ william w. mcguire, m.d.
william w. mcguire,m.d.
director, chief executive officer (principal
executive officer)
march15, 2004
/s/ patrick j. erlandson
patrick j. erlandson
chief financial officer (principal financial and
accounting officer)
march15, 2004
*
william c. ballard,jr.
director
march15, 2004
*
richard t. burke
director
march15, 2004
*
stephen j. hemsley
director
march15, 2004
*
james a. johnson
director
march15, 2004
*
thomas h. kean
director
march15, 2004
*
douglas w. leatherdale
director
march15, 2004
*
mary o. mundinger
director
march15, 2004
*
robert l. ryan
director
march15, 2004
table of contents
signature
title
date
*
donna e. shalala
director
march15, 2004
*
william g. spears
director
march15, 2004
*
gail r. wilensky
director
march15, 2004
*by
/s/ david j. lubben
david j. lubben
as attorney-in-fact
table of contents
exhibit index
number
description
(a)
articles of amendment to second restated articles
of incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3(a) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2001)
(b)
articles of merger amending the articles of
incorporation of the company (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3(a) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1999)
(c)
second restated articles of incorporation of the
company (incorporated by reference to exhibit3(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1996)
(d)
second amended and restated bylaws of the company
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3(d) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2002)
(a)
senior indenture, dated as of november15,
1998, between the company and the bank of newyork
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to the
companys registration statement on forms-3 (sec file
no.333-44569))
(b)
amendment, dated as of november6, 2000, to
senior indenture, dated as of november15, 1998, between
the company and the bank of newyork (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.1 to the companys quarterly
report on form10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2001)
(c)
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of
regulations-k, copies of instruments defining the rights
of certain holders of long-term debt are not filed. the company
agrees to furnish copies thereof to the securities and exchange
commission upon request.
*10
(a)
unitedhealth group incorporated 2002 stock
incentive plan, amended and restated effective may15, 2002
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(a) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2002)
*10
(b)
unitedhealth group incorporated executive
incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(b)
to the companys annual report on form10-k for the
year ended december31, 2002)
*10
(c)
unitedhealth group executive savings plans (1998
statement)(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(e) to
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2001)
*10
(d)
first amendment to unitedhealth group executive
savings plans (1998 statement)
*10
(e)
unitedhealth group executive savings plans (2004
statement)
*10
(f)
unitedhealth group directors compensation
deferral plan (2002 statement)(incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(d) of the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2002)
*10
(g)
first amendment to unitedhealth group
directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement)
*10
(h)
employment agreement, dated as of
october13, 1999, between united healthcare corporation and
william w. mcguire,m.d. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(f) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1999)
*10
(i)
letter to william w. mcguire,m.d., dated as
of february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(h) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10
(j)
employment agreement dated as of october13,
1999, between united healthcare corporation and stephen j.
hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(g) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1999)
*10
(k)
letter to stephen j. hemsley, dated as of
february13, 2001, regarding employment agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(j) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
table of contents
number
description
*10
(l)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998 , between united healthcare
services,inc. and robert j. sheehy, as amended
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(l) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2001)
*10
(m)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare
services,inc. and lois e. quam, as amended, and memorandum
of understanding, effective as of october11, 1999, between
lois e. quam and united healthcare services,inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(l) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10
(n)
employment agreement, dated as of october1,
1998, between united healthcare services,inc. and patrick
j. erlandson (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(m) to
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
*10
(o)
employment agreement, dated as of october1,
1998, as amended, between united healthcare services,inc.
and david s. wichmann
*10
(p)
employment agreement, dated as of may20,
1998, between united healthcare services,inc. and r.
channing wheeler (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(c) to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 1998)
*10
(q)
employment agreement, dated as of
october16, 1998, between united healthcare
services,inc. and david j. lubben, as amended
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10(p) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2000)
(r)
aarp health insurance agreement by and among
american association of retired persons, trustees of the aarp
insurance plan and united healthcare insurance company dated as
of february26, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(p) to the companys annual report on
form10-k/ a for the year ended december31, 1996)
(s)
first amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10(a) to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the quarter period ended
june30, 1998)
(t)
second amendment to the aarp health insurance
agreement by and among american association of retired persons,
trustees of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare
insurance company effective january1, 1998 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10(b) to the companys
quarterly report on form10-q for the quarter ended
june30, 1998)
(u)
amendments to the aarp health insurance agreement
by and among american association of retired persons, trustees
of the aarp insurance plan and united healthcare insurance
company (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(s) to the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 2002)
(v)
amendments to the aarp health insurance agreement
by and between aarp services,inc. and united healthcare
insurance company, entered into between april and october 2003
(w)
information technology services agreement between
united healthcare services,inc. and unisys corporation
dated june1, 1996 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10 to the companys quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 1998)
(x)
amendments to information technology services
agreement between united healthcare services,inc. and
unisys corporation (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10(u) to the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2002)
(y)
information technology services agreement between
united healthcare services,inc. and international business
machines corporation dated as of february1, 2003
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10 to the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended march31, 2003)
(z)
amendment#1 to the information technology
services agreement between united healthcare services,inc.
and international business machines corporation, dated
december19, 2003
table of contents
number
description
statement regarding computation of per share
earnings (incorporated by reference to the information contained
under the heading net earnings per common share in
note2 to the notes to consolidated financial statements
included in the companys annual report to shareholders for
the fiscal year ended december31, 2003 and which is
included as part of exhibit13 hereto)
portions of the companys annual report to
shareholders for the fiscal year ended december31, 2003
letter from arthur andersen llp to the securities
and exchange commission dated may17, 2002 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit16 to the companys current
report on form8-k/ a filed on may17, 2002)
subsidiaries of the company
independent auditors consent
powers of attorney
certifications pursuant to section302 of
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certifications pursuant to section906 of
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
pursuant to rule24b-2 of the securities
exchange act of 1934, as amended, confidential portions of these
exhibits have been deleted and filed separately with the
securities and exchange commission pursuant to a request for
confidential treatment.
*
denotes management contracts and compensation
plans in which certain directors and named executive officers
participate and which are being filed pursuant to
item601(b)(10)(iii)(a) of regulations-k.
