10-k
d10k.htm
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2006
form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2006
table of contents
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549   form 10-k   (mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2006  or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934  commission file number: 1-10864   unitedhealth group incorporated  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
minnesota
41-1321939
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
unitedhealth group center 9900 bren road east minnetonka, minnesota
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (952)936-1300   securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
common stock, $.01 par value
new york stock exchange, inc.
(title of each class)
(name of each exchange on which registered)
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none   indicate by check mark if the registrant is a
well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.yesnox  indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act.yesnox  indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all
reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90days.yesxno  indicate by checkmark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is not contained
herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):
large accelerated filerx
accelerated filer
non-accelerated filer
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesnox  the aggregate market value of voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of june30, 2006, was approximately $55,976,249,541 (based on the last
reported sale price of $44.78 per share on june30, 2006, on the new york stock exchange).*  as of february15, 2007, there were 1,354,320,209
shares of the registrants common stock, $.01 par value per share, issued and outstanding.  note that in part iii of this report on form 10-k, we
incorporate by reference certain information from our definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held on may29, 2007. this document will be filed with the securities and exchange commission (sec) within
the time period permitted by the sec. the sec allows us to disclose important information by referring to it in that manner. please refer to such information.
*
only shares of voting stock held beneficially by directors, executive officers and subsidiaries of the company have been excluded in determining this number.
table of contents
table of contents
page
explanatory note
part i
item1.
business
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
part iii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships, related transactions and director independence
item14.
principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
exhibit index
table of contents
explanatory note  in this form 10-k, unitedhealth group incorporated (unitedhealth group or the
company) is restating its consolidated balance sheet as of december31, 2005, and the related consolidated statements of operations, changes in shareholders equity and cash flows for each of the fiscal years ended
december31, 2005 and december31, 2004 and quarterly financial data for the quarter ended december31, 2005.  this form 10-k also reflects
the restatement of selected financial data in item6 for the fiscal years ended december31, 2005, 2004, 2003 and 2002, and the amendment of managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations presented in the companys form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2005 as it related to the fiscal years ended december31, 2005 and december31, 2004.  immediately prior to the filing of this form 10-k, the company filed an amended quarterly report on form10-q/a for the quarter ended march31, 2006 and
quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30, 2006. these forms 10-q/a and 10-q contain restated financial information for the first three fiscal quarters of 2005 and the quarter ended march31,
2006.  previously filed annual reports on form 10-k and quarterly reports on form 10-q (other than for the quarter ended march31, 2006, which has
been amended by the form 10-q/a) have not been amended and should not be relied upon.  background of the restatement  in march 2006, media reports questioned whether a number of companies, including unitedhealth group, had engaged in backdating stock option grants. shortly thereafter,
the company was notified that the securities and exchange commission (the sec) had commenced an inquiry into the companys historic practices concerning stock option grants.  on april4, 2006, the companys board of directors (the board) created an independent committee comprised of three independent directors to review
the companys option grant practices over the period from 1994 through 2005 (the independent review period). the independent committee engaged the law firm of wilmer cutler pickering hale and dorr llp (wilmerhale) as
counsel for its independent review, and wilmerhale retained independent accounting advisors. wilmerhale has advised that, in the course of its review, it examined physical and electronic documents comprising more than 26million pages of
material and conducted over 80 interviews.  wilmerhales report of its findings (the wilmerhale report) was furnished to the board and
publicly issued on october15, 2006. the complete text of the wilmerhale report is available on the companys web site, www.unitedhealthgroup.com, and is included as an exhibit to the companys current report on form 8-k filed with
the sec on october16, 2006.  after substantially completing its analysis of the accounting adjustments necessary to reflect the findings of the
wilmerhale report, on november8, 2006, the company filed with the sec a current report on form 8-k reporting managements conclusion, which the audit committee of the board had approved, that  due solely to the companys
historic stock option practices  the companys financial statements for the fiscal years ended december31, 1994 through 2005, the interim periods contained therein, the quarter ended march31, 2006 and all earnings and press
releases, including for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30, 2006, and similar communications issued by the company for such periods, and the related reports of the companys independent registered public accounting
firm, should no longer be relied upon. the form 8-k also reported that management had re-evaluated its assessment of the companys internal controls over financial reporting and had concluded that, as of december31, 2005, the company had
a material weakness solely relating to stock option plan administration and accounting for and disclosure of stock option grants.
table of contents
the form 8-k also disclosed that certain of the companys current and former senior executives had agreed to
increase the exercise price of all stock options granted to that executive with stated grant dates between 1994 and 2002 to eliminate any financial benefit resulting from what the wilmerhale report concluded was the likely backdating of grants that
they received.  after completing its internal review of the accounting treatment for all option grants, and following consultation on certain interpretive
accounting issues with the office of the chief accountant of the sec, management has concluded, and the audit committee of the board has approved the conclusion, that the company used incorrect measurement dates and made other errors described below
in accounting for stock option grants and, accordingly, that the companys previously issued financial statements should be restated in this form 10-k.  summary of the restatement adjustments  as of january1, 2006, the company adopted statement of financial accounting standards
no.123 (revised 2004), share-based payment (fas 123r), using the modified retrospective transition method. under this method, all prior period financial statements are required to be restated to recognize compensation cost in the
amounts historically disclosed in our consolidated financial statements under statement of financial accounting standards no.123, accounting for stock-based compensation (fas 123). prior to january1, 2006, the company
accounted for share-based compensation granted under its stock option plans using the recognition and measurement provisions of accounting principles board opinion no.25, accounting for stock issued to employees (apb 25). under apb
25, a company was not required to recognize compensation expense for stock options issued to employees if the exercise price of the stock options was at least equal to the quoted market price of the companys common stock on the
measurement date. apb 25 defined the measurement date as the first date on which both the number of shares an individual employee was entitled to receive and the option or purchase price, if any, were known.  the restatement in this form 10-k principally reflects additional stock-based compensation expense and related tax effects under both fas 123r, the companys
current accounting method, and apb 25, the companys historical accounting method, relating to the companys historic stock option practices. the restatement also reflects certain other accounting adjustments, including adjustments
unrelated to historic stock option practices, which are not material either individually or in the aggregate to the current or prior periods.  the
principal components of the restatement are as follows:  revised measurement dates. based on all available evidence, the company applied the
methodologies described below to determine the appropriate measurement dates under both fas123 and apb25 for grants in the following categories: (1)grants of approximately 80 million shares on a split-adjusted basis to
section16 officers (section 16 grants); (2)grants of approximately 260 million shares on a split-adjusted basis to middle management and senior management employees (broad-based grants); and (3)grants of
approximately 50 million shares on a split-adjusted basis in connection with the hiring or promotion of employees (new hire and promotion grants). as a result of this analysis, the company has determined that, in most cases, the stated
grant date was not the correct measurement date.
section16 grants  section16 grants, generally made to eight to twelve officers, required approval by the compensation and human resources
committee of the board (the compensation committee).  for the majority of section16 grants, compensation
committee approval was reflected in written actions. the wilmerhale report concluded that the written actions were generally executed subsequent to the stated grant dates. (under minnesota corporate law, it is permissible to make a written action
effective as of a date other than the date on which the last of the required signers affixes his or her signature, even if that effective date is before the last signature affixed.) based on the available evidence, the company has determined that
the appropriate measurement date for each of these section16 grants is the earlier of (a)the date on which a form 4 (or other statement of changes in beneficial ownership) was filed with the sec with respect to a
table of contents
particular officers grant or (b)the date on which the written action with respect to that grant was likely executed by a majority of the members
of the compensation committee.  as to certain other section16 grants, compensation committee approval occurred at a meeting or there
was general compensation committee approval of the section16 grant together with a delegation to the chairman of the compensation committee to determine the final amount of stock options, grant date and exercise price for each section16
officer receiving options. the company has determined, based on all available evidence, that the appropriate measurement date for these section16 grants is the earlier of (a)the date on which a form 4 (or other statement of changes in
beneficial ownership) was filed with the sec with respect to a particular officers grant or (b)the date on which a resolution with respect to that grant was adopted at a meeting of the compensation committee or a decision was made by the
chairman of the compensation committee, if so delegated.  for option grants with stated grant dates in october 1999 that were made in
connection with the entry of employment agreements for our former chief executive officer and our current chief executive officer (both of whom had been employed by the company prior to that date), the company has determined that the appropriate
measurement date is the date on which the employment agreements were executed on behalf of the company. with respect to stock option grants with a stated grant date in october 1999 that represented the number of additional stock options necessary to
equal the minimum annual stock option grant provided for pursuant to each such employment agreement, the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date is the last day of 1999, the calendar year in which the company was contractually
obligated to make the grants.
broad-based grants  between 1,500 and 4,000 middle and senior management employees periodically and customarily received options. as described in the
wilmerhale report, our former chief executive officer, acting pursuant to authority delegated to him by the compensation committee, chose the grant dates and overall amounts for broad-based grants and ultimately reflected the broad-based grants in
ceo certificates.  the company followed separate allocation processes to determine the particular recipients and
individual option amounts of grants to middle management employees and senior management employees. in the majority of broad-based grants, the process of allocating stock option grants among individual employees in both middle management and senior
management continued beyond the stated grant date. after the date on which substantially all granting activities were completed, there was an insignificant number of changes to option awards attributable to circumstances such as the effective
cancellation of a grant because of an employees termination, administrative error corrections, promotion or individual performance reassessment.  based on all available evidence, the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date for broad-based grants was the later of the following two dates: (a)the date on which the evidence identified by
the company indicated that a communication to or from our former chief executive officer refers to a particular grant, or the grant was presented to the compensation committee or (b)the date on which the allocation of the options to individual
employees and grant process associated with the broad-based grant was substantially complete. where information is not available to evidence either (a)or (b)above, the company has determined the appropriate measurement date to be the
date on which the company determined, based upon all available evidence, that the ceo certificate for such grant was likely executed. where option award amounts changed subsequent to the date the allocation process was substantially complete, the
company has determined that each award that was changed is a separate grant with its own measurement date and should not be considered indicative that the granting process was not complete.
new hire and promotion grants  during the independent review period, the company granted stock options to approximately 2,500 employees in connection
with their hire or promotion (new hire and promotion grants).  for new hire and promotion grants made prior to
2002, the company typically chose grant dates by determining the lowest closing price of the companys common stock between the date of an event in
table of contents
the recruitment of the newly hired employee (e.g., date of first contact, date of an offer letter) or promotion of the employee and the end of the quarter in
which the employee started work or was promoted. as a result of this practice, some employees received stock options with grant dates that were earlier than that employees start date. in 2002, the company changed to a practice of determining
grant dates for new hires and promotions to be the date of the lowest closing price of the companys common stock between the start date of employment or date of promotion and the end of the quarter in which the employee started work or was
promoted. the company historically used these stated grant dates as the measurement dates for accounting purposes.  the company has
concluded that the measurement dates used with respect to nearly all of the new hire and promotion grants during the independent review period were not correct because the companys practice was to determine grant dates with the benefit of
hindsight. the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date for each new hire and promotion grant was the date on which the company set the terms of the award or, if the company could not identify such date based on all available
evidence, the last date of the fiscal quarter in which a particular new hire or promotion grant was made.  1999 grant of supplemental
options. in the fourth quarter of 1999, following a decline in its stock price, the company granted supplemental stock options to acquire 2.2million shares of company common stock (17.6 million shares on a split-adjusted
basis) to a broad group of employees, including our former chief executive officer and other section16 officers. the supplemental options were granted in connection with the suspension of the vesting and exercisability of an equal number of
options with exercise prices above $46.50 ($5.8125 on a split-adjusted basis) that had previously been granted to those employees (the suspended options). the supplemental options had a stated grant date of october13, 1999 and an
exercise price equal to $40.125 ($5.0156 on a split-adjusted basis).  after taking into account all available evidence regarding the suspended options, the
company has concluded that, under apb 25, the grant of the supplemental options constituted an effective re-pricing subject to variable accounting for each option until exercise, forfeiture or expiration. additionally, the company has determined
that, under fas 123, the grant of the supplemental options was a modification that required an incremental fair value charge to be recognized over the related vesting period.  2000 reactivation of suspended options. in 2000, the company reactivated the vesting and exercisability of the suspended options. the company has determined that, under apb 25 and fas 123, the
reactivation of the vesting and exercisability of the suspended options was a new stock option grant that should have had a new measurement date, and the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date is the date grantees were again
permitted to exercise their previously vested awards.  cliff vesting options. prior to april 2000, the company granted to employees certain
stock options that vested 100% on the sixth or ninth anniversary of the date of grant (the cliff vesting options). under the terms of the options, the company could elect to accelerate the vesting of all or a portion of the cliff vesting
options at its discretion. the company followed a policy of accelerating the vesting of a consistent percentage of the cliff vesting options, unless the option holder was subject to disciplinary action or performing at a less than satisfactory
level. this resulted in nearly all option holders having their cliff vesting options accelerated so they actually vested as if they had a 20% or 25%per year time-based vesting schedule (i.e., a four-year or five-year vesting period).
grant of cliff vesting options. under apb 25, an award should be accounted for as a performance award if its cliff vesting terms are not considered to be
substantive. based on numerous factors, including evaluation of employee turnover rates, the company has determined that the nine-year vesting term was not substantive in grants after january 1995 to middle management employees. accordingly, these
options should have been subject to variable accounting until each of their vesting dates. with respect to substantially all other cliff vesting options, the company has concluded that the cliff vesting term is substantive.
table of contents
acceleration of cliff vesting options. in accordance with the provisions of financial accounting standards board interpretation no.44, accounting
for certain transactions involving stock compensation (an interpretation of apb opinion no.25) (fin 44), subsequent to july1, 2000, the acceleration of the six- or nine-year cliff vesting term of a stock option
constituted a modification. accordingly, the company should have measured the intrinsic value of the award at the date of the modification and recognized this amount as compensation cost on the termination of employment if, absent the acceleration,
the award would have been forfeited pursuant to its original terms. under fas123, the performance targets were taken into consideration when determining the expected term of the award and therefore the acceleration of vesting was not
considered to be a modification of the terms.  other modifications of option terms. the company has also determined that
certain other actions were taken that resulted in the modification of option terms, as follows:
options modified upon terminations. on approximately 75 occasions from 1998 to 2005, the company entered into amended employment or separation agreements
with employees that resulted in the modification of vesting or cancellation terms of their stock option agreements. under apb 25, the potential compensation expense of the modification should have been measured at the date of the modification and
recognized if the employee ultimately received a benefit on the termination date. under fas 123, the modification should have been recognized at the date of the modification based upon the incremental fair value provided to the employee.
1999 cancellation and reissuance of options. in the fourth quarter of 1999, the company issued stock options to acquire an aggregate of 400,000 shares of
company common stock (3.2 million shares on a split-adjusted basis) to approximately 65 employees in exchange for the cancellation of an equal number of stock options that had previously been granted to those employees at various times earlier in
1999. the reissued stock options had a stated grant date of october13, 1999 and an exercise price equal to $40.125 ($5.0156 on a split-adjusted basis), which was lower than the exercise price of the cancelled options. the company has
determined that, under apb 25, this constituted a re-pricing, resulting in variable accounting for each option until exercise, forfeiture or expiration. additionally, the company has concluded that, under fas 123, this would also be
viewed as a modification to the award and the incremental fair value in addition to the originally measured fair value should have been recognized over the remaining vesting period.  related tax adjustments. the restatement in this form 10-k also reflects the estimated loss of certain tax deductions and additional interest expense
related to the exercise of stock options granted to certain of the companys executive officers that  as a result of the revision of measurement datesno longer qualify as deductible performance-based compensation in accordance with
internal revenue code section162(m).  additional information  note3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements in this form 10-k sets forth, on a year-by-year basis, the impact under fas 123r and apb 25 of recognizing additional stock-based compensation expense and
related tax effects as a result of historic stock option practices.  the company also conducted a sensitivity analysis to assess how the restatement
adjustments described in this form 10-k would have changed under two alternative methodologies for determining measurement dates for stock option grants made during the independent review period. see managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations, presented in item7 of this form 10-k, for information regarding the incremental stock-based compensation cost that would result from using alternate measurement date determination
methodologies. see cautionary statements in item7 for a discussion of certain risk factors related to the companys historic stock option practices.  item9a of this form 10-k describes managements conclusion, in light of the findings of the wilmerhale report and the restatement reflected in this form 10-k and as reported in a current report on form 8-k
filed
table of contents
with the sec on november8, 2006, that the company had a material weakness in internal control over financial reporting solely relating to stock option
plan administration and accounting for and disclosure of stock option grants as of december31, 2005 and that, solely for this reason, its internal control over financial reporting and its disclosure controls and procedures were not effective
as of that date. item9a of this form 10-k further describes the conclusion of the companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer, based upon managements evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of
the companys disclosure controls and procedures as of december31, 2006, that the company has remediated the material weakness in internal control over financial reporting relating to stock option plan administration and accounting for
and disclosure of stock option grants and that the companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective at the reasonable assurance level as of december31, 2006.
table of contents
part i
item1.
business  introduction  overview  unitedhealth group (we, our, or
the company) is a diversified health and well-being company, serving approximately 70million americans. we are focused on improving the american health care system and how it works for multiple, distinct constituencies. we provide
individuals with access to quality, cost-effective health care services and resources through more than 520,000 physicians and other care providers and 4,700 hospitals across the united states.  during 2006, we managed approximately $92 billion in aggregate health care spending on behalf of the constituents and consumers we served. our primary focus is on
improving health care systems by simplifying the administrative components of health care delivery, promoting evidence-based medicine as the standard for care, and providing relevant, actionable data that physicians, health care providers,
consumers, employers and other participants in health care can use to make better, more informed decisions.  through our diversified family of businesses,
we leverage core competencies in advanced technology-based transactional capabilities; health care data, knowledge and information; and health care resource organization and care facilitation to improve access to health and well-being services,
simplify the health care experience, promote quality and make health care more affordable.  our revenues are derived from premium revenues on risk-based
products; fees from management, administrative, technology and consulting services; sales of a wide variety of products and services related to the broad health and well-being industry; and investment and other income. in 2006, we conducted our
business primarily through operating divisions in the following business segments:
uniprise;
health care services, which includes our unitedhealthcare, ovations and americhoice businesses;
specialized care services; and
ingenix.  for a discussion of our financial results
by segment, see item7  managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.  recent
developments  key business developments  the results
of pacificare health systems, inc. (pacificare), which we acquired in december 2005 for total cash and stock consideration of approximately $8.8 billion, were included for the full year 2006. this acquisition significantly strengthened
our resources by enhancing our capabilities on the pacific coast and in other western states and broadening the scope of our product offerings for a host of specialized services.  on january1, 2006, we began serving as a plan sponsor offering medicare part d prescription drug insurance coverage under a contract with the centers for medicare & medicaid services (cms). as of
december31, 2006, we had enrolled approximately 5.7million members in the part d program, including approximately 4.5million in the stand-alone prescription drug plans and approximately 1.2million in medicare advantage
plans incorporating part d coverage.
table of contents
senior leadership changes  during 2006, we made significant changes in our senior management personnel and in the structure and responsibilities of senior management positions, including the following:
stephen j. hemsley, who had been our president and chief operating officer (coo), became our president and chief executive officer (ceo) on november30, 2006.
although it had not been planned that mr. hemsley would succeed our former ceo in 2006, the decision by our board of directors to select mr.hemsley to become ceo was consistent with our ceo succession plan, which is reviewed annually by the
board of directors.
our board of directors appointed george l. mikan iii (g. mike mikan) to serve as our new executive vice president and chief financial officer (cfo) on
november7, 2006, and appointed eric s. rangen to serve as our new senior vice president and chief accounting officer on december15, 2006.
on december1, 2006, we announced changes to the structure of the companys executive management. richard h. anderson, lois e. quam and david s. wichmann
were each promoted to the position of president of one of our three new business groups: commercial services group; public and senior markets group; and individual and employer markets group. each of these executive officers was also assigned
enterprise-wide functional responsibilities at the corporate level. the purpose of these changes is to focus greater attention and resources on critical areas of the company, facilitate communication and coordination across the various businesses,
and increase executive visibility of and input into the corporate decision-making process.
new senior management positions of chief legal officer, chief administrative officer, chief ethics officer, chief accounting officer, and secretary to the board of
directors were created to strengthen the companys overall management oversight, control, depth and expertise. eric rangen was appointed as our chief accounting officer, forrest burke was appointed acting general counsel, william bojan was
appointed chief ethics officer and searches are underway to fill the remaining new positions.  business organization changes
consistent with the structural changes to the companys executive management, we began transitioning our operating structure into the following
three new market groups in 2007:
commercial services group, which will include specialized care services, ingenix and exante financial services;
individual and employer markets group, which will include unitedhealthcare and uniprise; and
public and senior markets group, which will include ovations and americhoice.  this initial operating structure will continue to evolve as we add new executive positions and realign enterprise-wide functions to strengthen our capabilities and performance. we have not currently realigned assets
or changed the way our senior executives evaluate financial performance. therefore, until we have completed the transition of our operating structure into the new market groups, we will continue to describe and report our results of operations in
our earnings releases and sec filings (including this form 10-k) using the four business segments described in   overview above.  executive compensation and corporate governance  in addition to the senior leadership and business organization changes, our board of
directors implemented a number of significant changes in the areas of executive compensation (including controls over equity awards) and corporate governance. the compensation discussion and analysis and corporate governance
sections of our definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held on may29, 2007 will contain a detailed description of these changes. see also item 9a of this form 10-k for a discussion of the remediation of our
internal control over financial reporting solely relating to stock option plan administration and accounting for and disclosure of stock option grants.
table of contents
additional information  unitedhealth group incorporated was incorporated in january 1977 in minnesota. the terms we, our or the company refer to unitedhealth group incorporated and our subsidiaries. our executive offices are
located at unitedhealth group center, 9900 bren road east, minnetonka, minnesota 55343; our telephone number is (952)936-1300.  you can access our
web site at www.unitedhealthgroup.com to learn more about our company. from that site, you can download and print copies of our annual reports to shareholders, annual reports on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, and current reports
on form 8-k, along with amendments to those reports. you can also download from our web site our articles of incorporation, bylaws and corporate governance policies, including our principles of governance, board of directors committee charters, and
code of business conduct and ethics. we make periodic reports and amendments available, free of charge, as soon as reasonably practicable after we file or furnish these reports to the securities and exchange commission (sec). we will also provide a
copy of any of our corporate governance policies published on our web site free of charge, upon request. to request a copy of any of these documents, please submit your request to: unitedhealth group incorporated, 9900 bren road east, minnetonka, mn
55343, attn: corporate secretary.  our transfer agent, wells fargo, can help you with a variety of shareholder-related services, including change of
address, lost stock certificates, transfer of stock to another person and other administrative services. you can write to our transfer agent at: wells fargo shareowner services, p.o. box 64854, st. paul, minnesota 55164-0854, email
stocktransfer@wellsfargo.com, or telephone (800)468-9716 or (651)450-4064.  description of business segments
uniprise  uniprise delivers health care and
well-being services nationwide to large national employers, individual consumers and other health care organizations through three related business units: uniprise strategic solutions (uss), definity health and exante financial services (exante).
each business unit works with other unitedhealth group businesses to deliver a complementary and integrated array of services. uss delivers strategic health and well-being solutions to large national employers. definity health provides
consumer-driven health plans and consumer activation services to employers and their employees. as of december31, 2006, uss and definity health served approximately eleven million individuals. exante delivers health-care-focused financial
services for consumers, employers and providers. uniprise also offers transactional processing services to various intermediaries and health care entities. most uniprise products and services are delivered through its affiliates. uniprise provides
administrative and customer care services for certain other businesses of unitedhealth group.  uniprise specializes in large-volume transaction management,
large-scale benefit design and innovative technology solutions that simplify complex administrative processes and promote improved health outcomes. uniprise processes approximately 270million medical benefit claims each year and responds to
approximately 50million service calls annually. uniprise provides comprehensive operational services for independent health plans and third-party administrators, as well as the majority of the commercial health plan consumers served by
unitedhealthcare. uniprise maintains internet-based administrative and financial applications for physician inquiries and transactions, for customer-specific data analysis for employers, and for consumer access to personal health care information
and services.  uss  uss provides comprehensive and customized administrative, benefits and service solutions for large employers and other organizations with more than 5,000 employees in multiple locations. uss customers generally retain the risk of financing
the medical benefits of their employees and their dependents and uss provides coordination and facilitation of medical services; transaction processing; consumer and care provider services; and access to contracted networks of physicians, hospitals
and other health care professionals for a fixed service fee per individual served. as of december31, 2006, uss served approximately 405 employers, including approximately 180 of the fortune 500 companies.
table of contents
definity health  definity health provides innovative consumer health care solutions that enable consumers to take ownership and control of their health care benefits. definity
healths products include high-deductible consumer-driven benefit plans coupled with health reimbursement accounts (hras) or health savings accounts (hsas), and are offered on a self-funded and fully insured basis. definity health is a national
leader in consumer-driven health benefit programs and as of december31, 2006, its products were provided to more than 18,000 group health plans across the unitedhealth group enterprise, including approximately 150 employers in the large group
uss self-funded market.  exante  exante financial services provides health-based financial services for consumers, employers and providers. these financial services are delivered through exante bank, a utah-chartered industrial bank. these financial
services include hsas that consumers can access using a debit card. exantes health benefit card programs include electronic systems for verification of benefit coverage and eligibility and administration of flexible spending accounts (fsas),
hras and hsas. exante also provides extensive electronic payment and statement services for health care providers and payers.  health care services
our health care services segment consists of our unitedhealthcare, ovations and americhoice businesses.  unitedhealthcare  unitedhealthcare offers a comprehensive array of
consumer-oriented health benefit plans and services for public sector, small and mid-sized employers, and individuals nationwide. unitedhealthcare facilitates access to health care services on behalf of nearly 15million americans as of
december31, 2006. with its risk-based product offerings, unitedhealthcare assumes the risk of both medical and administrative costs for its customers in return for a monthly premium, which is typically at a fixed rate for a one-year period.
unitedhealthcare also provides administrative and other management services to customers that self-insure the medical costs of their employees and their dependents, for which unitedhealthcare receives a fixed service fee per individual served. these
customers retain the risk of financing medical benefits for their employees and their dependents, while unitedhealthcare provides coordination and facilitation of medical services, customer and care provider services and access to a contracted
network of physicians, hospitals and other health care professionals. small employer groups are more likely to purchase risk-based products because they are generally unable or unwilling to bear a greater potential liability for health care
expenditures. unitedhealthcare also offers a variety of non-employer based insurance options for purchase by individuals, which are designed to meet the health coverage needs of consumers and their families.  unitedhealthcare offers its products through affiliates that are usually licensed as insurance companies or as health maintenance organizations, depending upon a variety
of factors, including state regulations. unitedhealthcares product strategy centers on several principles: consumer choice, broad access to health professionals, use of data and science to promote better outcomes, quality service and greater
affordability. integrated wellness programs and services help individuals make informed decisions, maintain a healthy lifestyle and optimize health outcomes by coordinating access to care services and providing personalized, targeted education and
information services.  unitedhealthcare arranges for discounted access to care through more than 520,000 physicians and other care providers, and 4,700
hospitals across the united states. the consolidated purchasing capacity represented by the individuals unitedhealth group serves makes it possible for unitedhealthcare to contract for cost-effective access to a large number of conveniently located
care providers. directly or through unitedhealth groups family of companies, unitedhealthcare offers:
a comprehensive range of benefit plans integrating medical, ancillary and alternative care products so customers can choose benefits that are right for them;
table of contents
affordability across a wide product line from essential needs to comprehensive benefit plans, all of which offer access to our broad-based proprietary network with
economic benefits reflective of the aggregate purchasing capacity of our organization;
innovative clinical programs  built around an extensive longitudinal clinical data set and the principles of evidence-based medicine;
access to quality and cost information for physicians and hospitals through the unitedhealth premium program;
care facilitation services that use several identification tools including proprietary predictive technology to identify individuals with significant gaps in care
and unmet needs or risks for potential health problems and then facilitate appropriate interventions;
disease and condition management programs to help individuals address significant, complex disease states;
convenient self-service tools for health transactions and information; and
clinical information that physicians can use to better serve their patients as well as improve their practices.  unitedhealthcares regional and national access to broad, affordable and quality networks of health care providers has advanced over the past three years, with
significant increases in access to services in california, connecticut, delaware, florida, central illinois, northern indiana, iowa, maryland, massachusetts, western michigan, nevada, new hampshire, new jersey, new york, oregon, pennsylvania,
eastern tennessee, virginia, washington, west virginia, wisconsin, and washington dc. unitedhealthcare has also organized health care alliances with select regional not-for-profit health plans to facilitate greater customer access and affordability.
we believe that unitedhealthcares innovation distinguishes its product offerings from the competition. its consumer-oriented health benefits and
services value individual choice and control in accessing health care. unitedhealthcare has programs that provide health education, admission counseling before hospital stays, care advocacy to help avoid delays in patients stays in the
hospital, support for individuals at risk of needing intensive treatment and coordination of care for people with chronic conditions. data-driven networks and clinical management are organized around clinical lines of service such as behavioral
health; cardiology; congenital heart disease; kidney disease; oncology; neuroscience; orthopedics; spine; womens health; primary care and transplantation to provide consumers with the necessary resources and information to make more informed
choices when managing their health. unitedhealthcare also offers comprehensive and integrated pharmaceutical management services that achieve lower costs by using formulary programs that drive better unit costs for drugs, benefit designs that
encourage consumers to use drugs that offer the best value and outcomes, and physician and consumer programs that support the appropriate use of drugs based on clinical evidence.  unitedhealthcares distribution system consists primarily of insurance producers and direct and internet marketing sales in the individual market; insurance producers in the small employer group market; and
producers and other consultant-based or direct sales for large employer and public sector groups. unitedhealthcares direct distribution efforts are generally limited to the individual market, portions of the large employer group and public
sector markets, and cross-selling of specialty products to existing customers.  ovations  ovations provides health and well-being services for individuals age 50 and older, addressing their unique needs for preventive and acute health care services as well as
for services dealing with chronic disease and other specialized issues for older individuals. ovations, through its affiliates, is one of few enterprises fully dedicated to this market segment, providing products and services in all 50 states, the
district of columbia, puerto rico, the u.s. virgin islands, guam and the northern mariana islands. ovations participates nationally in the medicare program, offering a wide-ranging spectrum of medicare products, including medigap products that
table of contents
supplement traditional fee-for-service coverage, more traditional health-plan-type programs under medicare advantage, medicare part d prescription drug
coverage and discount card offerings, and special offerings for chronically ill and medicare and medicaid dual-eligible beneficiaries.  ovations has
extensive capabilities and experience with distribution, including direct marketing to consumers on behalf of its key clients  aarp, the nations largest membership organization dedicated to the needs of people age 50 and over, state and
u.s. government agencies and employer groups. ovations also has distinct pricing, underwriting and clinical program management, and marketing capabilities dedicated to risk-based health products and services in the senior and geriatric markets.
cms is overseeing a multi-year implementation of the 2003 medicare modernization act, including the introduction of the medicare part d prescription drug
benefit in 2006 and a greater diversity in medicares product offerings. we believe that these changes create and expand opportunities for well-organized and focused companies to better serve older americans. we believe that ovations is
well-positioned to respond to these opportunities.  we currently have a number of contracts with cms, which primarily relate to the medicare health benefit
program authorized under the medicare modernization act. beginning january1, 2006, we began serving as a plan sponsor offering medicare part d prescription drug insurance coverage. as a result of this contract and the december 2005 acquisition
of pacificare, premium revenues from cms approximated 26% of our total consolidated revenues as of december 31, 2006, a majority of which were generated by ovations.  insurance solutions  ovations offers a range of health insurance products and services to aarp members,
and has expanded the scope of services and programs offered over the past several years. ovations provides medicare supplement and hospital indemnity insurance from its insurance company affiliates to approximately 3.8million aarp members.
additional ovations services include a nurse healthline service, a lower cost medicare supplement offering that provides consumers with a hospital network and 24-hour access to health care information. ovations also offers an aarp-branded health
insurance program focused on persons between 50 and 64 years of age.  medicare prescription drug benefit (part d)  effective january1, 2006, ovations provides the medicare prescription drug benefit (part d) to beneficiaries throughout the united states and its territories. among
the several part d plans it offers, ovations provides a medicare prescription drug coverage plan branded by aarp. ovations also provides part d drug coverage through its medicare advantage program, special needs plans and stand-alone prescription
drug plans. as of december31, 2006, including pacificare, ovations had enrolled approximately 5.7million members in the part d program, including approximately 4.5million in the stand-alone prescription drug plans and
approximately 1.2million in medicare advantage plans incorporating part d coverage.  secure horizons  the ovations secure horizons division provides health care coverage for the seniors market primarily through the medicare advantage program administered by cms. ovations
offers medicare advantage hmo, preferred provider organization (ppo), special needs plans and private-fee-for-service plans. under the medicare advantage programs, ovations provides health insurance coverage to eligible medicare beneficiaries in
exchange for a fixed monthly premium per member from cms that varies based on the geographic areas in which members reside. most products are offered under the secure horizons by unitedhealthcare brand name. in 2006, ovations
secure horizons expanded its program and now offers medicare advantage products in all 50 states. as of december31, 2006, ovations had approximately 1.4million enrolled individuals in its medicare advantage products, of whom more than
1.2million will receive their part d coverage through secure horizons. ovations began offering a regional ppo medicare advantage plan in three markets on january1, 2006.
table of contents
evercare  through its evercare division, ovations is one of the nations leaders in offering complete, individualized care planning and care benefits for aging, disabled and chronically ill individuals. evercare serves
approximately 124,000 people (including 53,000 with medicare advantage) across the nation in long-term care settings including nursing homes, community-based settings and private homes, as well as through hospice and palliative care. evercare offers
services through innovative care management and clinical programs.  evercare integrates federal, state and private funding through a continuum of products
from special needs plans and long-term care medicaid programs to hospice care, and serves people in 35 markets in home, community and nursing home settings. these services are provided primarily through nurse practitioners, nurses and care managers.
evercare operated special needs plans in 34 states as of december31, 2006.  evercare solutions for caregivers is a comprehensive eldercare service
program providing service coordination, consultation, claim management and information resources nationwide. proprietary, automated medical record software enables the evercare clinical care teams to capture and track patient data and clinical
encounters, creating a comprehensive set of coherent care information that bridges across home, hospital and nursing home care settings for high-risk populations. evercare also operates hospice and palliative care programs in nine states and intends
to expand these products into at least five new markets in 2007.  prescription solutions  prescription solutions offers integrated pharmacy benefit management (pbm) services (including mail order pharmacy services) to approximately 6.6million people, as
of december31, 2006. prescription solutions offers a broad range of innovative programs, products and services designed to enhance clinical outcomes with appropriate financial results for employers and members. the fulfillment capabilities of
prescription solutions are an important strategic component in serving pacificares legacy commercial and senior business, as well as pacificares part d enrollees. effective january1, 2007, prescription solutions began providing pbm
services to an additional four million ovations medicare advantage and stand-alone part d members.  americhoice  americhoice, through its affiliates, provides network-based health and well-being services to beneficiaries of state medicaid, childrens health insurance programs
(chip), and other government-sponsored health care programs. americhoice provides health insurance coverage to eligible medicaid beneficiaries in exchange for a fixed monthly premium per member from the applicable state. americhoice provides
services to approximately 1.4million individuals in 13 states. americhoice also offers government agencies a broad menu of separate management services  including clinical care, consulting and management, pharmacy benefit services and
administrative and technology services  to help them effectively administer their distinct health care delivery systems and benefits for individuals in their programs. americhoice also contracts with cms for the provision of special needs
plans serving individuals dually eligible for medicaid and medicare services. these programs are primarily organized toward enrolling individuals who dually qualify for medicaid and medicare coverage in states where americhoice operates its medicaid
health plans.  americhoices approach is grounded in its belief that health care cannot be provided effectively without considering all of the factors
social, economic, environmental, and physical  that affect a persons life. americhoice coordinates resources among family members, physicians, other health care providers and government and community-based agencies and
organizations to provide continuous and effective care. for members, this means that the americhoice personal care model offers them a holistic approach to health care, emphasizing practical programs to improve their living circumstances as well as
quality medical care and treatment in accessible, culturally sensitive, community-oriented settings. for example, americhoices disease management and outreach programs focus on high-prevalence and debilitating illnesses such as hypertension
and
table of contents
cardiovascular disease, asthma, sickle cell disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (hiv/aids), cancer and
high-risk pregnancy. several of these programs have been developed by americhoice with the help of leading researchers and clinicians at academic medical centers and medical schools.  for physicians, the americhoice personal care model means assistance with coordination of their patients care. americhoice utilizes sophisticated technology to monitor preventive care interventions and
evidence-based treatment protocols to support care management. americhoice utilizes advanced and unique pharmacy services  including benefit design, generic drug programs, drug utilization review and preferred drug list development  to
help optimize the use of appropriate quality pharmaceuticals and concurrently manage pharmacy expenditures to levels appropriate to the specific clinical situations. for state customers, the americhoice personal care model means increased access to
care and improved quality for their beneficiaries, in a measurable system that reduces their administrative burden and lowers their costs.  americhoice
considers a variety of factors in determining in which state programs to participate and on what basis, including the states experience and consistency of support for its medicaid program in terms of service innovation and funding, the
population base in the state, the willingness of the physician/provider community to participate with the americhoice personal care model, and the presence of community-based organizations that can partner with americhoice to meet the needs of its
members. using these criteria, americhoice entered three new markets in 2006, signed an agreement to expand in one existing market in 2007, and is examining several others. conversely, in recent years, americhoice has exited several markets because
of, among other reasons, the lack of consistent direction and support from the sponsoring states.  specialized care services  the specialized care services (scs) companies offer a comprehensive platform of specialty health and wellness and ancillary benefits, services and resources to specific
customer markets nationwide. these products and services include employee benefit offerings, provider networks and related resources focusing on behavioral health and substance abuse, dental, vision, disease management, complex and chronic illness
and care facilitation. the scs companies also offer solutions in the areas of complementary and alternative care, employee assistance, short-term disability, life insurance, work/life balance and health-related information. these services are
designed to simplify the consumer health care experience and facilitate efficient health care delivery.  scss products are marketed under several
different brands through three strategic markets we serve: the employer market for both unitedhealth group customers and unaffiliated parties; the payer market for unitedhealth group health plans, independent health plans, third-party administrators
and reinsurers; and the public sector segment for medicare and state medicaid offerings through partnerships with ovations, americhoice and other intermediaries. scs offers its products both on an administrative fee basis, where it manages and
administers benefit claims for self-insured customers in exchange for a fixed service fee per individual served, and on a risk basis, where scs assumes responsibility for health care and income replacement costs in exchange for a fixed monthly
premium per individual served. the simple, modular service designs offered by scs can be easily integrated to meet varying health plan, employer and consumer needs at a wide range of price points. approximately 53% of the 56million unique
consumers served by scs receive their major medical health benefits from a source other than a unitedhealth group affiliate.  for most of 2006, scs
consisted of three operating groups: specialized health solutions; dental and vision; and group insurance services. in december 2006, group insurance services and dental and vision were combined into the group benefits solutions operating group.
specialized health solutions  the
specialized health solutions operating group provides services and products for benefits commonly found in comprehensive medical benefit plans, as well as a continuum of individualized specialty health and wellness
table of contents
solutions from health information to case and disease management for complex, chronic and rare medical conditions.  united behavioral health (ubh) and its subsidiaries provide employee assistance programs, work/life, behavioral health care, substance abuse programs and psychiatric
disability benefit management services to employers, health plans, labor groups and public payers. ubhs programs assist individuals in managing personal challenges and behavioral health issues while seeking to increase overall health, wellness
and productivity. ubhs customers buy care management services and access to ubhs large national network of 78,000 clinicians and counselors through standard and highly customized behavioral programs. ubh serves 33million
individuals.  acn group (acn) and its affiliates provide benefit administration, and clinical and network management for chiropractic, physical therapy,
occupational therapy and other complementary and alternative care services. acn serves more than 24million consumers through its national network of contracted health professionals.  through optum, scs delivers personalized care and condition management, health assessments, longitudinal care management, disease management, health information
assistance, support and related services including wellness services. utilizing evidence-based medicine, technology and specially trained nurses, optum facilitates effective and efficient health care delivery by helping its 32million consumers
address daily living concerns, make informed health care decisions, and become more effective health care consumers.  united resource networks (urn)
provides support services and access to centers of excellence networks for individuals in need of organ transplantation and those diagnosed with complex cancer, congenital heart disease, kidney disease, infertility and neonatal care
issues. urn provides these services to approximately 50million individuals through 2,800 payers. urn negotiates competitive rates with medical centers that have been designated as centers of excellence based on their satisfaction
of clinical standards, including patient volumes and outcomes, medical team credentials and experience, and patient and family support services.  group benefits solutions  group benefits solutions provides vision, dental, life, critical illness, and
short-term disability benefits along with cost management products and services for governments, health plans and employers through its affiliates and other intermediaries.  spectera provides vision benefits for more than eleven million people enrolled in employer-sponsored and government benefit plans. spectera works to build productive relationships with vision care professionals,
retailers, employer groups and benefit consultants. specteras national network includes more than 24,000 vision professionals.  through
unitedhealthcare dental and other brands (uhd), we provide dental benefit management and related services to sixmillion individuals through a network of approximately 80,000 dentists. uhds products are distributed to commercial and
government markets, both directly and through unaffiliated insurers and its unitedhealth group affiliates.  unimerica workplace benefits provides
integrated short-term disability, critical illness and group life insurance products to employers benefit programs.  national benefit resources (nbr)
distributes and administers medical stop-loss insurance covering self-funded employer benefit plans. through a network of third-party administrators, brokers and consultants, nbr markets stop-loss insurance throughout the united states. nbr also
distributes products and services on behalf of its scs affiliates, urn and optum.
table of contents
ingenix  ingenix
offers database and data management services, software products, publications, consulting services, outsourced services and pharmaceutical development and consulting services on a nationwide and international basis. ingenixs customers include
more than 5,000 hospitals, 250,000 physicians, 1,500 payers and intermediaries, more than 200 fortune 500 companies, and more than 150 life sciences companies, as well as other unitedhealth group businesses. ingenix is engaged in the
simplification of health care administration with information and technology that helps customers accurately and efficiently document, code and bill for the delivery of care services. ingenix is a leader in contract research services, medical
education services, publications, and pharmacoeconomics, outcomes, safety and epidemiology research through its i3 businesses.  ingenixs products and
services are sold primarily through a direct sales force focused on specific customers and market segments across the pharmaceutical, biotechnology, employer, government, hospital, physician and payer market segments. ingenixs products are
also supported and distributed through an array of alliance and business partnerships with other technology vendors, who integrate and interface its products with their applications.  the ingenix companies are divided into two operating groups: information services and pharmaceutical services.  information services  ingenixs diverse product offerings help clients strengthen health care
administration and advance health care outcomes. these products include health care utilization reporting and analytics, physician clinical performance benchmarking, clinical data warehousing, analysis and management responses for medical cost trend
management, decision-support portals for evaluation of health benefits and treatment options, and claims management tools for administrative error and cost reduction. ingenix uses proprietary software applications that manage clinical and
administrative data across diverse information technology environments. ingenix also uses proprietary predictive algorithmic applications to help clients detect and act on repetitive health care patterns in large data sets. ingenix offers complete
electronic data interchange (edi) services helping health care providers and payers decrease costs of claims transmission, payment and reimbursement through both networked and direct connection services.  ingenix provides other services on an outsourced basis, such as verification of physician credentials, provider directories, hedis reporting, and fraud and abuse
detection and prevention services. ingenix also offers consulting services, including actuarial and financial advisory work through its reden& anders division, as well as product development, provider contracting and medical policy
management. ingenix publishes print and electronic media products that provide customers with information regarding medical claims coding, reimbursement, billing and compliance issues.  pharmaceutical services  ingenixs i3 division helps to coordinate and manage clinical trials for products in development for pharmaceutical, biotechnology and medical device manufacturers. ingenixs focus is to help pharmaceutical and biotechnology
customers effectively and efficiently get drug and medical device data to appropriate regulatory bodies and to improve health outcomes through integrated information, analysis and technology. ingenixs capabilities and efforts focus on the
entire range of product assessment, through commercialization of life-cycle management services  pipeline assessment, market access and product positioning, clinical trials, economic, epidemiology, safety and outcomes research, and medical
education. ingenixs services include global contract research services, protocol development, investigator identification and training, regulatory assistance, project management, data management, biostatistical analysis, quality assurance,
medical writing and staffing resource services. ingenixs pharmaceutical contract research operations are in more than 50 countries and are therapeutically focused on oncology, the central nervous system, respiratory and infectious diseases,
and endocrinology. ingenix uses comprehensive, science-based evaluation and analysis and benchmarking services to support pharmaceutical, biotechnology and medical device development. ingenix also helps educate providers about pharmaceutical
products through medical symposia, product communications and scientific publications.
table of contents
government regulation  most of our health and well-being services are regulated by federal and state regulatory agencies that generally have discretion to issue regulations and interpret and enforce laws and rules. this regulation can vary
significantly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. changes in applicable laws and regulations are continually being considered, and the interpretation of existing laws and rules also may change periodically. complying with new laws and rules, or
changes in the interpretation of existing laws and rules, could negatively impact our business. we believe we are in compliance in all material respects with the applicable laws, rules and regulations.  federal regulation  we are subject to federal regulation.
ovations medicare business and americhoices medicaid business are regulated by cms. cms has the right to audit performance to determine compliance with cms contracts and regulations and the quality of care being given to medicare
beneficiaries. our health care services segment, through americhoice, also has medicaid and state childrens health insurance program contracts that are subject to federal and state regulations regarding services to be provided to medicaid
enrollees, payment for those services, and other aspects of these programs. there are many regulations surrounding medicare and medicaid compliance. in addition, the portion of ingenixs business that includes clinical research is subject to
regulation by the u.s. food and drug administration.  state regulation  americhoice is subject to regulation by state medicaid agencies that oversee the provision of benefits by americhoice to its beneficiaries. in addition, all of the states in which our subsidiaries offer insurance and
health maintenance organization products regulate those products and operations. these states require periodic financial reports and establish minimum capital or restricted cash reserve requirements. health plans and insurance companies are
regulated under state insurance holding company regulations. such regulations generally require registration with applicable state departments of insurance and the filing of reports that describe capital structure, ownership, financial condition,
certain intercompany transactions and general business operations. some state insurance holding company laws and regulations require prior regulatory approval of acquisitions and material intercompany transfers of assets, as well as transactions
between the regulated companies and their parent holding companies or affiliates. these laws may restrict the ability of our regulated subsidiaries to pay dividends. in addition, some of our business and related activities may be subject to ppo,
managed care organization (mco), utilization review (ur) or third-party administrator-related regulations and licensure requirements. these regulations differ from state to state, but may contain network, contracting, product and rate, financial and
reporting requirements. there are laws and regulations that set specific standards for delivery of services, payment of claims, fraud prevention, protection of consumer health information and covered benefits and services. our pharmacy activities
are generally regulated at the state level and may require registration or licensure with certain state boards of pharmacy. additionally, different approaches to state and federal privacy and insurance regulation and varying enforcement philosophies
in the different states may adversely affect our ability to standardize our products and services across state lines.  in connection with the pacificare
acquisition, which closed on december20, 2005, as typically occurs in connection with a transaction of this size, certain of our subsidiaries entered into various commitments with state regulatory departments, principally in california. we
believe that none of these commitments will materially affect our operations.  hipaa  the administrative simplification provisions of the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996, as amended (hipaa), apply to both the group and individual health insurance markets, including
self-funded employee benefit plans. hipaa requires guaranteed health care coverage for small employers and certain eligible individuals. it also requires guaranteed renewability for most employers and individuals and limits exclusions based on
preexisting conditions. federal regulations promulgated pursuant to hipaa include
table of contents
minimum standards for electronic transactions and code sets, and for the privacy and security of protected health information. new standards for national
provider identifiers are currently being implemented by regulators.  erisa  the employee retirement income security act of 1974, as amended (erisa), regulates how goods and services are provided to or through certain types of employer-sponsored health benefit plans. erisa is a set of laws and
regulations subject to periodic interpretation by the u.s. department of labor as well as the federal courts. erisa places controls on how our business units may do business with employers who sponsor employee benefit health plans, particularly
those that maintain self-funded plans. regulations established by the u.s. department of labor provide additional rules for claims payment and member appeals under health care plans governed by erisa. additionally, some states require licensure or
registration of companies providing third-party claims administration services for health care plans.  audits and investigations  we typically have been and are currently involved in various governmental investigations, audits and reviews. these include routine, regular and special investigations,
audits and reviews by cms, state insurance and health and welfare departments, state attorneys general, the office of the inspector general, the office of personnel management, the office of civil rights, u.s. congressional committees, the u.s.
department of justice and u.s. attorneys. such government actions can result in assessment of damages, civil or criminal fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including loss of licensure or exclusion from participation in government programs. we
also are subject to a formal investigation of our historic stock option practices by the sec, internal revenue service, u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york, minnesota attorney general, and a related review by the special litigation
committee of the company, and we have received requests for documents from u.s. congressional committees, as described in item7legal matters. with the exception of the civil investigative demand from the minnesota attorney
general, we generally have cooperated and will continue to cooperate with the regulatory authorities. at the conclusion of these regulatory inquiries, we could be subject to regulatory or criminal fines or penalties as well as other sanctions or
other contingent liabilities, which could be material.  international regulation  some of our business units, including ingenixs i3 business, have international operations. these international operations are subject to different legal and regulatory requirements in different jurisdictions,
including various tax, tariff and trade regulations, as well as employment, intellectual property and investment rules and laws.  competition  as a diversified health and well-being services company, we operate in highly competitive markets. our competitors include
managed health care companies, insurance companies, third-party administrators and business services outsourcing companies, health care providers that have formed networks to directly contract with employers, specialty benefit providers, government
entities, disease management companies, and various health information and consulting companies. for our uniprise and health care services businesses, competitors include aetna inc., cigna corporation, coventry health care, inc., humana inc., kaiser
permanente, and wellpoint, inc., numerous for-profit and not-for-profit organizations operating under licenses from the blue cross blue shield association and other enterprises concentrated in more limited geographic areas. our specialized care
services and ingenix business segments also compete with a number of other businesses. new entrants into the markets in which we compete, as well as consolidation within these markets, also contribute to a competitive environment. we believe the
principal competitive factors that can impact our businesses relate to the sales, marketing and pricing of our products and services; product innovation; consumer satisfaction; the level and quality of products and services; care delivery; network
capabilities; market share; product distribution systems; efficiency of administration operations; financial strength and marketplace reputation.
table of contents
employees  as of december31, 2006, we employed approximately 58,000 individuals. we believe our employee relations are generally positive.  executive officers of the registrant  the following sets forth certain information regarding our executive officers as of february15,
2007, including the business experience of each executive officer during the past five years:
name
age
position
firstelectedas executiveofficer
stephen j. hemsley
president and chief executive officer
g. mike mikan
executive vice president and chief financial officer
richard h. anderson
executive vice president of unitedhealth group and president of commercial services group
forrest g. burke
acting general counsel
lois e. quam
executive vice president of unitedhealth group and president of public and senior markets group
eric s. rangen
senior vice president and chief accounting officer
david s. wichmann
executive vice president of unitedhealth group and president of individual and employer markets group
our board of directors elects executive officers annually. our executive officers serve until their successors are
duly elected and qualified.  mr.hemsley is the president and chief executive officer of unitedhealth group, has served in that capacity since
november 2006, and has been a member of the board of directors since february 2000. mr.hemsley served as president and chief operating officer from 2002 to november 2006. he joined unitedhealth group in 1997.  mr.mikan is executive vice president and chief financial officer of unitedhealth group and has served in that capacity since november 2006. mr.mikan
served as senior vice president of finance of unitedhealth group from february 2006 to november 2006. from june 2004 to february 2006, mr.mikan served as chief financial officer of unitedhealthcare and as president of unitedhealth networks.
mr.mikan was chief financial officer of specialized care services from 2002 to june 2004. mr.mikan joined unitedhealth group in 1998.  mr.anderson is executive vice president of unitedhealth group and president of the commercial services group and has served in that capacity since december 2006. from january 2005 to december 2006, mr.anderson was
executive vice president of unitedhealth group and chief executive officer of ingenix. from november 2004 to january 2005, mr.anderson was executive vice president of unitedhealth group. mr.anderson joined unitedhealth group in 2004.
prior to joining unitedhealth group, mr.anderson served as chief executive officer of northwest airlines corporation from 2002 until november 2004.  mr.burke is the acting general counsel of unitedhealth group and has served in that capacity since october 2006. mr.burke has served as general counsel of uniprise, unitedhealthcare and specialized care services since
march 2006. he served as general counsel of uniprise from january 2005 to march 2006. mr.burke joined unitedhealth group in 2005. from 2002 to 2005, mr. burke was a partner at the law firm dorsey& whitney, llp, where he served on the
management committee and chaired the business services group.
table of contents
ms.quam is executive vice president of unitedhealth group and president of the public and senior markets
group and has served in that capacity since december 2006. from 2002 to december 2006, ms.quam served as chief executive officer of ovations. ms.quam joined unitedhealth group in 1989.  mr.rangen is the senior vice president and chief accounting officer of unitedhealth group and has served in that capacity since december 2006. from november
2006 to december 2006, mr.rangen was senior vice president of unitedhealth group. mr.rangen joined unitedhealth group in november 2006. prior to joining unitedhealth group, mr.rangen served as executive vice president and chief
financial officer of alliant techsystems inc. from april 2004 to march 2006 and as vice president and chief financial officer of alliant techsystems, inc. from 2002 to april 2004.  mr.wichmann is executive vice president of unitedhealth group and president of the individual and employer markets group and has served in that capacity since december 2006. from july 2004 to december
2006, mr.wichmann served as president and chief operating officer of unitedheathcare. from june 2003 to july 2004, mr.wichmann served as chief executive officer of specialized care services. he also served as president and chief
operating officer of specialized care services from 2002 to june 2003. mr.wichmann joined unitedhealth group in 1998.
item1a. risk factors  see item7  cautionary statements, which is
incorporated by reference herein.  item1b.unresolved staff comments  none.
item2.properties  as of december31, 2006, we owned and/or leased real properties totaling
12.4million square feet to support our business operations in the united states and other countries (net of approximately 0.7million square feet of space subleased to third parties). of this total, we leased approximately
11.6million aggregate square feet of space and owned approximately 1.5million aggregate square feet of space. our leases expire at various dates through may31, 2025. our facilities are primarily located in the united states. our
various segments use these facilities for their respective business purposes, and we believe these current facilities are suitable for their respective uses and are adequate for our anticipated future needs.
item3.legal proceedings  see item7  legal matters, which is incorporated
by reference herein.
item4.submission of matters to a vote of security holders  none.
table of contents
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities  market prices  our common stock is traded on the new york stock
exchange (nyse) under the symbol unh. on february15, 2007, there were 15,069 registered holders of record of our common stock. the per share high and low common stock closing prices reported by the nyse were as follows:
high
low
first quarter (through february 15, 2007)
$
56.29
$
50.51
first quarter
$
62.93
$
53.20
second quarter
$
56.60
$
41.44
third quarter
$
52.84
$
44.29
fourth quarter
$
54.46
$
45.12
first quarter
$
48.33
$
42.63
second quarter
$
53.64
$
44.30
third quarter
$
56.66
$
47.75
fourth quarter
$
64.61
$
53.84
dividend policy  our board of directors established our dividend policy in august 1990. pursuant to our dividend policy, the board reviews our financial statements following the end of each fiscal year and decides whether to declare a dividend on the
outstanding shares of common stock. shareholders of record on april3, 2006 received an annual dividend for 2006 of $0.03 per share and shareholders of record on april1, 2005 received an annual dividend for 2005 of $0.015 per share. on
january30, 2007, our board of directors approved an annual dividend of $0.03 per share, which will be paid on april16, 2007 to shareholders of record on april2, 2007.  issuer purchases of equity securities  issuer purchases of equity securities (1)
fourth quarter 2006
for the month ended
totalnumberof sharespurchased
averageprice paidpershare
totalnumber of shares purchasedaspart of publicly announced plans or programs
maximum numberofshares that may yet be purchasedunderthe plans
or programs
october31, 2006
136,650,000
november30, 2006
10,328
(2)
$
48.30
136,650,000
december31, 2006
205,923
(2)
$
53.60
136,650,000
total
216,251
$
53.35
(1)
in november1997, our board of directors adopted a share repurchase program, which the board evaluates periodically and renews as necessary. on may2,
2006, the board renewed the share repurchase program and authorized the company to repurchase up to 140million shares of our common stock at prevailing market prices. there is no established expiration date for the program. in august 2006, we
announced that
table of contents
we would not purchase shares under this stock repurchase program until we had completed our restatement (which is reflected in this form 10-k) and become
current in our periodic sec filings. as a result, we did not repurchase any shares through this publicly announced program for the quarter ended december31, 2006.
(2)
represents shares of common stock withheld by the company, as permitted by the applicable equity award certificates, to satisfy tax withholding obligations upon vesting of shares of
restricted stock.  performance graphs  the following two performance graphs compare the companys total return to shareholders with indexes of other specified companies and the s&p 500 index. the first graph compares the cumulative five-year total return to shareholders
on unitedhealth groups common stock relative to the cumulative total returns of the s&p 500 index, and a customized peer group (the fortune 50 group), an index of certain fortune 50 companies. the second graph
compares our cumulative total return to shareholders with the s&p 500 index and an index of a group of peer companies selected by us for the five-year period ended december31, 2006. the company is not included in either the fortune
50 group index in the first graph or the peer group index in the second graph. in calculating the cumulative total shareholder return of the indexes, the shareholder returns of the fortune 50 group companies in the first graph and the
peer group companies in the second graph are weighted according to the stock market capitalizations of the companies at january1 of each year. the comparisons assume the investment of $100 on december31, 2001 in company common stock and
in each index, and that dividends were reinvested when paid.  fortune 50 group  the fortune 50 group consists of the following companies: american international group inc, berkshire hathaway inc, cardinal health inc, citigroup inc, general electric company, international business machine
corp. and johnson& johnson. although there are differences in terms of size and industry, like unitedhealth group, all of these companies are large multi-segment companies using a well-defined operating model in one or more broad sectors
of the economy. these companies have also distinguished themselves by the consistency of their growth and performance, in many cases over multiple decades.
table of contents
12/01
12/02
12/03
12/04
12/05
12/06
unitedhealth group
100.00
118.03
164.54
249.08
351.75
304.31
s & p 500
100.00
77.90
100.24
111.15
116.61
135.03
fortune 50 group
100.00
73.79
89.64
99.03
98.09
111.23
the stock price performance included in this graph is not necessarily indicative of future stock price
performance.
table of contents
peer group  the companies included in our peer group are aetna inc, cigna corp., coventry health care inc., humana inc. and wellpoint inc. we believe that this peer group accurately reflects our peers in the health care industry.
12/01
12/02
12/03
12/04
12/05
12/06
unitedhealth group
100.00
118.03
164.54
249.08
351.75
304.31
s & p 500
100.00
77.90
100.24
111.15
116.61
135.03
peer group
100.00
83.05
125.88
194.28
283.66
280.08
the stock price performance included in this graph is not necessarily indicative of future stock price
performance.
table of contents
item6.
selected financial data  financial highlights  we derived the selected consolidated financial data for 2005 and 2004 from our audited restated consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing in item 8 of
this form 10-k. the consolidated statement of operations data for 2003 and 2002 and the consolidated balance sheet data as of the years ended 2004, 2003 and 2002 have been restated to conform to the restated consolidated financial statements
included in this form 10-k and are presented herein on an unaudited basis. we have presented these selected financial data on both a fas123r basis, which we adopted on january1, 2006, and on an apb 25 basis, our historical accounting
method for periods prior to january1, 2006.
fas 123r (1)current accounting method
for the year ended december31,
(in millions, except per share data)
2006(2,3)
2005(2,4)
2004(2,4)
2003(4)
2002(4)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
consolidated operating results
revenues
$
71,542
$
46,425
$
38,217
$
29,696
$
25,861
earnings from operations
$
6,984
$
5,080
$
3,858
$
2,671
$
1,969
net earnings
$
4,159
$
3,083
$
2,411
$
1,655
$
1,206
return on shareholders equity
22.2
%
25.2
%
29.0
%
34.6
%
28.8
%
basic net earnings per common share
$
3.09
$
2.44
$
1.93
$
1.40
$
0.99
diluted net earnings per common share
$
2.97
$
2.31
$
1.83
$
1.34
$
0.95
common stock dividends per share
$
0.030
$
0.015
$
0.015
$
0.008
$
0.008
consolidated cash flows from (used for)
operating activities
$
6,526
$
4,083
$
3,923
$
2,913
$
2,348
investing activities
$
(2,101
)
$
(3,489
)
$
(1,644
)
$
(745
)
$
(1,391
)
financing activities
$
$
$
(550
)
$
(1,036
)
$
(1,367
)
consolidated financial condition
(as of december31)
cash and investments
$
20,582
$
14,982
$
12,253
$
9,477
$
6,329
total assets
$
48,320
$
41,288
$
27,862
$
17,668
$
14,187
debt
$
7,456
$
7,095
$
4,011
$
1,979
$
1,761
shareholders equity
$
20,810
$
17,815
$
10,772
$
5,236
$
4,551
debt-to-total-capital ratio
26.4
%
28.5
%
27.1
%
27.4
%
27.9
%
financial highlights and managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes.
(1)
unitedhealth group adopted fas 123r on a modified retrospective basis on january1, 2006. this method of adoption requires all prior periods to be restated by the amounts
previously disclosed on a pro-forma basis under fas 123.
(2)
unitedhealth group acquired pacificare in december 2005 for total consideration of approximately $8.8 billion, oxford health plans, inc. (oxford) in july 2004 for total
consideration of approximately $5.0 billion and mid-atlantic medical services, inc. (mamsi) in february 2004 for total consideration of approximately $2.7 billion. these acquisitions affect the comparability of 2006, 2005 and 2004 financial
information to prior fiscal years. the results of operations and financial condition of pacificare, oxford and mamsi have been included in unitedhealth groups consolidated financial statements since the respective acquisition dates.
(3)
on january1, 2006, the company began serving as a plan sponsor offering medicare part d drug insurance coverage under a contract with cms. total revenues
generated under this program were $5.7 billion for the
table of contents
year ended december31, 2006. this program affects the comparability of 2006 financial information with prior years. see note 4 of the notes to
consolidated financial statements for a detailed discussion of this program.
(4)
the unaudited consolidated statements of operations and cash flows data for 2003 and 2002, and the unaudited consolidated balance sheet data as of december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
have been revised to reflect adjustments related to the restatement described under managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and note 3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
pre-tax adjustments related to 2003 and 2002 include non-cash stock-based compensation expense totaling $54 million and $62 million, respectively under fas 123r, our current accounting method. the cumulative after tax impact of all restatement
adjustments related to years prior to 2002 totaled $220 million under fas123r, our current accounting method, and has been reflected as an adjustment to retained earnings at december31, 2001. the tables following the financial highlights
presented under apb25, our historical accounting method, reflect the detailed unaudited 2003 and 2002 statements of operations adjustments under apb 25 and fas 123r.
table of contents
financial highlights
apb 25 (1)  historical accounting method
for the year ended december31,
(in millions, except per share data)
2005 (2,3)
2004 (2,3)
2003 (3)
2002 (3)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
consolidated operating results
revenues
$
46,425
$
38,217
$
29,696
$
25,861
earnings from operations
$
5,069
$
3,901
$
2,743
$
2,043
net earnings
$
3,062
$
2,429
$
1,695
$
1,251
return on shareholders equity
25.1
%
29.5
%
36.0
%
30.3
%
basic net earnings per common share
$
2.42
$
1.94
$
1.44
$
1.03
diluted net earnings per common share
$
2.31
$
1.86
$
1.37
$
0.99
common stock dividends per share
$
0.015
$
0.015
$
0.008
$
0.008
consolidated cash flows from (used for)
operating activities
$
4,326
$
4,147
$
3,003
$
2,423
investing activities
$
(3,489
)
$
(1,644
)
$
(745
)
$
(1,391
)
financing activities
$
$
(774
)
$
(1,126
)
$
(1,442
)
consolidated financial condition
(as of december31)
cash and investments
$
14,982
$
12,253
$
9,477
$
6,329
total assets
$
41,288
$
27,862
$
17,668
$
14,187
debt
$
7,095
$
4,011
$
1,979
$
1,761
shareholders equity
$
17,788
$
10,725
$
5,174
$
4,495
debt-to-total-capital ratio
28.5
%
27.2
%
27.7
%
28.1
%
financial highlights and managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes.
(1)
unitedhealth groups historical accounting policy for stock-based compensation followed the recognition and measurement principles of apb 25. furthermore, unitedhealth group
complied with the disclosure provisions of fas 123.
(2)
unitedhealth group acquired pacificare in december 2005 for total consideration of approximately $8.8 billion, oxford in july 2004 for total consideration of approximately $5.0
billion and mamsi in february 2004 for total consideration of approximately $2.7 billion. these acquisitions affect the comparability of 2006, 2005 and 2004 financial information to prior fiscal years. the results of operations and financial
condition of pacificare, oxford and mamsi have been included in unitedhealth groups consolidated financial statements since the respective acquisition dates. see note 5 of the notes to consolidated financial statements for a detailed
discussion of these acquisitions.
(3)
the unaudited consolidated statements of operations and cash flows data for 2003 and 2002, and the unaudited consolidated balance sheets data as of december 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002
have been revised to reflect adjustments related to the restatement described under managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and note 3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
pre-tax adjustments related to 2003 and 2002 include non-cash stock-based compensation expense totaling $172 million and $144 million, respectively under apb 25, our historical accounting method. the cumulative after tax impact of all restatement
adjustments related to years prior to 2002 totaled $507 million under apb 25, our historical accounting method, and has been reflected as an adjustment to retained earnings at december31, 2001. the following tables reflect the detailed
unaudited 2003 and 2002 statement of operations adjustments under apb 25 and fas 123r.
table of contents
consolidated statements of operations  unaudited
for the year ended december31, 2003
(in millions, except per share data)
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
revenues
premiums
$
25,448
$
$
26,283
$
$
$
26,283
services
3,118
(225
)
2,893
2,893
products
investment and other income
total revenues
28,823
29,696
29,696
operating costs
medical costs
20,714
21,482
21,482
operating costs
4,875
5,003
5,075
cost of products sold
depreciation and amortization
total operating costs
25,888
1,065
26,953
27,025
earnings from operations
2,935
(192
)
2,743
(18
)
(54
)
2,671
interest expense
(95
)
(95
)
(95
)
earnings before income taxes
2,840
(192
)
2,648
(18
)
(54
)
2,576
provision for income taxes
(1,015
)
(953
)
(921
)
net earnings
$
1,825
$
(130
)
$
1,695
$
$
(41
)
$
1,655
basicnetearningspercommon share
$
1.55
$
(0.11
)
$
1.44
$
$
(0.04
)
$
1.40
diluted net earnings per common share
$
1.48
$
(0.11
)
$
1.37
$
$
(0.03
)
$
1.34
basic weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,178
1,178
1,178
dilutive effect of common stock equivalents
(1
)
diluted weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,234
(1
)
1,233
1,237
financial highlights and managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes.
(1)
includes $172 million of stock-based compensation expense and $49 million of deferred tax benefit associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated statement of
operations as well as an adjustment to premium revenue of $927 million, medical costs of $848 million and operating costs of $79 million to reflect a reinsurance contract on a gross basis. in order to conform to our current presentation, we have
also reclassified certain service revenues and operating costs to product revenues and cost of products sold, respectively, primarily related to our pharmacy benefit management business acquired as part of the pacificare acquisition in december
2005.
(2)
reflects $190 million of stock-based compensation expense and $68 million of deferred tax benefit as recorded under the modified retrospective method of adoption of fas 123r, net of
the restatement adjustments under apb25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated statement of operations subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method of adoption and
includes $54 million of additional stock-based compensation expense and $13 million of related deferred tax benefit.
table of contents
consolidated statements of operations  unaudited
for the year ended december31, 2002
(in millions, except per share data)
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
revenues
premiums
$
21,906
$
$
22,714
$
$
$
22,714
services
2,894
(310
)
2,584
2,584
products
investment and other income
(2
)
total revenues
25,020
25,861
25,861
operating costs
medical costs
18,192
18,938
18,938
operating costs
4,387
(11
)
4,376
4,450
cost of products sold
depreciation and amortization
total operating costs
22,834
23,818
23,892
earnings from operations
2,186
(143
)
2,043
(12
)
(62
)
1,969
interest expense
(90
)
(90
)
(90
)
earningsbeforeincometaxes
2,096
(143
)
1,953
(12
)
(62
)
1,879
provisionforincometaxes
(744
)
(702
)
(673
)
net earnings
$
1,352
$
(101
)
$
1,251
$
(1
)
$
(44
)
$
1,206
basic net earnings per common share
$
1.12
$
(0.09
)
$
1.03
$
$
(0.04
)
$
0.99
diluted net earnings per common share
$
1.06
$
(0.07
)
$
0.99
$
$
(0.04
)
$
0.95
basic weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,214
1,214
1,214
dilutive effect of common stock equivalents
(2
)
diluted weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,272
(2
)
1,270
1,272
financial highlights and managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes.
(1)
includes $144 million of stock-based compensation and $44 million of deferred tax benefit associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated statement of
operations as well as an adjustment to premium revenue of $897 million, medical costs of $825 million and operating costs of $72 million to reflect a reinsurance contract on a gross basis. in order to conform to our current presentation, we have
also reclassified certain service revenues and operating costs to product revenues and costs of products sold, respectively, primarily related to our pharmacy benefit management business acquired as part of the pacificare acquisition in december
2005.
(2)
reflects $156 million of stock-based compensation and $55 million of deferred tax benefit as recorded under the modified retrospective method of adoption of fas 123r, net of the
restatement adjustments under apb 25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated statement of operations subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method of adoption and
includes $62 million of additional stock-based compensation expense and $18 million of related deferred tax benefit.
table of contents
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations  business overview  unitedhealth group is a diversified health and well-being company, serving approximately
70million americans. our focus is on improving the american health care system by simplifying the administrative components of health care delivery; promoting evidence-based medicine as the standard for care; and providing relevant, actionable
data that physicians, health care providers, consumers, employers and other participants in health care can use to make better, more informed decisions.  through our diversified family of businesses, we leverage core competencies in advanced technology-based transactional capabilities; health care data, knowledge and informatics; and health care resource organization and care facilitation to
make health care work better. we provide individuals with access to quality, cost-effective health care services and resources. we provide employers and consumers with superb value, service and support, and we deliver value to our shareholders by
executing a business strategy founded upon a commitment to balanced growth, profitability and capital discipline.  financial restatements
all of the financial information presented in this item7 has been adjusted to reflect the restatement of the companys financial results,
which is more fully described in the explanatory note immediately preceding part i, item1 and in note 3, restatement of consolidated financial statements of the notes to consolidated financial statements in this form
10-k. the impact under fas 123r of recognizing additional stock-based compensation expense and related tax effects as a result of historic stock option practices as well as immaterial adjustments unrelated to historic stock option practices that
were identified through a review of the companys accounting practices is $43 million ($57 million net of tax) in 2005, $40 million ($44 million net of tax) in 2004, and an aggregate of $453 million ($313 million net of tax) for 2003 and all
prior years. the impact under apb 25 of all errors is $304 million ($238 million net of tax) in 2005, $200 million ($158 million net of tax) in 2004, and an aggregate of $1,056 million ($738 million net of tax) for 2003 and all prior years. the
company also conducted a sensitivity analysis to assess how the restatement adjustment would have changed under two alternative methodologies for determining measurement dates. see  critical accounting policies and estimates  stock
option measurement dates for details.
table of contents
the following tables illustrate the effect of the restatement adjustments on our pro forma net earnings and pro forma net
earnings per share if we had recorded compensation expense based on the estimated grant date fair value accounting method as defined by fas 123 for all stock-based awards granted from 1995 to 2003. refer to note 3 for an illustration of the effect
of the fas 123r restatement adjustments relating to 2004 and 2005.
(in millions, except per share data)-unaudited
net earnings
apb 25
as reported  apb 25
$
1,825
$
1,352
$
$
$
$
(214
)
$
$
$
restatementadjustments  apb25:
compensation expense, net of tax effects
(123
)
(100
)
(172
)
(177
)
(27
)
(40
)
(16
)
(20
)
(17
)
other adjustments, net of tax effects
(7
)
(1
)
(5
)
(3
)
(3
)
(2
)
(3
)
(2
)
(3
)
as restated  apb 25
$
1,695
$
1,251
$
$
$
$
(256
)
$
$
$
fas 123 pro forma
as restated-apb 25
$
1,695
$
1,251
$
$
$
$
(256
)
$
$
$
less: apb 25 compensation expense, net of tax effects
fas 123 historical compensation expense, net of tax effects
(122
)
(101
)
(82
)
(76
)
(37
)
(40
)
(30
)
(24
)
(20
)
restatement adjustments
fas 123 compensation expense,netoftaxeffects
(41
)
(44
)
(53
)
(94
)
(14
)
(22
)
(8
)
(4
)
(4
)
as restated  fas 123 pro forma
$
1,655
$
1,206
$
$
$
$
(278
)
$
$
$
basic net earnings per common share:
as reported  apb 25
$
1.55
$
1.11
$
0.73
$
0.57
$
0.41
$
(0.14
)
$
0.29
$
0.23
$
0.20
as restated  apb 25
$
1.44
$
1.03
$
0.59
$
0.43
$
0.39
$
(0.17
)
$
0.28
$
0.21
$
0.19
as restated  fas 123 pro forma
$
1.40
$
0.99
$
0.62
$
0.43
$
0.37
$
(0.18
)
$
0.26
$
0.20
$
0.18
diluted net earnings per common share:
as reported  apb 25
$
1.48
$
1.06
$
0.70
$
0.55
$
0.40
$
(0.14
)
$
0.28
$
0.22
$
0.20
as restated  apb 25
$
1.37
$
0.99
$
0.56
$
0.41
$
0.38
$
(0.17
)
$
0.27
$
0.20
$
0.18
as restated  fas 123 pro forma
$
1.34
$
0.95
$
0.59
$
0.42
$
0.36
$
(0.18
)
$
0.25
$
0.20
$
0.18
2006 financial performance highlights  unitedhealth group had very strong results in 2006. the company achieved diversified growth across its business segments and generated net earnings of $4.2 billion, representing an increase of 35% over 2005. other
financial performance highlights include:
diluted net earnings per common share of $2.97, an increase of 29% over 2005.
consolidated revenues of $71.5 billion, an increase of 54% over 2005, with revenues advancing in each business segment. excluding the impact of acquisitions,
revenues increased 21% over 2005.
earnings from operations of $7.0 billion, up $1.9 billion, or 37%, over 2005.
operating margin of 9.8%, down from 10.9% in 2005, primarily due to changes in business mix related to the pacificare acquisition and the launch of the medicare
part d program.
cash flows from operations of $6.5 billion, up from $4.1 billion in 2005.
table of contents
2006 results compared to 2005 results  consolidated financial results  revenues  revenues are comprised of premium revenues from risk-based products; service revenues, which primarily include fees for management, administrative and consulting services; product revenues; and investment and other
income.  premium revenues are primarily derived from risk-based health insurance arrangements in which the premium is fixed, typically for a one-year
period, and we assume the economic risk of funding our customers health care services and related administrative costs. service revenues consist primarily of fees derived from services performed for customers that self-insure the medical costs
of their employees and their dependents. for both premium risk-based and fee-based customer arrangements, we provide coordination and facilitation of medical services; transaction processing; customer, consumer and care provider services; and access
to contracted networks of physicians, hospitals and other health care professionals. through our prescription solutions pharmacy benefit management (pbm) business, revenues are derived from products sold and from administrative services. product
revenues are recognized upon sale or shipment because the price is fixed and the member may not return the drugs or receive a refund. service revenues are recognized when the prescription claim is adjudicated. product revenues also include sales of
ingenix syndicated content products, which are recognized as revenue upon shipment.  consolidated revenues in 2006 of $71.5 billion increased by $25.1
billion, or 54%, over 2005. excluding the impact of businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005, consolidated revenues increased by approximately 21% in 2006 principally driven by the successful launch of the medicare part d program on
january1, 2006, rate increases on premium-based and fee-based services and growth in individuals served across our business segments. following is a discussion of 2006 consolidated revenue trends for each of our revenue components.
premium revenues consolidated premium revenues totaled $65.7 billion in 2006, an increase of $23.6 billion, or 56%, over 2005. excluding the impact of
acquisitions, consolidated premium revenues increased by $8.8 billion, or 21%, over 2005. this increase was primarily driven by premium rate increases and the successful launch of the medicare part d program, partially offset by a slight decrease in
the number of individuals served by our commercial risk-based products.  unitedhealthcare premium revenues in 2006 totaled $33.5 billion, an increase of
$7.6 billion, or 29%, over 2005. excluding premium revenues from businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005, unitedhealthcare premium revenues were essentially flat compared to 2005. this was primarily due to average net premium rate increases
of approximately 8% or above on unitedhealthcares renewing commercial risk-based products, offset by lower premium yields from new business due primarily to a larger portion of new customer sales generated from high-deductible lower-premium
products (with correspondingly lower medical costs), and a 5% decrease in the number of individuals served by unitedhealthcares commercial risk-based products due primarily to the companys internal pricing decisions in a competitive
commercial risk-based pricing environment and the conversion of certain groups to fee-based products. ovations premium revenues in 2006 totaled $24.4 billion, an increase of $15.2 billion, or 165%, over 2005. excluding the impact of acquisitions,
ovations premium revenues increased by approximately $8.3 billion, or 92%, over 2005. the increase was driven primarily by the successful launch of the medicare part d program, which had premium revenues of $5.7 billion for 2006, and an increase in
the number of individuals served by medicare advantage and medicare supplement products, as well as rate increases on these products. specialized care services premium revenues increased by approximately $1.0 billion over 2005. this was primarily
due to the pacificare acquisition and strong growth in the number of individuals served by several specialized care services businesses under premium-based arrangements. the remaining premium revenue increase resulted primarily from membership
growth and premium revenue rate increases in americhoices medicaid programs, which contributed premium revenue increases of approximately $278 million, or 8%, over 2005 excluding the impact of acquisitions.
table of contents
service revenues service revenues in 2006 totaled $4.3 billion, an increase of $602 million, or 16%, over
2005. excluding the impact of acquisitions, service revenues increased by approximately 12% over 2005. the increase in service revenues was driven primarily by aggregate growth of 8% in the number of individuals served by uniprise and
unitedhealthcare under fee-based arrangements during 2006, as well as annual rate increases. in addition, ingenix service revenues increased by approximately 23% due to new business growth in the health information and contract research businesses
and from businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005.  product revenues product revenues in 2006 totaled $737 million, an increase of
$579 million over 2005. this was primarily due to pharmacy revenues at our pbm business, which was acquired in december 2005 with the purchase of pacificare.  investment and other income investment and other income during 2006 totaled $871 million, representing an increase of $366 million over 2005. interest income increased by $372 million in 2006, principally due to the impact of
increased levels of cash and fixed-income investments during the year, due in part to the acquisition of pacificare, as well as higher yields on fixed-income investments. net capital gains on sales of investments were $4 million in 2006, compared
with net capital gains of $10 million in 2005.  medical costs  the combination of pricing, benefit designs, consumer health care utilization and comprehensive care facilitation efforts is reflected in the medical care ratio (medical costs as a percentage of premium revenues). the consolidated medical
care ratio increased from 80.0% in 2005 to 81.2% in 2006. this medical care ratio increase resulted primarily from the impact of the acquisition of pacificare and launch of the medicare part d program, both of which carry a higher medical care ratio
than the historic unitedhealth group businesses.  for each period, our operating results include the effects of revisions in medical cost estimates related
to all prior periods. changes in medical cost estimates related to prior fiscal years, resulting from more complete claim information and other facts and circumstances, that are identified in the current year are included in total medical costs
reported for the current fiscal year. medical costs for 2006 include approximately $430 million of favorable medical cost development related to prior fiscal years. medical costs for 2005 include approximately $400million of favorable medical
cost development related to prior fiscal years. the increase in favorable medical cost development in 2006 was driven by an increase in medical payables due to organic growth and businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005.  medical costs for 2006 increased $19.6 billion, or 58%, to $53.3 billion, due to the impact of businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005, medical costs associated
with the new medicare part d program and a medical cost trend of 7% to 8% on commercial risk-based business. medical costs associated with the new medicare part d program for 2006 were $4.9 billion. medical trend was due to both medical inflation
and increases in health care consumption.  operating costs  the operating cost ratio (operating costs as a percentage of total revenues) for 2006 of 14.0%, improved from 15.4% in 2005. this decrease was primarily driven by revenue mix changes, with premium revenues growing at a faster rate than
service revenues primarily due to the new medicare part d program and the pacificare acquisition. operating costs as a percentage of premium revenues are generally considerably lower than operating costs as a percentage of fee-based revenues. the
decrease in the operating cost ratio reflected productivity gains from technology deployment and other cost management initiatives, including cost savings associated with the pacificare acquisition integration, and an insurance recovery of $43
million. these items were partially offset by a $22 million charitable contribution to the united health foundation and approximately $44 million of additional cash expenses related to the stock option review, exclusive of the fas 123r compensation
expense.
table of contents
operating costs in 2006 totaled $10.0 billion, an increase of $2.8 billion, or 40%, over 2005. excluding the impact of
acquisitions, operating costs increased by approximately 13% over 2005. this increase was primarily due to the new medicare part d program as well as a 4% increase in the total number of individuals served by health care services and uniprise during
2006 (excluding the impact of acquisitions), growth in specialized care services and ingenix, general operating cost inflation, and the specific items discussed above, partially offset by productivity gains from technology deployment, cost savings
associated with acquisition integrations and other cost management initiatives.  cost of products sold  cost of products sold in 2006 totaled $599 million, an increase of $510 million over 2005. this increase was primarily due to pharmacy sales at our pbm business, which
was acquired in december 2005 with the purchase of pacificare.  depreciation and amortization  depreciation and amortization in 2006 was $670 million, an increase of $217 million, or 48%, over 2005. approximately $85 million of this increase was related to
intangible assets from pacificare and other businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005. the remaining increase was primarily due to additional depreciation and amortization from higher levels of computer equipment and capitalized software as a
result of technology enhancements, business growth and businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005.  income taxes  our effective income tax rate was 36.3% in 2006 and in 2005.  business
segments  the following summarizes the operating results of our business segments for the years ended december31 (in millions):
revenues
percentchange
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
health care services
$
64,180
$
40,023
60%
uniprise
5,451
4,893
11%
specialized care services
3,989
2,806
42%
ingenix
21%
intersegment eliminations
(3,054
)
(2,104
)
nm
consolidated revenues
$
71,542
$
46,425
54%
earnings from operations
percentchange
(as restated)
(as restated)
health care services
$
5,128
$
3,664
40%
uniprise
21%
specialized care services
42%
ingenix
41%
consolidated earnings from operations
$
6,984
$
5,080
37%
nm - not meaningful
table of contents
health care services  the health care services segment is composed of the unitedhealthcare, ovations and americhoice businesses. unitedhealthcare offers a comprehensive array of consumer-oriented health benefit plans and services for local, small and mid-sized
employers and individuals nationwide. ovations provides health and well-being services to individuals age 50 and older, including the administration of supplemental health insurance coverage on behalf of aarp and the delivery of the new medicare
part d prescription drug benefit to beneficiaries throughout the united states. americhoice provides network-based health and well-being services to state medicaid, childrens health insurance programs and other government-sponsored health care
programs and the beneficiaries of those programs. the financial results of unitedhealthcare, ovations and americhoice have been combined in the health care services segment column in the tables presented below because these businesses have similar
economic characteristics and have similar products and services, types of customers, distribution methods and operational processes, and operate in a similar regulatory environment, typically within the same legal entity.  health care services had revenues of $64.2 billion in 2006, representing an increase of $24.2 billion, or 60%, over 2005. excluding the impact of acquisitions, health
care services revenues increased by approximately $8.9 billion, or 23%, over 2005. unitedhealthcare revenues of $35.2 billion in 2006 increased by $8.0 billion, or 29%, over 2005. excluding the impact of acquisitions, unitedhealthcare revenues
increased by approximately 1% over 2005 due to an increase in the number of individuals served with commercial fee-based products as well as average premium rate increases of approximately 8% or above on unitedhealthcares renewing commercial
risk-based products, offset by lower premium yields from a larger portion of new customer sales generated from high-deductible lower-premium products (with correspondingly lower medical costs) and a 5% decrease in the number of individuals served by
unitedhealthcares commercial risk-based products due primarily to the companys internal pricing decisions in a competitive commercial risk-based pricing environment and the conversion of certain groups to fee-based products. ovations
revenues of $25.3 billion in 2006 increased by approximately $15.9 billion, or 168% over 2005. excluding the impact of acquisitions, ovations revenues increased by $8.4 billion, or 91%, over 2005. the increase was driven primarily by the successful
launch of the medicare part d program, which had premium revenues of $5.7 billion for 2006, and an increase in the number of individuals served by medicare advantage and medicare supplement products, as well as rate increases on these products. the
remaining increase in health care services revenues is attributable to an 8% increase in americhoice revenues, excluding the impact of acquisitions, driven primarily by membership growth and premium revenue rate increases on medicaid products.
health care services earnings from operations in 2006 were $5.1 billion, representing an increase of $1.5billion, or 40%, over 2005. this increase
was principally driven by acquisitions and increases in the number of individuals served by ovations medicare and part d products and unitedhealthcares fee-based products. the segment also benefited by productivity gains from technology
deployment and other cost management initiatives, including cost savings associated with the pacificare acquisition integration. unitedhealthcares commercial medical care ratio increased to 79.8% in 2006 from 78.6% in 2005, mainly due to the
impact of the pacificare acquisition and changes in product, business and customer mix. health care services operating margin for 2006 was 8.0%, a decrease from 9.2% in 2005. this decrease was driven mainly by the acquisition of pacificare and
the new medicare part d program, which have lower operating margins than historic unitedhealth group businesses.
table of contents
the following table summarizes the number of individuals served by health care services, by major market segment and
funding arrangement, as of december 31 (1):
(in thousands)
commercial
risk-based
10,040
10,105
fee-based
4,735
3,990
total commercial
14,775
14,095
medicare advantage
1,410
1,150
medicare part d stand-alone
4,500
medicaid
1,425
1,250
total health care services
22,110
16,495
(1)
excludes individuals served by ovations medicare supplement products provided to aarp members as well as medicare institutional and medicaid long-term care members.
the number of individuals served by unitedhealthcares commercial business as of december31, 2006 increased by approximately
680,000, or 5%, over the prior year. excluding the impact of acquisitions, commercial business individuals served increased by 185,000, or 1%, over the prior year. this included an increase of approximately 660,000 in the number of individuals
served with commercial fee-based products, driven by new customer relationships and customers converting from risk-based products to fee-based products, offset by a decrease of approximately 475,000 in the number of individuals served with
commercial risk-based products due primarily to the companys internal pricing decisions in a competitive commercial risk-based pricing environment and the conversion of certain groups to fee-based products.  excluding acquisitions, the number of individuals served by ovations medicare advantage products increased by 230,000, or 20%, from 2005 due primarily to new
customer relationships. excluding the impact of acquisitions, americhoices medicaid enrollment increased 65,000, or 5%, primarily due to new customer gains. uniprise  uniprise provides network-based health and well-being services, business-to-business transaction processing services, consumer
connectivity and technology support services nationwide to large employers and health plans, and provides health-related consumer and financial transaction products and services. uniprise revenues in 2006 were $5.5 billion, representing an increase
of $558 million, or 11%, over 2005. excluding the impact of acquisitions, uniprise revenues increased 7% over 2005. this increase was driven primarily by growth of 4% in the number of individuals served by uniprise, excluding the impact of
acquisitions, and annual service fee rate increases for self-insured customers. uniprise served 10.9million individuals and 10.5million individuals as of december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.  uniprise earnings from operations for 2006 were $897 million, representing an increase of $157 million, or 21%, over 2005. operating margin for 2006 improved to 16.5%
for 2006 from 15.1% in 2005. uniprise has expanded its operating margin through operating cost efficiencies derived from process improvements, technology deployment and cost management initiatives that have reduced labor and occupancy costs in its
transaction processing and customer service, billing and enrollment functions. additionally, uniprises infrastructure can be scaled efficiently, allowing its business to grow revenues at a proportionately higher rate than the associated growth
in operating expenses.  specialized care services  specialized care services offers a comprehensive platform of specialty health, wellness and ancillary benefits, networks, services and resources to specific customer markets nationwide. specialized care services revenues of
table of contents
$4.0 billion increased by $1.2 billion, or 42%, over 2005. excluding the impact of acquisitions, revenues increased by 22% over the prior periods. this
increase was principally driven by an increase in the number of individuals served by several of its specialty benefit businesses and rate increases related to these businesses.  earnings from operations in 2006 of $769 million increased $228 million, or 42%, over 2005. specialized care services operating margin was 19.3% in 2006 and 2005. realized improvements in operating cost
structure and benefits from the integration of pacificare specialty operations in 2006 were offset by a business mix shift toward higher revenue, lower margin products.  ingenix  ingenix offers database and data management services, software products, publications, consulting services,
outsourced services and pharmaceutical development and consulting services on a national and international basis. ingenix revenues for 2006 of $976 million increased by $169 million, or 21%, over 2005. this was driven primarily by new business
growth in the health information and contract research businesses, as well as businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005.  earnings from operations in
2006 were $190 million, up $55 million, or 41%, from 2005. operating margin was 19.5% in 2006, up from 16.7% in 2005. these increases in earnings from operations and operating margin were primarily due to growth in the health information and
pharmaceutical services businesses, improving gross margins due to effective cost management and businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005.  2005
results compared to 2004 results  consolidated financial results  revenues  consolidated revenues in 2005 increased by $8.2 billion, or 21%, to $46.4 billion. excluding the impact of
businesses acquired since the beginning of 2004, consolidated revenues increased by approximately 11% in 2005 primarily as a result of rate increases on premium-based and fee-based services and growth in individuals served across business segments.
following is a discussion of 2005 consolidated revenue trends for each of our revenue components.  premium revenues consolidated premium
revenues totaled $42.1 billion in 2005, an increase of $7.7billion, or 22%, over 2004. excluding the impact of acquisitions, consolidated premium revenues increased by approximately 11% over 2004. this increase was primarily driven by premium
rate increases and a modest increase in the number of individuals served by our risk-based products.  unitedhealthcare premium revenues in 2005 totaled
$25.9 billion, an increase of $5.1 billion, or 24%, over 2004. excluding premium revenues from businesses acquired since the beginning of 2004, unitedhealthcare premium revenues increased by approximately 9% over 2004. this increase was primarily
due to average net premium rate increases of approximately 8% to 9% on unitedhealthcares renewing commercial risk-based products. in addition, ovations premium revenues in 2005 totaled $9.2 billion, an increase of $1.8 billion, or 24%, over
2004. excluding the impact of acquisitions, ovations premium revenues increased by approximately 20% over 2004, driven primarily by an increase in the number of individuals served by medicare advantage products and by medicare supplement products
provided to aarp members, as well as rate increases on these products. premium revenues from americhoices medicaid programs in 2005 totaled $3.3 billion, an increase of $270 million, or 9%, over 2004 driven primarily by premium rate increases.
the remaining premium revenue increase is due mainly to strong growth in the number of individuals served by several specialized care services businesses under premium-based arrangements.  service revenues service revenues in 2005 totaled $3.7 billion, an increase of $423 million, or 13%, over 2004. the increase in service revenues was driven
primarily by aggregate growth of 8% in the number of individuals
table of contents
served by uniprise and unitedhealthcare under fee-based arrangements during 2005, excluding the impact of acquisitions, as well as annual rate increases. in
addition, ingenix service revenues increased by 16% due to growth in the health information and contract research businesses as well as businesses acquired since the beginning of 2004.  product revenues product revenues in 2005 totaled $158 million, an increase of $36 million over 2004. this was primarily due to pharmacy revenues at our pbm business, which was acquired in december 2005
with the purchase of pacificare, and increased revenues associated with the interim government-sponsored drug card program.  investment and other
income investment and other income totaled $505 million, representing an increase of $92 million over 2004. interest income increased by $126 million in 2005, principally due to the impact of increased levels of cash and fixed-income
investments during the year due to the acquisitions of oxford and mamsi as well as higher yields on fixed-income investments. net capital gains on sales of investments were $10 million in 2005, a decrease of $34 million from 2004.  medical costs  the combination of pricing, benefit designs, consumer
health care utilization and comprehensive care facilitation efforts is reflected in the medical care ratio. the consolidated medical care ratio decreased from 80.9% in 2004 to 80.0% in 2005. this medical care ratio decrease resulted primarily from
changes in product, business and customer mix and an increase in favorable medical cost development related to prior periods.  for each period, our
operating results include the effects of revisions in medical cost estimates related to all prior periods. changes in medical cost estimates related to prior fiscal years, resulting from more complete claim information, that are identified in the
current year are included in total medical costs reported for the current fiscal year. medical costs for 2005 include approximately $400 million of favorable medical cost development related to prior fiscal years. medical costs for 2004 include
approximately $210 million of favorable medical cost development related to prior fiscal years. the increase in favorable medical cost development in 2005 was driven primarily by growth in the size of the medical cost base and related medical
payables due to organic growth and businesses acquired since the beginning of 2004.  on an absolute dollar basis, 2005 medical costs totaled $33.7 billion,
an increase of $5.8 billion, or 21%, over 2004. excluding the impact of acquisitions, medical costs increased by approximately 9% driven primarily by a medical cost trend of 7% to 8% due to both inflation and an increase in health care consumption
as well as organic growth.  operating costs  the
operating cost ratio for 2005 was 15.4%, down from 15.9% in 2004. this decrease was primarily driven by revenue mix changes, with premium revenues growing at a faster rate than service revenues largely due to recent acquisitions. operating costs as
a percentage of premium revenues are generally considerably lower than operating costs as a percentage of fee-based revenues. additionally, the decrease in the operating cost ratio reflects productivity gains from technology deployment and other
cost management initiatives.  on an absolute dollar basis, operating costs for 2005 totaled $7.1 billion, an increase of $1.1 billion, or 17%, over 2004.
excluding the impact of acquisitions, operating costs increased by approximately 11%. this increase was driven by an 8% increase in total individuals served by health care services and uniprise during 2005 (excluding the impact of acquisitions),
growth in specialized care services and ingenix and general operating cost inflation, partially offset by productivity gains from technology deployment and other cost management initiatives.  cost of products sold  cost of products sold in 2005 totaled $89
million, an increase of $35 million over 2004. this was primarily due to pharmacy sales at our pbm business, which was acquired in december 2005 with the purchase of pacificare, and increased costs associated with sales under the interim
government-sponsored drug card program.
table of contents
depreciation and amortization  depreciation and amortization in 2005 was $453 million, an increase of $79 million, or 21%, over 2004. approximately $32 million of this increase was related to intangible assets from business acquisitions since the beginning of 2004. the
remaining increase was primarily due to additional depreciation and amortization from higher levels of computer equipment and capitalized software as a result of technology enhancements and business growth.  income taxes  our effective income tax rate was 36.3% in 2005,
compared to 35.4% in 2004. the increase was mainly driven by favorable settlements of prior year tax returns during 2004 and an increase in 2005 state taxes.  business segments  the following summarizes the operating results of our business segments for the years ended december31 (in
millions):
revenues
percentchange
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
health care services
$
40,023
$
32,681
22%
uniprise
4,893
4,318
13%
specialized care services
2,806
2,296
22%
ingenix
14%
intersegment eliminations
(2,104
)
(1,785
)
nm
consolidated revenues
$
46,425
$
38,217
21%
earnings from operations
percentchange
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
health care services
$
3,664
$
2,688
36%
uniprise
19%
specialized care services
22%
ingenix
34%
consolidated earnings from operations
$
5,080
$
3,858
32%
nm - not meaningful  health care services  health care services had revenues of $40.0
billion in 2005, representing an increase of $7.3 billion, or 22%, over 2004. excluding the impact of acquisitions, health care services revenues increased by approximately $3.0 billion, or 11%, over 2004. unitedhealthcare accounted for
approximately $1.6 billion of this increase, driven by average premium rate increases of approximately 8% to 9% on unitedhealthcares renewing commercial risk-based products. ovations contributed approximately $1.2 billion to the revenue
advance over 2004 largely attributable to growth in the number of individuals served by ovations medicare supplement products provided to aarp members and by its medicare advantage products as well as rate increases on these products. the
remaining increase in health care services revenues is attributable to an 8% increase in americhoices revenues, excluding the impact of acquisitions, driven primarily by premium revenue rate increases on medicaid products.
table of contents
health care services earnings from operations in 2005 were $3.7 billion, representing an increase of $976 million, or
36%, over 2004. this increase primarily resulted from revenue growth and improved gross margins on unitedhealthcares risk-based products, increases in the number of individuals served by unitedhealthcares commercial fee-based products,
and the acquisitions of oxford and mamsi during 2004. unitedhealthcares commercial medical care ratio decreased to 78.6% in 2005 from 79.3% in 2004 mainly due to changes in product, business and customer mix. health care services 2005
operating margin was 9.2%, an increase from 8.2% in 2004. this increase was driven mainly by the lower commercial medical care ratio as well as changes in business and customer mix.  the following table summarizes the number of individuals served by health care services, by major market segment and funding arrangement, as of december 31 (1):
(in thousands)
2005(2)
commercial
risk-based
10,105
7,655
fee-based
3,990
3,305
total commercial
14,095
10,960
medicare advantage
1,150
medicaid
1,250
1,260
total health care services
16,495
12,550
(1)
excludes individuals served by ovations medicare supplement products provided to aarp members as well as medicare institutional and medicaid long-term care members.
(2)
includes commercial risk-based membership of 2.34 million, commercial fee-based membership of 95,000 and medicare membership of 755,000 related to the december 2005 acquisition of
pacificare.  the number of individuals served by unitedhealthcares commercial business as of december31, 2005, excluding the
pacificare acquisition, increased by approximately 700,000 over the prior year. this included an increase of 590,000 in the number of individuals served with fee-based products driven by the addition of approximately 335,000 individuals served
resulting from new customer relationships and customers converting from risk-based products to fee-based products as well as approximately 255,000 individuals served by a benefits administrative services company acquired in december 2005. in
addition, the number of individuals served with commercial risk-based products increased by 110,000 driven primarily by the addition of approximately 130,000 individuals served by neighborhood health partnership, acquired in september 2005, and a
slight increase in net new customer relationships more than offset by customers converting from risk-based products to fee-based products.  excluding the
pacificare acquisition, the number of individuals served by ovations medicare advantage products increased by 65,000, or 20%, over 2004 due primarily to new customer relationships. americhoices medicaid enrollment decreased by 10,000
from 2004 due primarily to the withdrawal of participation in one market during the third quarter of 2005 partially offset by new customer relationships since 2004.  uniprise  uniprise revenues in 2005 were $4.9 billion, representing an increase of $575 million, or 13%, over 2004.
excluding the impact of acquisitions, uniprise revenues increased approximately 11% over 2004. this increase was driven primarily by growth of 7% in the number of individuals served by uniprise, excluding the impact of acquisitions, and annual
service fee rate increases for self-insured customers. uniprise served 10.5million individuals and 9.9million individuals as of december31, 2005 and 2004, respectively.  uniprise earnings from operations in 2005 were $740 million, representing an increase of $116 million, or 19%, over 2004. operating margin for 2005 improved to 15.1% from 14.5% in 2004. uniprise has expanded its
table of contents
operating margin through operating cost efficiencies derived from process improvements, technology deployment and cost management initiatives that have
reduced labor and occupancy costs in its transaction processing and customer service, billing and enrollment functions. additionally, uniprises infrastructure can be scaled efficiently, allowing its business to grow revenues at a
proportionately higher rate than the associated growth in operating expenses.  specialized care services  specialized care services revenues of $2.8 billion increased by $510 million, or 22%, over 2004. this increase was principally driven by an 11% increase in the number of
individuals served by its specialty benefit businesses, excluding the impact of acquisitions, and rate increases related to these businesses as well as businesses acquired since the beginning of 2004.  earnings from operations in 2005 of $541 million increased $96 million, or 22%, over 2004. specialized care services operating margin was 19.3% in 2005, down from
19.4% in 2004. this decrease was due to a business mix shift toward higher revenue, lower margin products, partially offset by continued gains in quality initiatives and operating cost efficiencies.  ingenix  ingenix 2005 revenues of $807 million increased by $100
million, or 14%, over 2004. this was driven primarily by growth in the health information and contract research businesses as well as businesses acquired since the beginning of 2004.  earnings from operations in 2005 were $135 million, up $34 million, or 34%, from 2004. ingenixs operating margin was 16.7% in 2005, up from 14.3% in 2004. the increase in earnings from operations and operating
margin was primarily due to growth in the health information and contract research businesses, improving gross margins due to effective cost management and businesses acquired since the beginning of 2004.  financial condition, liquidity and capital resources at december31, 2006  liquidity and capital resources  we manage our cash, investments and capital structure so we are able to meet the
short- and long-term obligations of our business while maintaining strong financial flexibility and liquidity. we forecast, analyze and monitor our cash flows to enable prudent investment management and financing within the confines of our financial
strategy.  our regulated subsidiaries generate significant cash flows from operations. a majority of the assets held by our regulated subsidiaries are in
the form of cash, cash equivalents and investments. after considering expected cash flows from operating activities, we generally invest cash of regulated subsidiaries that exceed our short-term obligations in longer term, investment-grade,
marketable debt securities to improve our overall investment return. factors we consider in making these investment decisions include our board of directors approved investment policy, regulatory limitations, return objectives, tax
implications, risk tolerance and maturity dates. our long-term investments are also available for sale to meet short-term liquidity and other needs. cash in excess of the capital needs of our regulated entities is paid to their non-regulated parent
companies, typically in the form of dividends, for general corporate use, when and as permitted by applicable regulations.  our non-regulated businesses
also generate significant cash from operations for general corporate use. cash flows generated by these entities, combined with the issuance of commercial paper, long-term debt and the availability of committed credit facilities, further strengthen
our operating and financial flexibility. we generally use these cash flows to reinvest in our businesses in the form of capital expenditures, to expand the depth and breadth of our services through business acquisitions, and to repurchase shares of
our common stock, depending
table of contents
on market conditions. in august 2006, we announced that we would not purchase shares under our stock repurchase program until we had completed our
restatement (which is reflected in this form 10-k) and become current in our periodic sec filings. as a result, we did not repurchase any shares through this publicly announced program for the quarter ended december31, 2006.  cash flows generated from operating activities, our primary source of liquidity, are principally from net earnings, prior to depreciation and amortization and other
non-cash expenses. as a result, any future decline in our profitability may have a negative impact on our liquidity. the level of profitability of our risk-based insured business depends in large part on our ability to accurately predict and price
for health care and operating cost increases. this risk is partially mitigated by the diversity of our other businesses, the geographic diversity of our risk-based business and our disciplined underwriting and pricing processes, which seek to match
premium rate increases with estimated future health care costs. in 2006, a hypothetical unexpected 1% increase in commercial insured medical costs would have reduced net earnings by approximately $170 million.  the availability of financing in the form of debt or equity is influenced by many factors, including our profitability, operating cash flows, debt levels, debt ratings,
debt covenants and other contractual restrictions, regulatory requirements and market conditions. we believe that our strategies and actions toward maintaining financial flexibility mitigate much of this risk. however, a significant downgrade in
ratings may increase the cost of borrowing for the company or limit the companys access to capital. see  cautionary statements relating to our historic stock option practices  credit ratings for additional information.
cash and investments  cash flows from operating
activities were $6.5 billion in 2006, an increase over $4.1 billion in 2005. the increase in operating cash flows resulted primarily from an increase of $1.3 billion in net income prior to  depreciation, amortization and other noncash items as well as an increase of approximately $1.1 billion in cash flows generated from working capital changes. we generated
operating cash flows from working capital changes of $1.6 billion in 2006 and $412 million in 2005. the year-over-year increase primarily resulted from the company receiving twelve monthly medicare premium payments during 2006 from cms rather than
the eleven monthly payments received in 2005, positively impacting the change in reported operating cash flows by $275 million, along with growth in medical payables during 2006 compared to 2005 primarily driven by overall growth of the insured
business. additionally, there was an increase in accrued taxes payable due largely to an increase in pre-tax earnings.  we maintained a strong financial
condition and liquidity position, with cash and investments of $20.6billion at december31, 2006. total cash and investments increased by $5.6 billion since december31,2005, primarily due to strong operating cash flows, cash
received from debt and common stock issuances, and cash and investments acquired through businesses acquired since the beginning of 2006, partially offset by common stock repurchases, cash paid for business acquisitions and capital expenditures.
as further described under regulatory capital and dividend restrictions, many of our subsidiaries are subject to various government regulations that
restrict the timing and amount of dividends and other distributions that may be paid to their parent companies. at december31, 2006, approximately $1.9 billion of our $20.6billion of cash and investments was held by non-regulated
subsidiaries and was available for general corporate use, including acquisitions and share repurchases.  financing and investing activities
in addition to our strong cash flows generated by operating activities, we use commercial paper and long-term debt to maintain adequate operating and
financial flexibility. as of december31, 2006 and 2005, we had commercial paper and long-term debt outstanding of approximately $7.5 billion and $7.1 billion, respectively. our debt-to-total-capital ratio was 26.4% and 28.5% as of
december31, 2006 and december31, 2005,
table of contents
respectively. we believe the prudent use of debt optimizes our cost of capital and return on shareholders equity, while maintaining appropriate
liquidity.  as of december 31, 2006, our outstanding commercial paper had interest rates of approximately 5.3% to 5.5%.  on december1, 2006, our health care services business segment acquired the student insurance division (student resources) of the mega life and health insurance
company through an asset purchase agreement. under the terms of the asset purchase agreement, we issued a 10-year, 5.4% promissory note for approximately $95 million and paid approximately $1 million in cash in exchange for the net assets of student
resources.  on february24, 2006, our health care services business segment acquired john deere health care, inc. (jdhc). under the terms of the
purchase agreement, we paid approximately $515 million in cash, including transaction costs, in exchange for all of the outstanding equity of jdhc. we issued commercial paper to finance the jdhc purchase price. jdhc has been renamed unitedhealthcare
services company of the river valley, inc.  on december20, 2005, the company acquired pacificare. under the terms of the agreement, pacificare
shareholders received 1.1 shares of unitedhealth group common stock and $21.50 in cash for each share of pacificare common stock they owned. total consideration issued for the transaction was approximately $8.8billion, composed of
approximately 99.2million shares of unitedhealth group common stock (valued at approximately $5.3 billion based upon the average of unitedhealth groups share closing price for two days before, the day of and two days after the
acquisition announcement date of july6, 2005), approximately $2.1billion in cash, $960 million in cash paid to retire pacificares existing debt and unitedhealth group vested common stock options with an estimated fair value of
approximately $420 million issued in exchange for pacificares outstanding vested common stock options.  on september19, 2005, our health care
services business segment acquired neighborhood health partnership (nhp). under the terms of the purchase agreement, we paid approximately $185 million in cash in exchange for all of the outstanding equity of nhp. we issued commercial paper to
finance the nhp purchase price.  on october16, 2006, we executed a $7.5 billion 364-day revolving credit facility in order to ensure the
companys immediate and continued access to additional liquidity, if necessary. the credit facility is available for working capital purposes as well as to pay or repay any outstanding borrowings of the company. we have entered into amendments
to this credit facility to provide us with additional time to deliver to the lenders this 10-k and our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30, 2006 and our annual report on form 10-k for the
year ended december31, 2006. as of december31, 2006, we had no amounts outstanding under our $7.5 billion credit facility.  in march 2006, we
refinanced outstanding commercial paper by issuing $650 million of floating-rate notes due march 2009, $750 million of 5.3% fixed-rate notes due march 2011, $750 million of 5.4% fixed-rate notes due march 2016 and $850 million of 5.8% fixed-rate
notes due march 2036. the floating-rate notes due march 2009 are benchmarked to the london interbank offered rate (libor) and had an interest rate of 5.5% at december31, 2006.  in december 2005, we amended and restated our $1.0 billion five-year revolving credit facility supporting our commercial paper program. we increased the credit facility to $1.3 billion and extended the maturity date
to december 2010. we entered into amendments to our $1.3 billion credit facility to provide us with additional time to deliver to the lenders our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30, 2006
and our annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2006, to obtain our lenders agreement and acknowledgement that the delivery of a notice of default or notice of acceleration under any indenture or credit agreement that
is being contested by the company in good faith does not cause a default or event of default under the credit agreement, and to obtain a waiver of any potential default that may arise as a result of our determination that our historical financial
information should not be relied upon and as a result of
table of contents
our restatement of our historical financial statements. as of december31, 2006, we had no amounts outstanding under our $1.3 billion credit facility.
in november and december 2005, we issued $2.6 billion of commercial paper primarily to finance the cash portion of the purchase price of the pacificare
acquisition described above and to retire a portion of the pacificare debt at the closing of the acquisition, as well as to refinance current maturities of long-term debt.  in october 2005, we executed a $3.0 billion 364-day revolving credit facility to support a $3.0 billion increase in our commercial paper program in order to finance the cash portion of the pacificare acquisition. we
terminated the 364-day revolving credit facility in march 2006.  in march 2005, we issued $500 million of 4.9% fixed-rate notes due march 2015. we used the
proceeds from this borrowing for general corporate purposes, including repayment of commercial paper, capital expenditures, working capital and share repurchases.  to more closely align interest costs with the floating interest rate received on our cash and cash equivalent balances, we have entered into interest rate swap agreements to convert the majority of our interest rate exposure from a fixed
rate to a variable rate. these interest rate swap agreements qualify as fair value hedges. the interest rate swap agreements have aggregate notional amounts of $4.9 billion as of december31, 2006 with variable rates that are benchmarked to
libor, and are recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. as of december31, 2006, the aggregate liability, recorded at fair value, for all existing interest rate swaps was approximately $73million. these fair value hedges are accounted
for using the short-cut method under statement of financial accounting standards no.133, accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities (fas 133), whereby the hedges are reported on our consolidated balance sheets at
fair value, and the carrying value of the long-term debt is adjusted for an offsetting amount representing changes in fair value attributable to the hedged risk. since these amounts completely offset, we have reported both the swap liability and the
debt liability within debt on our consolidated balance sheets and there have been no net gains or losses recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. at december31, 2006, the rates used to accrue interest expense on these
agreements ranged from 4.9% to 5.7%.  our debt arrangements and credit facilities contain various covenants, the most restrictive of which require us to
maintain a debt-to-total-capital ratio (calculated as the sum of commercial paper and long-term debt divided by the sum of commercial paper, long-term debt and shareholders equity) below 50%. after giving effect to the credit agreement
amendments and waivers that we obtained from our lenders, we believe we are in compliance with the requirements of our debt covenants. on august28, 2006 we received a purported notice of default from persons claiming to hold certain of our
debt securities alleging a violation of our indenture governing our debt securities. this followed our announcement that we would delay filing our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2006. on or about november2,
2006, we received a purported notice of acceleration from the holders who previously sent the notice of default that purports to declare an acceleration of our 5.8% senior unsecured notes due march15, 2036 as a result of our not filing our
quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2006. our indenture requires us to provide to the trustee copies of the reports we are required to file with the sec, such as our quarterly reports, within 15 days of filing such
reports with the sec. on october25, 2006, we filed an action in the united states district federal court for the district of minnesota seeking a declaratory judgment that we are not in default under the terms of the indenture. immediately
prior to the filing of this form 10-k, we filed our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june 30, 2006 and september 30, 2006, as well as an amendment to our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2006. should
the company ultimately be unsuccessful in this matter, the company may be required to retire all or a portion of the $850 million of senior unsecured notes due march 2036. we intend to prosecute the declaratory judgment action vigorously.
pacificare had approximately $100 million par value of 3% convertible subordinated debentures (convertible notes), which were convertible into
approximately 5.2million shares of unitedhealth groups common stock and $102 million of cash as of december31, 2005. in december 2005, we initiated a consent solicitation to all of the holders of outstanding convertible notes
pursuant to which we offered to compensate all holders who elected
table of contents
to convert their notes in accordance with existing terms and consent to an amendment to a covenant in the indenture governing the convertible notes. the
compensation consisted of the present value of interest through october18, 2007, the earliest redemption date, plus a pro rata share of $1 million. on january31, 2006, approximately 91% of the convertible notes were tendered pursuant to
the offer, for which we issued 4.8million shares of unitedhealth group common stock, valued at $282 million, and cash of $93 million.  our senior
debt is rated a with a negative outlook by standard& poors (s&p), a with a negative watch by fitch, and a3 with a negative outlook by moodys. our commercial paper is rated a-1
with a negative outlook by s&p, f-1 with a negative watch by fitch, and p-2 with a negative outlook by moodys. moodys downgraded our rating in october 2006 citing concerns about corporate governance following
the release of the wilmerhale report (see note 3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements). we do not expect this moodys downgrade to significantly affect our borrowing capacity or costs. a significant downgrade in our debt or
commercial paper ratings could adversely affect our borrowing capacity and costs. see cautionary statements relating to our historic stock option practices  credit ratings for additional information.
under our board of directors authorization, we maintain a common stock repurchase program. repurchases may be made from time to time at prevailing prices,
subject to certain restrictions on volume, pricing and timing. there is no established expiration date for the program. during the year ended december31, 2006, we repurchased 40.2million shares at an average price of approximately $56
per share and an aggregate cost of approximately $2.2 billion. as of december31, 2006, we had board of directors authorization to purchase up to an additional 136.7million shares of our common stock. our common stock repurchase
program is discretionary as we are under no obligation to repurchase shares. we repurchase shares because we believe it is a prudent use of capital. the company suspended purchases under its stock repurchase program in the third quarter of 2006
pending completion of our restatement (which is reflected in this form 10-k) and becoming current in our periodic sec filings. the company intends to resume its stock repurchase program in 2007.  we currently have $1.0 billion remaining under our universal s-3 shelf registration statement (for common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and other securities),
although we will be unable to issue securities on form s-3 on a primary basis until we have timely filed all reports required to be filed with the sec for a twelve-month period. we may offer securities from time to time at prices and terms to be
determined at the time of offering. under our s-4 acquisition shelf registration statement, we have remaining issuing capacity of 48.6million shares of our common stock in connection with acquisition activities. we filed a separate s-4
registration statement for the 99.2million shares issued in connection with the december 2005 acquisition of pacificare described previously.  contractual obligations, off-balance sheet arrangements and commitments  the following table summarizes future obligations due by period as
of december31, 2006, under our various contractual obligations, off-balance sheet arrangements and commitments (in millions):
2008to2009
2010to2011
thereafter
total
debt and commercial paper (1)
$
1,483
$
1,850
$
$
3,373
$
7,456
interest on debt and commercial paper (2)
1,660
3,045
operating leases
purchase obligations (3)
future policy benefits (4)
1,186
1,971
other long-term obligations (5)
total contractual obligations
$
2,308
$
3,261
$
1,722
$
6,919
$
14,210
(1)
debt payments could be accelerated upon violation of debt covenants. we believe the likelihood of acceleration is remote.
(2)
calculated using stated rates from the debt agreements and related interest rate swap agreements and assuming amounts are outstanding through their contractual term. for
variable-rate obligations, we used the rates in place as of december31, 2006 to estimate all remaining contractual payments.
table of contents
(3)
includes fixed or minimum commitments under existing purchase obligations for goods and services, including agreements which are cancelable with the payment of an early termination
penalty. excludes agreements that are cancelable without penalty and also excludes liabilities to the extent recorded on the consolidated balance sheets at december31, 2006.
(4)
estimated payments required under life and annuity contracts held by a divested entity. under our reinsurance arrangement with oneamerica financial partners, inc. (oneamerica) these
amounts are payable by oneamerica, but we remain primarily liable to the policyholders if they are unable to pay (see note 5 of the notes to consolidated financial statements). the payable is offset by a corresponding reinsurance receivable from
oneamerica.
(5)
includes obligations associated with certain employee benefit programs and minority interest purchase commitments.  the table above includes a facility lease agreement that we signed in 2006. lease payments are expected to commence under this agreement in march 2009, at the time we
occupy the facility, and extend over a 20 year period with total estimated lease payments of $229 million.  in conjunction with the pacificare acquisition
we committed to make $50 million in charitable contributions to the benefit of california health care consumers, which has been accrued on our consolidated balance sheets. additionally, we agreed to invest $200 million in californias health
care infrastructure to further health care services to the underserved populations of the california marketplace. the timing and amount of individual contributions and investments are at our discretion, subject to the advice and oversight of local
regulatory authorities; however, our goal is to have the investment commitment fully funded by the end of 2010. the investment commitment remains in place for 20 years after full funding. we have committed to specific projects totaling $12 million
of the $50 million charitable commitment at this time.  due to the financial restatements previously discussed, the company has determined that certain
options exercised by nonexecutive officer employees in 2006 were discount options subject to section 409a of the internal revenue code. the company notified the internal revenue service (irs) on february 28, 2007 that it would participate in the
irss resolution program which allows the company to pay its employees additional tax costs under section 409a. as such, the company will take a charge, net of tax benefit, of approximately $55 million in the first quarter of 2007.
currently, we do not have any other material contractual obligations, off-balance sheet arrangements or commitments that require cash resources; however,
we continually evaluate opportunities to expand our operations. this includes internal development of new products, programs and technology applications, and may include acquisitions.  medicare part d pharmacy benefits contract  beginning january1, 2006, the company began serving as a plan
sponsor offering medicare part d prescription drug insurance coverage under a contract with cms. the company contracts with cms on an annual basis. under medicare part d, members have access to a standard drug benefit that features a monthly
premium, typically with an initial annual deductible, coinsurance of 25% for the member and 75% for the company up to an initial coverage limit of $2,250 of annual drug costs, no insurance coverage between $2,250 and $5,100 (except the member gets
the benefit of the companys significant drug discounts), and catastrophic coverage for annual drug costs in excess of $5,100 covered approximately 80% by cms, 15% by the company and 5% by the member up to an annual out-of-pocket maximum of
$3,600.  the companys contract with cms includes risk-sharing provisions, wherein cms retains approximately 75% to 80% of the losses or profits
outside a pre-defined risk corridor. the risk-sharing provisions take effect if actual pharmacy benefit costs are more than 2.5% above or below expected cost levels as submitted by the company in its initial contract application.
table of contents
during 2006, members were permitted to enroll or disenroll in a medicare part d plan until may15, 2006. once
enrolled, most members were allowed to switch plans once before may15, 2006 (although low-income members eligible for both medicare and medicaid are allowed to change plans monthly). contracts are generally non-cancelable by enrollees after
may15, 2006. after that date, enrollees may change plans once every year between november15 and december31 to take effect january1 of the following year.  as a result of the medicare part d benefit design, the company incurs benefit costs unevenly during the annual contract year. while the company is responsible for a majority of a medicare members drug costs up
to $2,250, the member is responsible for their drug costs from $2,250 up to $5,100 (at the companys discounted purchase price). as such, the company incurs disproportionately higher benefit claims in the first half of the contract year as
compared with last half of the contract year, when comparatively more members will be incurring claims above the $2,250 initial coverage limit. although the company also incurs costs for individuals with annual pharmacy claims in excess of $5,100,
these costs represent a much smaller portion of total contract costs, and will be incurred primarily in the second half of the year. the uneven timing of medicare part d pharmacy benefit claims results in losses in the first half of year that
entitle the company to risk-share adjustment payments from cms. accordingly, during the interim periods within the contract year we record a net risk-share receivable from cms in other current assets in the consolidated balance sheets and a
corresponding retrospective premium adjustment in premium revenues in the consolidated statements of operations. this represents the estimated amount payable by cms to the company under the risk-share contract provisions if the program were
terminated based on estimated costs incurred through that interim period. those losses reverse in the second half of the year and final risk-share amounts due to or from cms, if any, are settled approximately six months after the contract year-end.
the projected net risk-share payable to be paid to cms as of december31, 2006 was approximately $350 million.  aarp  in january 1998, we entered into a ten-year contract with aarp to provide health insurance products and services to members of aarp. these products and services are
provided to supplement benefits covered under traditional medicare (medicare supplement insurance), hospital indemnity insurance, health insurance focused on persons between 50 to 64 years of age, and other products. under the terms of this medicare
supplement insurance contract, we are compensated for transaction processing and other services as well as for assuming underwriting risk. we are also engaged in product development activities to complement the insurance offerings under this
program. premium revenues from these aarp supplemental health insurance offerings were approximately $5.0 billion in 2006, $4.9 billion in 2005 and $4.5 billion in 2004.  the underwriting gains or losses related to the aarp medicare supplement insurance business are directly recorded as an increase or decrease to a rate stabilization fund (rsf). the primary components of the
underwriting results are premium revenue, medical costs, investment income, administrative expenses, member services expenses, marketing expenses and premium taxes. underwriting gains and losses are recorded as an increase or decrease to the rsf and
accrue to the overall benefit of the aarp policyholders, unless cumulative net losses were to exceed the balance in the rsf. to the extent underwriting losses exceed the balance in the rsf, we would have to fund the deficit. any deficit we fund
could be recovered by underwriting gains in future periods of the contract. to date, we have not been required to fund any underwriting deficits. as further described in note 13 to the consolidated financial statements, the rsf balance is reported
in other policy liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. we believe the rsf balance at december31, 2006 is currently sufficient to cover potential future underwriting and other risks associated with the contract.
under a separate license agreement with aarp, we sell medicare prescription drug benefit plans under the aarp brand name. we assume all operational and
underwriting risks and losses for these plans.  regulatory capital and dividend restrictions  we conduct a significant portion of our operations through subsidiaries that are subject to standards established by the national association of insurance commissioners
(naic). these standards, among other things, require
table of contents
these subsidiaries to maintain specified levels of statutory capital, as defined by each state, and restrict the timing and amount of dividends and other
distributions that may be paid to their parent companies. generally, the amount of dividend distributions that may be paid by a regulated subsidiary, without prior approval by state regulatory authorities, is limited based on the entitys level
of statutory net income and statutory capital and surplus. we maintain an aggregate statutory capital level for our regulated subsidiaries that is significantly higher than the minimum level regulators require.  in 2006, based on 2005 statutory net income and statutory capital and surplus levels, the maximum amount of dividends which could be paid without prior regulatory
approval was approximately $2.2 billion. for the year ended december31, 2006, the companys regulated subsidiaries paid over $2.5 billion in dividends to their parent companies, including approximately $300 million of special dividends
approved by state insurance regulators.  the inability of the companys regulated subsidiaries to pay dividends to their parent companies would impact
the scale to which we could reinvest in our business through capital expenditures, business acquisitions and the repurchase of shares of our common stock. in addition, the inability to pay regulated dividends could impact our ability to repay our
debt; however, our cash flows from operating activities generated from our non-regulated businesses greatly mitigate this risk. as of december31, 2006, approximately $1.9 billion of our $20.6 billion of cash and investments was held by
non-regulated subsidiaries and available for general corporate use. critical accounting policies and estimates  critical accounting policies are those policies that require management to make challenging, subjective or complex judgments, often because they must estimate the effects
of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. critical accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties that are sufficiently sensitive to result in materially different results under different assumptions and
conditions. we believe our critical accounting policies are those described below. for a detailed discussion of these and other accounting policies, see note 2 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.  medical costs  each reporting period, we estimate our
obligations for medical care services that have been rendered on behalf of insured consumers for which we have either not yet received or processed claims, and for liabilities for physician, hospital and other medical cost disputes. we develop
estimates for medical costs incurred but not reported using an actuarial process that is consistently applied, centrally controlled and automated. the actuarial models consider factors such as time from date of service to claim receipt, claim
backlogs, care provider contract rate changes, medical care consumption and other medical cost trends. depending on the health care provider and type of service, the typical billing lag for services can range from two to 90 days from the date of
service. substantially all claims related to medical care services are known and settled within nine to twelve months from the date of service. we estimate liabilities for physician, hospital and other medical cost disputes based upon an analysis of
potential outcomes, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies.  each period, we re-examine previously established medical costs
payable estimates based on actual claim submissions and other changes in facts and circumstances. as the liability estimates recorded in prior periods become more exact, we adjust the amount of the estimates, and include the changes in estimates in
medical costs in the period in which the change is identified. in every reporting period, our operating results include the effects of more completely developed medical costs payable estimates associated with previously reported periods. if the
revised estimate of prior period medical costs is less than the previous estimate, we will decrease reported medical costs in the current period (favorable development). if the revised estimate of prior period medical costs is more than the previous
estimate, we will increase reported medical costs in the current period (unfavorable development). historically, the net impact of estimate developments has represented less than 1% of annual medical costs, less than 5% of annual earnings from
operations and less than 4% of medical costs payable.
table of contents
in developing our medical costs payable estimates, we apply different estimation methods depending on the month for which
incurred claims are being estimated. for example, we actuarially calculate completion factors using an analysis of claim adjudication patterns over the most recent 36-month period. a completion factor is an actuarial estimate, based upon historical
experience, of the percentage of incurred claims during a given period that have been adjudicated by the company as of the date of estimation. for months prior to the most recent three months, we apply the completion factors to actual claims
adjudicated-to-date in order to estimate the expected amount of ultimate incurred claims for those months. we do not believe that completion factors are a reliable basis for estimating claims incurred for the most recent three months as there is
typically insufficient claim data available for those months to calculate credible completion factors. accordingly, for the most recent three months, we estimate claim costs incurred primarily by applying observed medical cost trend factors to the
average per member per month (pmpm) medical costs incurred in prior months for which more complete claim data is available, supplemented by a review of near-term completion factors. medical cost trend factors are developed through a comprehensive
analysis of claims incurred in prior months for which more complete claim data is available and by reviewing a broad set of health care utilization indicators including, but not limited to, pharmacy utilization trends, inpatient hospital census data
and incidence data from the national centers for disease control. we also consider completion factors in developing medical cost estimates for the most recent months. this approach is consistently applied from period to period.  completion factors are the most significant factors we use in developing our medical costs payable estimates for older periods, generally periods prior to the most
recent three months. the following table illustrates the sensitivity of these factors and the estimated potential impact on our medical costs payable estimates for those periods as of december31, 2006:
completion factor increase (decrease) in factor
increase (decrease) inmedicalcostspayable(1)
(inmillions)
(0.75)%
$
(0.50)%
$
(0.25)%
$
0.25%
$
(42
)
0.50%
$
(84
)
0.75%
$
(126
)
medical cost pmpm trend factors are the most significant factors we use in estimating our medical costs payable
for the most recent three months. the following table illustrates the sensitivity of these factors and the estimated potential impact on our medical costs payable estimates for the most recent three months as of december31, 2006:
medical cost pmpm trend increase (decrease) in factor
increase(decrease)in medicalcostspayable(2)
(in millions)
3%
$
2%
$
1%
$
(1)%
$
(82
)
(2)%
$
(165
)
(3)%
$
(247
)
(1)
reflects estimated potential changes in medical costs and medical costs payable caused by changes in completion factors used in developing medical cost payable estimates for older
periods, generally periods prior to the most recent three months.
(2)
reflects estimated potential changes in medical costs and medical costs payable caused by changes in medical costs pmpm trend data used in developing medical cost payable estimates
for the most recent three months.
table of contents
the analyses above include those outcomes that are considered reasonably likely based on the companys historical
experience in estimating its liabilities for incurred but not reported benefit claims.  in order to evaluate the impact of changes in medical cost
estimates for any particular discrete period, one should consider both the amount of development recorded in the current period pertaining to prior periods and the amount of development recorded in subsequent periods pertaining to the current
period. the accompanying table provides a summary of the net impact of favorable development on medical costs and earnings from operations (in millions).
favorabledevelopment
increase(decrease) to medical costs(a)
medical costs
earningsfromoperations
asrestated(b)
asadjusted(c)
asrestated(b)
asadjusted
$
$
(80
)
$
18,938
$
18,858
$
1,969
$
2,049
$
$
(60
)
$
21,482
$
21,422
$
2,671
$
2,731
$
$
(190
)
$
27,858
$
27,668
$
3,858
$
4,048
$
$
(30
)
$
33,669
$
33,639
$
5,080
$
5,110
$
(d
)
$
53,308
(d
)
$
6,984
(d
)
(a)
the amount of favorable development recorded in the current year pertaining to the prior year less the amount of favorable development recorded in the subsequent year pertaining to
the current year.
(b)
restated to include the impact of fas 123r, which we adopted effective january1, 2006, as well as impacts associated with the restatement described in note 3 restatement
of consolidated financial statements.
(c)
represents reported amounts adjusted to reflect the net impact of medical cost development.
(d)
not yet determinable as the amount of prior period development recorded in 2007 will change as our december31, 2006 medical costs payable estimate develops throughout 2007.
our estimate of medical costs payable represents managements best estimate of the companys liability for unpaid medical costs as
of december31, 2006, developed using consistently applied actuarial methods. management believes the amount of medical costs payable is reasonable and adequate to cover the companys liability for unpaid claims as of december31,
2006; however, actual claim payments may differ from established estimates. the increase in favorable medical cost development in 2006 was driven primarily by growth in the size of the medical cost base and related medical payables due to organic
growth and businesses acquired since the beginning of 2005. as our medical costs payable estimate increases in amount due to increases in the fully insured consumer base and inflationary increases in medical costs, the absolute dollar amount of
subsequent changes to that estimate will increase even if the accuracy of our medical costs payable estimate remains consistent as a percentage of the original estimate. assuming a hypothetical 1% difference between our december31, 2006
estimates of medical costs payable and actual medical costs payable, excluding the aarp business, 2006 earnings from operations would increase or decrease by $71 million and diluted net earnings per common share would increase or decrease by $0.03
per share.  historic stock option measurement dates  the selection by the company of the methodologies described in note 3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements to determine the measurement dates of historic stock option grants involved judgment and careful evaluation of all
relevant facts and circumstances for each historical grant. the company believes it has used the most appropriate methodologies. however, the company also conducted a sensitivity analysis to assess how the restatement adjustments would have changed
under two alternative methodologies for determining measurement dates. the following table sets forth the incremental effect on earnings before income taxes that would result from using the alternate measurement date determination methodologies
described below:
communication date.this methodology would select as the measurement date the date on which stock option grants were communicated to
employees, assuming that the communication date is readily
table of contents
identifiable. this was generally the date on which stock option awards became viewable by all optionees on the companys intranet portal for employee
benefits. in the event the communication date was not readily available, with respect to section16 officers, this alternative methodology would select as the measurement date the date on which a section16 officer filed a form 4 (or other
statement of changes in beneficial ownership) with respect to a specific grant and, for employees who are not section16 officers, the date on which the company has determined that the ceo certificate was likely executed by the former ceo of
the company.
legal execution date.this methodology would select as the measurement date the date on which the company has determined that the
legal documentation approving a grant was likely executed, based on evaluation of all available information. for section16 officers, this date is typically the date on which the company has determined that the written action of the
compensation committee was likely executed by a majority of the members of the compensation committee and, for all other employees, this date is typically the date on which the company has determined that the ceo certificate was likely executed by
the former ceo of the company.
decrease to earnings before income taxes
fas 123r - current accounting method
apb 25 - historical accounting method
(in millions) year
communicationmeasurementdates
legalexecutionmeasurementdates
communicationmeasurementdates
legalexecutionmeasurementdates
pre-1994
n/a
n/a
$
$
n/a
n/a
$
$
n/a
n/a
total impact
$
$
$
$
revenues  revenues are principally derived from health care insurance premiums. we recognize premium revenues in the period eligible individuals are entitled to receive health care services. customers are typically billed monthly at a contracted rate
per eligible person multiplied by the total number of people eligible to receive services, as recorded in our records. employer groups generally provide us with changes to their eligible population one month in arrears. each billing includes an
adjustment for prior month changes in eligibility status that were not reflected in our previous billing. we estimate and adjust the current periods revenues and accounts receivable accordingly. our estimates are based on historical trends,
premiums billed, the level of contract renewal activity and other relevant information. we revise estimates of revenue adjustments each period and record changes in the period they become known.  goodwill, intangible assets and other long-lived assets  as of
december31, 2006, we had long-lived assets, including goodwill, other intangible assets, property, equipment and capitalized software, of $20.6 billion. we review our goodwill for impairment annually at the reporting unit level, and we review
our remaining long-lived assets for impairment when events and changes in
table of contents
circumstances indicate we might not recover their carrying value. to determine the fair value of our long-lived assets and assess their recoverability, we
must make assumptions about a wide variety of internal and external factors including estimated future utility and estimated future cash flows, which in turn are based on estimates of future revenues, expenses and operating margins. if these
estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets that could materially affect our results of operations and shareholders equity in the period in which the impairment
occurs.  investments  as of december31,
2006, we had approximately $10.3 billion of investments, primarily held in marketable debt securities. our investments are principally classified as available for sale and are recorded at fair value. we exclude unrealized gains and losses on
investments available for sale from earnings and report them together, net of income tax effects, as a separate component in shareholders equity. we continually monitor the difference between the cost and fair value of our investments. as of
december31, 2006, our investments had gross unrealized gains of $79 million and gross unrealized losses of $53 million. if any of our investments experience a decline in fair value that is determined to be other than temporary, based on
analysis of relevant factors, we record a realized loss in our consolidated statements of operations. management judgment is involved in evaluating whether a decline in an investments fair value is other than temporary. we analyze relevant
factors individually and in combination including the length of time and extent to which market value has been less than cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer as well as specific events or circumstances that may
influence the operations of the issuer, and our intent and ability to hold the investment for a sufficient time in order to enable recovery of our cost. new information and the passage of time can change these judgments. we revise impairment
judgments when new information becomes known or when we do not anticipate holding the investment until recovery and record any resulting impairment charges at that time. we manage our investment portfolio to limit our exposure to any one issuer or
industry and largely limit our investments to u.s. government and agency securities, state and municipal securities, and corporate debt obligations that are investment grade.  contingent liabilities  because of the nature of our businesses, we are routinely involved in various
disputes, legal proceedings and governmental audits and investigations. we record liabilities for our estimates of the probable costs resulting from these matters. our estimates are developed in consultation with outside legal counsel and are based
upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies and considering our insurance coverage, if any, for such matters. it is possible that future results of operations for any particular quarterly or
annual period could be materially affected by changes in our estimates or assumptions. see  cautionary statements for a description of the risks related to our pending regulatory inquiries and litigation.  inflation  the current national health care cost inflation rate
significantly exceeds the general inflation rate. we use various strategies to lessen the effects of health care cost inflation. these include setting commercial premiums based on anticipated health care costs and coordinating care with physicians
and other health care providers. through contracts with physicians and other health care providers, we emphasize preventive health care, appropriate use of health care services consistent with clinical performance standards, education and closing
gaps in care.  we believe our strategies to mitigate the impact of health care cost inflation on our operating results have been and will continue to be
successful. however, other factors including competitive pressures, new health care and pharmaceutical product introductions, demands from physicians and other health care providers and consumers, major epidemics, and applicable regulations may
affect our ability to control the impact of health care cost inflation. because of the narrow operating margins of our risk-based products, changes in medical cost trends that were not anticipated in establishing premium rates can create significant
changes in our financial results.
table of contents
legal matters  legal matters relating to our historic stock option practices  regulatory inquiries  in march 2006, we received an informal inquiry from the sec relating to our historic stock option practices.  on may17, 2006, we received a document request from the internal revenue service seeking documents relating to stock option grants and other compensation for the
persons who from 2003 to the present were the named executive officers in our annual proxy statements.  on may17, 2006, we received a subpoena from
the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york requesting documents from 1999 to the present relating to our stock option practices.  on
june6, 2006, we received a civil investigative demand from the minnesota attorney general requesting documents from january1, 1997 to the present concerning our executive compensation and stock option practices. after filing an action in
ramsey county court, state of minnesota, captioned unitedhealth group incorporated vs. state of minnesota, by lori swanson, attorney general, we filed a motion for protective order which was denied by the trial court. we are pursuing an
appeal of the order denying the protective order.  on december19, 2006, we received from the staff of the sec enforcement division a formal order of
investigation into the companys historic stock option practices.  we have also received requests for documents from u.s. congressional committees
relating to our historic stock option practices and compensation of executives.  with the exception of the civil investigative demand from the minnesota
attorney general, we have generally cooperated and will continue to cooperate with the regulatory authorities. at the conclusion of these regulatory inquiries, we could be subject to regulatory or criminal fines or penalties, as well as other
sanctions or other contingent liabilities, which could be material.  litigation matters  on march29, 2006, the first of several shareholder derivative actions was filed against certain of our current and former officers and directors in the united
states district court for the district of minnesota. the action has been consolidated with six other actions and is captioned in re unitedhealth group incorporated shareholder derivative litigation. the consolidated amended complaint is
brought on behalf of the company by several pension funds and other shareholders and names certain of our current and former directors and officers as defendants, as well as the company as a nominal defendant. the consolidated amended complaint
generally alleges that defendants breached their fiduciary duties to the company, were unjustly enriched, and violated the securities laws in connection with our historic stock option practices. the consolidated amended complaint seeks unspecified
money damages, injunctive relief and rescission of the options. on june26, 2006, our board of directors created a special litigation committee under minnesota statute 302a.241, consisting of two former minnesota supreme court justices, with
the power to investigate the claims raised in the derivative actions and a shareholder demand, and determine whether the companys rights and remedies should be pursued. based on the existence of our special litigation committee, defendants
have moved to dismiss or in the alternative to stay the litigation pending resolution of the special litigation committee process. a consolidated derivative action, reflecting a consolidation of two actions, is also pending in hennepin county
district court, state of minnesota. the consolidated complaint is captioned in re unitedhealth group incorporated derivative litigation. the action was brought by two individual shareholders and names certain of our current and former
officers and directors as defendants, as well as the company as nominal defendant. on february6, 2007, the state court judge entered an order staying the action pending resolution of the special litigation committee process.  on may5, 2006, the first of seven putative class actions alleging a violation of the federal securities laws was brought by an individual shareholder against
certain of our current and former officers and directors in the united
table of contents
states district court for the district of minnesota. on december8, 2006, a consolidated amended complaint was filed consolidating the actions into a
single action. the action is captioned in re unitedhealth group incorporated pslra litigation. the action was brought by lead plaintiff california public employees retirement system against the company and certain of our current and former
officers and directors. the consolidated amended complaint alleges that defendants, in connection with the same alleged course of conduct identified in the shareholder derivative actions described above, made misrepresentations and omissions during
the period between january20, 2005 and may17, 2006, in press releases and public filings that artificially inflated the price of our common stock. the consolidated amended complaint also asserts that during the class period, certain
defendants sold shares of our common stock while in possession of material, non-public information concerning the matters set forth in the complaint. the consolidated amended complaint alleges claims under sections 10(b), 14(a), 20(a) and 20a of the
securities and exchange act of 1934 and sections 11 and 15 of the securities act of 1933. the action seeks unspecified money damages and equitable relief. defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint on february6, 2007. we
intend to vigorously defend against the action.  on june6, 2006, a purported class action captioned zilhaver v. unitedhealth group
incorporated, was filed against the company and certain of our current and former officers and directors in the united state district court for the district of minnesota. this action alleges that the fiduciaries to the company-sponsored 401(k)
plan violated erisa by allowing the plan to continue to hold company stock. defendants filed a motion to dismiss on february6, 2007. we intend to vigorously defend against the action.  on august28, 2006, we received a purported notice of default from persons claiming to hold certain of our debt securities alleging a violation of our indenture
governing our debt securities. this follows our announcement that we would delay filing our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2006. on october25, 2006, we filed an action in the united states district court for
the district of minnesota, captioned unitedhealth group incorporated v. cede& co. and the bank of new york, seeking a declaratory judgment that we are not in default under the terms of the indenture. on or about november2,
2006, we received a purported notice of acceleration from the holders who previously sent the notice of default that purports to declare an acceleration of our 5.80% senior unsecured notes due march15, 2036 as a result of our announcement that
we would delay filing our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2006. immediately prior to the filing of this form 10-k, we filed our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and
september30, 2006, as well as an amendment to our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2006. should the company ultimately be unsuccessful in this matter, we may be required to retire all or a portion of the $850
million of senior unsecured notes due march 2036. we intend to vigorously prosecute the declaratory judgment action.  other legal matters
because of the nature of our businesses, we are routinely made party to a variety of legal actions related to the design and management of our service
offerings. we record liabilities for our estimates of probable costs resulting from these matters. these matters include, but are not limited to, claims relating to health care benefits coverage, medical malpractice actions, contract disputes and
claims related to disclosure of certain business practices.  beginning in 1999, a series of class action lawsuits were filed against both unitedhealthcare
and pacificare, and virtually all major entities in the health benefits business. in december 2000, a multidistrict litigation panel consolidated several litigation cases involving the company and our affiliates in the southern district court of
florida, miami division. generally, the health care provider plaintiffs allege violations of erisa and the racketeer influenced corrupt organization act (rico) in connection with alleged undisclosed policies intended to maximize profits. other
allegations include breach of state prompt payment laws and breach of contract claims for failure to timely reimburse providers for medical services rendered. the consolidated suits seek injunctive, compensatory and equitable relief as well as
restitution, costs, fees and interest payments. the trial court granted the health care providers motion for class certification and that order was reviewed by the eleventh circuit court of appeals. the eleventh circuit affirmed the class
action status of the rico claims, but reversed as to the
table of contents
breach of contract, unjust enrichment and prompt payment claims. during the course of the litigation, there have been co-defendant settlements. on
january31, 2006, the trial court dismissed all remaining claims against pacificare, and on june19, 2006, the trial court dismissed all remaining claims against unitedhealthcare brought by the lead plaintiff. the tag-along lawsuits remain
outstanding. on july27, 2006, the plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal to the eleventh circuit court of appeals challenging the dismissal of the claims against unitedhealthcare. we intend to vigorously defend against the action.  on march15, 2000, the american medical association filed a lawsuit against the company in the supreme court of the state of new york, county of new york. on
april13, 2000, we removed this case to the unitedstates district court for the southern district of new york. the suit alleges causes of action based on erisa, as well as breach of contract and the implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing, deceptive acts and practices, and trade libel in connection with the calculation of reasonable and customary reimbursement rates for non-network providers. the suit seeks declaratory, injunctive and compensatory relief as well as costs,
fees and interest payments. an amended complaint was filed on august25, 2000, which alleged two classes of plaintiffs, an erisa class and a non-erisa class. after the court dismissed certain erisa claims and the claims brought by the american
medical association, a third amended complaint was filed on january11, 2002. on october25, 2002, the court granted in part and denied in part our motion to dismiss the third amended complaint. on may21, 2003, we filed a
counterclaim complaint in this matter alleging antitrust violations against the american medical association and asserting claims based on improper billing practices against an individual provider plaintiff. on may26, 2004, we filed a motion
for partial summary judgment seeking the dismissal of certain claims and parties based, in part, due to lack of standing. on july16, 2004, plaintiffs filed a motion for leave to file an amended complaint, seeking to assert rico violations. on
december29, 2006, the trial court granted plaintiffs motion to amend the complaint. we intend to vigorously defend against the action.  quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risks  market risk represents the risk of changes in the fair value of a financial
instrument caused by changes in interest rates or equity prices. the companys primary market risk is exposure to changes in interest rates that could impact the fair value of our investments and long-term debt.  approximately $20.3 billion of our cash equivalents and investments at december31, 2006 were debt securities. assuming a hypothetical and immediate 1% increase or
decrease in interest rates applicable to our fixed-income investment portfolio at december31, 2006, the fair value of our fixed-income investments would decrease or increase by approximately $337 million. we manage our investment portfolio to
limit our exposure to any one issuer or industry and largely limit our investments to u.s. government and agency securities, state and municipal securities, and corporate debt obligations that are investment grade.  to mitigate the financial impact of changes in interest rates, we have entered into interest rate swap agreements to more closely match the interest rates of our
long-term debt with those of our cash equivalents and short-term investments. including the impact of our interest rate swap agreements, approximately $6.1 billion of our commercial paper and debt had variable rates of interest and approximately
$1.4 billion had fixed rates as of december31, 2006. a hypothetical 1% increase or decrease in interest rates would not be material to the fair value of our commercial paper and debt.  at december31, 2006, we had $312 million of equity investments, a portion of which were held by our unitedhealth capital business in various public and non-public
companies concentrated in the areas of health care delivery and related information technologies. market conditions that affect the value of health care or technology stocks will likewise impact the value of our equity portfolio.  concentrations of credit risk  investments in financial instruments
such as marketable securities and accounts receivable may subject unitedhealth group to concentrations of credit risk. our investments in marketable securities are managed under
table of contents
an investment policy authorized by our board of directors. this policy limits the amounts that may be invested in any one issuer and generally limits our
investments to u.s. government and agency securities, state and municipal securities and corporate debt obligations that are investment grade. concentrations of credit risk with respect to accounts receivable are limited due to the large number of
employer groups that constitute our customer base. as discussed more fully in note 5 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we have an aggregate $2.0 billion reinsurance receivable resulting from the sale of our life and annuity
business. we regularly evaluate the financial condition of the reinsurer and only record the reinsurance receivable to the extent that the amounts are deemed probable of recovery. as of december31, 2006, there were no other significant
concentrations of credit risk.  cautionary statements  the statements, estimates, projections, guidance or outlook contained in this annual report on form 10-k include forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995 (pslra). when used in
this annual report on form 10-k and in future filings by us with the sec, in our news releases, presentations to securities analysts or investors, and in oral statements made by or with the approval of one of our executive officers, the words or
phrases believes, anticipates, expects, plans, seeks, intends, will likely result, estimates, projects or similar expressions are intended to
identify such forward-looking statements. these statements are intended to take advantage of the safe harbor provisions of the pslra. these forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual results to
differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements.  the following discussion contains certain cautionary statements regarding
our business that investors and others should consider. except to the extent otherwise required by federal securities laws, we do not undertake to address or update forward-looking statements in future filings or communications regarding our
business or operating results, and do not undertake to address how any of these factors may have caused results to differ from discussions or information contained in previous filings or communications. in addition, any of the matters discussed
below may have affected past, as well as current, forward-looking statements about future results. any or all forward-looking statements in this form 10-k and in any other public filings or statements we make may turn out to be wrong. they can be
affected by inaccurate assumptions we might make or by known or unknown risks and uncertainties. many factors discussed below will be important in determining future results. by their nature, forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future
performance or results and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict or quantify. actual future results may vary materially from expectations expressed in this report or any of our prior communications.
cautionary statements relating to our historic stock option practices  matters relating to or arising out of our historic stock option practices, including regulatory inquiries, litigation matters, downgrades in our credit ratings, and potential additional cash and noncash charges
could have a material adverse effect on the company.  as described in the explanatory note immediately preceding part i, item1, and in note 3
restatement of consolidated financial statements of the notes to consolidated financial statements in this form 10-k, in early 2006, our board of directors initiated an independent review of the companys stock option practices from
1994 to 2005. the independent review was conducted by the independent committee with the assistance of independent counsel, wilmerhale, and independent accounting advisors. on october15, 2006, we announced that the independent committee and
wilmerhale had completed their review of the companys stock option practices and reported the findings to the non-management directors of the company. as a result of our historic stock option practices, we restated, in this form 10-k, our
previously filed financial statements, we are subject to various regulatory inquiries, litigation matters and credit rating downgrades, and we may be subject to further cash and noncash charges, any or all of which could have a material adverse
effect on us.
table of contents
regulatory inquiries  the sec is conducting a formal investigation into the companys historic stock option practices. in may 2006, the company received a request from the internal revenue service seeking documents relating to stock option grants and other
compensation for the persons who from 2003 to the present were named executive officers in the companys annual proxy statements. we also received a subpoena from the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york in may 2006 requesting
documents from 1999 to the present relating to the companys historic stock option practices. in june 2006, the company received a civil investigative demand from the minnesota attorney general requesting documents from january1, 1997 to
the present concerning the companys executive compensation and historic stock option practices. we have also received document requests from u.s. congressional committees in connection with these issues. we have not resolved any of these
matters. we cannot provide assurance that the company will not be subject to adverse publicity, regulatory or criminal fines or penalties, as well as other sanctions or other contingent liabilities or adverse customer reactions in connection with
these matters. see item7  legal matters for a more detailed description of these inquiries and document requests.  litigation
matters  we and certain of our current and former directors and officers are defendants in a consolidated federal securities class action, an erisa
class action, and state and federal shareholder derivative actions relating to our historic stock option practices. we also have received several shareholder demands relating to our historic stock option practices. our board of directors has
designated an unaffiliated special litigation committee, consisting of two former minnesota supreme court justices, to investigate the claims raised in the derivative actions and shareholder demands, and determine whether the claims should be
pursued.  in addition, following our announcement that we would delay filing our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2006, we
received a purported notice of default from persons claiming to hold certain of our debt securities alleging a violation of the indenture governing our debt securities. subsequently, we filed an action in the u.s. district court for the district of
minnesota, seeking a declaratory judgment that the company is not in default under the terms of the indenture. the company subsequently received a purported notice of acceleration from these holders who previously sent the notice of default that
purports to declare an acceleration of the companys 5.80% senior unsecured notes due march15, 2036, of which an aggregate of $850 million principal amount is outstanding.  in connection with the departure of william w. mcguire, m.d., our former chairman and chief executive officer, we received an order from the u.s. district court for the district of minnesota in november 2006 granting
a joint motion for temporary injunctive relief made by plaintiffs and dr.mcguire. according to the order, dr.mcguire is preliminarily enjoined from exercising any company stock options without court approval, and the company and
dr.mcguire are preliminarily enjoined from taking any further action pursuant to or having any effect on dr.mcguires employment agreement, as amended, and other related agreements, and while the preliminary injunction is in effect,
no payments will be made to dr.mcguire under these agreements, including any payments under dr.mcguires supplemental employee retirement plan.  these actions are in preliminary stages, and we cannot provide assurance that their ultimate outcome will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. see item7  legal
matters for a more detailed description of these proceedings and shareholder demands.  in addition, we may be subject to additional litigation or
other proceedings or actions arising out of the independent committees review, the special litigation committees review and the related restatement of our historical financial statements. litigation and any potential regulatory
proceeding or action may be time consuming, expensive and distracting from the conduct of our business. the adverse resolution of any specific lawsuit or any potential regulatory proceeding or action could have a material adverse effect on our
business, financial condition and results of operations.
table of contents
credit ratings  as a
result of their concerns related to our historic stock option practices, moodys downgraded our a2 senior debt rating to a3 with a negative outlook in october 2006 and am best downgraded our financial strength ratings from a+ to a with a
negative outlook in november 2006. standard& poors and fitchratings confirmed their existing ratings and their negative outlook (standard& poors) and negative watch (fitchratings) on the companys ratings. if our
business results deteriorate significantly, or if there is an event, outcome or action as a result of the regulatory inquiries and document requests or the pending civil litigation, which is materially adverse to the company, our credit ratings may
be further downgraded. a significant downgrade in ratings may increase the cost of borrowing for the company or limit the companys access to capital.  potential additional cash and noncash charges  as described in the explanatory note immediately preceding part i, item1, and in note 3
restatement of consolidated financial statements of the notes to consolidated financial statements in this form 10-k, the company, after completing its internal review of the accounting treatment of all stock option grants and after
consultation with the secs office of the chief accountant on certain interpretive accounting issues, recorded additional cash and noncash stock-based compensation expenses, and related tax effects, with regard to certain past stock option
grants, and restated previously filed financial statements included in this form10-k. while we believe we have made appropriate judgments in determining the financial and tax impacts of our historic stock option practices, we cannot provide
assurance that the sec or the irs will agree with the manner in which we have accounted for and reported, or not reported, the financial and tax impacts. if the sec or the irs disagrees with our financial or tax adjustments and such disagreement
results in material changes to our historical financial statements, we may have to further restate our prior financial statements, amend prior filings with the sec, or take other actions not currently contemplated.  in addition, other adjustments for non-operating cash charges may be required in connection with the resolution of stock option-related matters arising under litigation,
and regulatory reviews by the sec, irs, u.s. attorney, u.s. congressional committees and minnesota attorney general, the amount and timing of which are uncertain but which could be material.  cautionary statements relating to our business  we must effectively manage our health care costs.  under our risk-based product arrangements, we assume the risk of both medical and
administrative costs for our customers in return for monthly premiums. premium revenues from risk-based products comprise approximately 90% of our total consolidated revenues. we generally use approximately 80% to 85% of our premium revenues to pay
the costs of health care services delivered to these customers. the profitability of our risk-based products depends in large part on our ability to predict, price for, and effectively manage health care costs. total health care costs are affected
by the number of individual services rendered and the cost of each service. our premium revenue is typically fixed in price for a 12-month period and is generally priced one to four months before the contract commences. we base the premiums we
charge on our estimate of future health care costs over the fixed premium period; however, medical cost inflation, regulations and other factors may cause actual costs to exceed what was estimated and reflected in premiums. these factors may include
increased use of services, increased cost of individual services, catastrophes, epidemics, the introduction of new or costly treatments and technology, new mandated benefits or other regulatory changes, insured population characteristics and
seasonal changes in the level of health care use. as a measure of the impact of medical cost on our financial results, relatively small differences between predicted and actual medical costs as a percentage of premium revenues can result in
significant changes in our financial results. for example, if medical costs increased by 1% without a proportional change in related revenues for unitedhealthcares commercial insured products, our annual net earnings for 2006 would have been
reduced by approximately $170 million. in addition, the financial results we report for any particular period include estimates of costs that have been incurred for which claims are still outstanding. if these
table of contents
estimates prove too high or too low, the effect of the change in estimate will be included in future results. that change can be either positive or negative
to our results.  we face competition in many of our markets and customers have flexibility in moving between competitors.
our businesses compete throughout the united states and face competition in all of the geographic markets in which they operate. for our uniprise
and health care services segments, competitors include aetna inc., cigna corporation, coventry health care, inc., humana inc., kaiser permanente and wellpoint, inc., numerous for-profit organizations and not-for-profit organizations operating under
licenses from the blue cross and blue shield association and enterprises that serve more limited geographic areas. our specialized care services and ingenix segments also compete with a number of businesses. the addition of new competitors can occur
relatively easily, and customers enjoy significant flexibility in moving between competitors. in particular markets, competitors may have capabilities or resources that give them a competitive advantage. greater market share, established reputation,
superior supplier or provider arrangements, existing business relationships, and other factors all can provide a competitive advantage to our businesses or to their competitors. in addition, significant merger and acquisition activity has occurred
in the industries in which we operate, both as to our competitors and suppliers in these industries. consolidation may make it more difficult for us to retain or increase customers, to improve the terms on which we do business with our suppliers, or
to maintain or advance profitability.  our relationship with aarp is important.  under a ten-year contract with aarp, which commenced in 1998, we provide medicare supplement insurance, hospital indemnity insurance, health insurance focused on those
ages 50 to 64 and other products to aarp members. as of december31, 2006, this supplemental health insurance program represented approximately $5.0 billion in annual net premium revenue from approximately 3.8million aarp members. we also
have a separate license agreement with aarp to brand certain of our medicare part d prescription drug plans. the aarp contracts may be terminated by us or aarp at the end of their respective initial terms and may also be terminated early under
certain circumstances, including a material breach by either party, insolvency of either party, a material adverse change in the financial condition of either party, and by mutual agreement. the success of our aarp arrangements depends, in part, on
our ability to service aarp and its members, develop additional products and services, price the products and services competitively, and respond effectively to federal and state regulatory changes.  some of the effects of changes in medicare remain uncertain.  the changes in medicare as a result of the medicare modernization act of 2003 (mma) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder are complex and wide-ranging and continue to affect our businesses. we have
taken advantage of new opportunities created by the mma to partner with the federal government, including medicare part d prescription drug coverage, medicare advantage regional ppos, private fee for service plans and special needs plans for
chronically ill medicare beneficiaries. we have invested considerable resources in creating new medicare product offerings for these initiatives and in analyzing how to best address uncertainties and risks associated with these new programs and
other changes arising from the mma. legislative or regulatory changes to these programs could have a significant impact on us. additionally, our ability to successfully participate in the medicare part d program depends in part on coordination of
information and information systems between us, cms and state governments. the inability to receive correct information due to systems issues by the federal government, the applicable state government or us could adversely affect our business.
additionally, our participation in the medicare part d program is based upon certain assumptions regarding enrollment, utilization, pharmaceutical costs and other factors. in the event any of these assumptions are materially incorrect, either as a
result of unforeseen changes to the medicare part d program or otherwise, our results could be materially affected. any positive or negative developments for the medicare part d program as a whole are likely to have a significant impact on us as a
result of the size of our enrollment in our medicare part d program.
table of contents
we are subject to funding risks with respect to revenue received from participation in medicare and
medicaid programs.  we participate as a payer in medicare advantage, medicare part d, and medicaid programs and receive revenues from the medicare
and medicaid programs to provide benefits under these programs. revenues for these programs are dependent upon annual funding from the federal government or applicable state governments. funding for these programs is dependent upon many factors
outside of our control including general economic conditions at the federal or applicable state level and general political issues and priorities. an unexpected reduction in government funding for these programs may adversely affect our revenues and
financial results.  our business is subject to routine government scrutiny, and we must respond quickly and appropriately to frequent
changes in government regulations.  our business is regulated at the federal, state, local and international levels. the laws and rules governing
our business and interpretations of those laws and rules are subject to frequent change. broad latitude is given to the agencies administering those regulations. existing or future laws and rules could force us to change how we do business, restrict
revenue and enrollment growth, increase our health care and administrative costs and capital requirements, and increase our liability in federal and state courts for coverage determinations, contract interpretation and other actions. we must obtain
and maintain regulatory approvals to market many of our products, to increase prices for certain regulated products and to complete certain acquisitions and dispositions, including integration of acquisitions. delays in obtaining approvals or our
failure to obtain or maintain these approvals could reduce our revenue or increase our costs.  we participate in federal, state and local government health
care coverage programs. these programs generally are subject to frequent change, including changes that may reduce the number of persons enrolled or eligible, reduce the amount of reimbursement or payment levels, or increase our administrative or
health care costs under such programs. such changes have adversely affected our financial results and willingness to participate in such programs in the past, and may do so in the future.  state legislatures and congress continue to focus on health care issues. legislative and regulatory proposals at state and federal levels may affect certain aspects of
our business, including contracting with physicians, hospitals and other health care professionals; physician reimbursement methods and payment rates; coverage determinations; mandated benefits and minimum medical expenditures; claim payments and
processing; drug utilization and patient safety efforts; use and maintenance of individually identifiable health information; medical malpractice litigation; and government-sponsored programs. we cannot predict if any of these initiatives will
ultimately become law, or, if enacted, what their terms or the regulations promulgated pursuant to such laws will be, but their enactment could increase our costs, expose us to expanded liability, require us to revise the ways in which we conduct
business or put us at risk for loss of business.  we typically are involved in various governmental investigations, audits and reviews. these may include
routine, regular and special investigations, examinations, audits and reviews by cms, state insurance and health and welfare departments and state attorneys general, the office of the inspector general, the office of personnel management, the office
of civil rights, the u.s. department of justice and u.s. attorneys. such government actions can result in assessment of damages, civil or criminal fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including restrictions or changes in the way we conduct
business, loss of licensure or exclusion from participation in government programs. in addition, public perception or publicity surrounding routine governmental investigations may adversely affect our stock price, damage our reputation in various
markets or make it more difficult for us to sell products and services.  relationships with physicians, hospitals and other health
care providers are important to our business.  we contract with physicians, hospitals, pharmaceutical benefit service providers, pharmaceutical
manufacturers, and other health care providers for competitive prices. our results of operations and prospects are substantially
table of contents
dependent on our continued ability to maintain these competitive prices. in any particular market, these physicians and health care professionals could
refuse to contract, demand higher payments, or take other actions that could result in higher health care costs, less desirable products for customers or difficulty meeting regulatory or accreditation requirements. in some markets, certain health
care providers, particularly hospitals, physician/hospital organizations or multi-specialty physician groups, may have significant market positions or near monopolies that could result in diminished bargaining power on our part.  in addition, we have capitation arrangements with some physicians, hospitals and other health care providers. under the typical arrangement, the provider receives a
fixed percentage of premium to cover all the medical costs provided to the capitated member. under some capitated arrangements, the provider may also receive additional compensation from risk sharing and other incentive arrangements. capitation
arrangements limit our exposure to the risk of increasing medical costs, but expose us to risk related to the adequacy of the financial and medical care resources of the provider. to the extent that a capitated provider organization faces financial
difficulties or otherwise is unable to perform its obligations under the capitation arrangement, we may be held responsible for unpaid health care claims that should have been the responsibility of the capitated provider and for which we have
already paid the provider under the capitation arrangement.  the nature of our business exposes us to litigation risks.
periodically, we become a party to the types of legal actions that can affect any business, such as employment and employment
discrimination-related suits, employee benefit claims, breach of contract actions, tort claims, shareholder suits, and intellectual property-related litigation. in addition, because of the nature of our business, we are routinely made party to a
variety of legal actions related to the design and management of our service offerings. these matters include, among others, claims related to health care benefits coverage, medical malpractice actions, contract disputes and claims related to
disclosure of certain business practices. we are also party to certain class action lawsuits brought by provider groups. see  legal matters for a more detailed description of our pending litigation matters.  the company is largely self-insured with regard to litigation risks; however, we maintain excess liability insurance with outside insurance carriers to minimize risks
associated with catastrophic claims. although we believe that we are adequately insured for claims in excess of our self-insurance, certain types of damages, such as punitive damages, are not covered by insurance. we record liabilities for our
estimates of the probable costs resulting from self-insured matters. although we believe the liabilities established for these risks are adequate, it is possible that the level of actual losses may exceed the liabilities recorded.  our businesses providing pbm services face regulatory and other risks associated with the pharmacy benefits management industry that may differ
from the risks of providing managed care and health insurance products.  in connection with the pacificare merger, we acquired a pbm business,
prescription solutions. we also provide pharmacy benefits management services through unitedhealth pharmaceutical solutions. prescription solutions and unitedhealth pharmaceutical solutions are subject to federal and state anti-kickback and other
laws that govern their relationships with pharmaceutical manufacturers, customers and consumers. in addition, federal and state legislatures regularly consider new regulations for the industry that could adversely affect current industry practices,
including the receipt or required disclosure of rebates from pharmaceutical companies. while we do not believe that the pbm is a fiduciary, if a court were to determine that our pbm business acts as a fiduciary under erisa, we could be subject to
claims for alleged breaches of fiduciary obligations in implementation of formularies, preferred drug listings and drug management programs, contracting network practices, specialty drug distribution and other transactions. our pbm also conducts
business as a mail order pharmacy, which subjects it to extensive federal, state and local laws and regulations, as well as risks inherent in the packaging and distribution of pharmaceuticals and other health care products. the failure to adhere to
these laws and regulations could expose our pbm subsidiary to civil and criminal penalties. we also face potential claims in connection with purported errors by our mail order pharmacy.
table of contents
our businesses depend on effective information systems and the integrity of the data in our
information systems.  our ability to adequately price our products and services, to provide effective and efficient service to our customers, and to
accurately report our financial results depends on the integrity of the data in our information systems. as a result of technology initiatives, changes in our system platforms and integration of new business acquisitions, we have been taking steps
to consolidate the number of systems we operate and have upgraded and expanded our information systems capabilities. if the information we rely upon to run our businesses were found to be inaccurate or unreliable or if we fail to maintain our
information systems and data integrity effectively, we could lose existing customers, have difficulty attracting new customers, have problems in determining medical cost estimates and establishing appropriate pricing, have disputes with customers,
physicians and other health care providers, have regulatory problems, have increases in operating expenses or suffer other adverse consequences. in addition, failure to consolidate our systems successfully could result in higher than expected costs
and diversion of managements time and energy, which could materially impact our business, financial condition and operating results.  the value of our intangible assets may become impaired.  due largely to our recent acquisitions, goodwill and other intangible assets
represent a substantial portion of our assets. goodwill and other intangible assets were approximately $18.7 billion as of december31, 2006, representing approximately 40% of our total assets. if we make additional acquisitions it is likely
that we will record additional intangible assets on our books. we periodically evaluate our goodwill and other intangible assets to determine whether all or a portion of their carrying values may no longer be recoverable, in which case a charge to
earnings may be necessary. any future evaluations requiring an asset impairment of our goodwill and other intangible assets could materially affect our results of operations and shareholders equity in the period in which the impairment occurs.
a material decrease in shareholders equity could, in turn, negatively impact our debt ratings or potentially impact our compliance with existing debt covenants.  our knowledge and information-related businesses depend on our ability to maintain proprietary rights to our databases and related products.  we rely on our agreements with customers, confidentiality agreements with employees, and our trade secrets, copyrights and patents to protect our proprietary rights. these legal protections and precautions may not
prevent misappropriation of our proprietary information. in addition, substantial litigation regarding intellectual property rights exists in the software industry, and we expect software products to be increasingly subject to third-party
infringement claims as the number of products and competitors in this industry segment grows. such litigation and misappropriation of our proprietary information could hinder our ability to market and sell products and services.  we must comply with restrictions on patient privacy and information security, including taking steps to ensure that our business associates who
obtain access to sensitive patient information maintain its confidentiality.  the use of individually identifiable data by our businesses is
regulated at the international, federal and state levels. these laws and rules are changed frequently by legislation or administrative interpretation. various state laws address the use and disclosure of individually identifiable health data. most
are derived from the privacy and security provisions in the federal gramm-leach-bliley act and the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 (hipaa). hipaa also requires that we impose privacy and security requirements on our
business associates (as this term is defined in the hipaa regulations). even though we provide for appropriate protections through our contracts with our business associates, we still have limited control over their actions and practices. compliance
with these proposals, requirements, and new regulations may result in cost increases due to necessary systems changes, the development of new administrative processes, and the effects of potential noncompliance by our business associates. they also
may impose further restrictions on our use of patient identifiable data that is housed in one or more of our administrative databases.
table of contents
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk  the
information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to item7 of this report under the heading quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
table of contents
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data  unitedhealth group  consolidated statements of operations
for the year ended december31,
(in millions, except per share data)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
revenues
premiums
$
65,666
$
42,096
$
34,439
services
4,268
3,666
3,243
products
investment and other income
total revenues
71,542
46,425
38,217
operating costs
medical costs
53,308
33,669
27,858
operating costs
9,981
7,134
6,073
cost of products sold
depreciation and amortization
total operating costs
64,558
41,345
34,359
earnings from operations
6,984
5,080
3,858
interest expense
(456
)
(241
)
(128
)
earnings before income taxes
6,528
4,839
3,730
provision for income taxes
(2,369
)
(1,756
)
(1,319
)
net earnings
$
4,159
$
3,083
$
2,411
basic net earnings per common share
$
3.09
$
2.44
$
1.93
diluted net earnings per common share
$
2.97
$
2.31
$
1.83
basic weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,344
1,265
1,252
dilutive effect of common stock equivalents
diluted weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,402
1,333
1,316
see notes to consolidated
financial statements.
table of contents
unitedhealth group  consolidated balance sheets
as of december31,
(in millions, except per share data)
(asrestated)
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
10,320
$
5,421
short-term investments
accounts receivable, net of allowances of $120 and $108
1,323
1,207
assets under management
1,970
1,825
deferred income taxes
other current assets
1,250
total current assets
16,044
10,547
long-term investments
9,642
8,971
property, equipment, and capitalized software, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization of $1,215 and $966
1,894
1,647
goodwill
16,822
16,238
other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization of $373 and $192
1,904
2,020
other assets
2,014
1,865
total assets
$
48,320
$
41,288
liabilities and shareholders equity
current liabilities
medical costs payable
$
8,076
$
7,262
accounts payable and accrued liabilities
3,713
3,285
other policy liabilities
3,957
1,845
commercial paper and current maturities of long-term debt
1,483
3,261
unearned premiums
1,268
1,000
total current liabilities
18,497
16,653
long-term debt, less current maturities
5,973
3,834
future policy benefits for life and annuity contracts
1,850
1,761
deferred income taxes and other liabilities
1,190
1,225
commitments and contingencies (note 14)
shareholders equity
common stock, $0.01 par value  3,000 shares authorized; 1,345 and 1,358 shares outstanding
additional paid-in capital
6,406
7,510
retained earnings
14,376
10,258
accumulated other comprehensive income:
net unrealized gains on investments, net of tax effects
total shareholders equity
20,810
17,815
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
48,320
$
41,288
see notes to consolidated
financial statements.
table of contents
unitedhealth group  consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity (as restated)
(in millions)
common stock
additionalpaid-incapital
retainedearnings
netunrealizedgains oninvestments
totalshareholdersequity
comprehensiveincome
shares
amount
balance at december31, 2003, as previously reported under apb 25
1,166
$
$
$
4,915
$
$
5,128
apb 25 cumulative restatement adjustments
(738
)
adjustments to historical common stock repurchases
(836
)
balance at december 31, 2003, as restated under apb 25
1,166
5,013
5,174
fas 123r adoption
(659
)
fas 123r adjustments
(284
)
adjustments to historical common stock repurchases
(731
)
balance at december31, 2003, as restated under fas 123r
1,166
4,801
5,236
issuances of common stock, and related tax benefits
6,206
6,208
common stock repurchases
(103
)
(1
)
(3,445
)
(3,446
)
stock-based compensation, and related tax benefits
comprehensive income net earnings
2,411
2,411
$
2,411
other comprehensive income adjustments:
change in net unrealized gains on investments, net of tax effects
(17
)
(17
)
(17
)
comprehensive income
$
2,394
common stock dividend
(18
)
(18
)
balance at december31, 2004, as restated
1,286
3,433
7,194
10,772
issuances of common stock, and related tax benefits
6,145
6,146
common stock repurchases
(54
)
(2,557
)
(2,557
)
stock-based compensation, and related tax benefits
comprehensive income net earnings
3,083
3,083
$
3,083
other comprehensive income adjustments:
change in net unrealized gains on investments, net of tax effects
(99
)
(99
)
(99
)
comprehensive income
$
2,984
common stock dividend
(19
)
(19
)
balance at december31, 2005, as restated
1,358
7,510
10,258
17,815
issuances of common stock, and related tax benefits
common stock repurchases
(40
)
(1
)
(2,344
)
(2,345
)
conversion of convertible debt
stock-based compensation, and related tax benefits
comprehensive income net earnings
4,159
4,159
$
4,159
other comprehensive income adjustments:
change in net unrealized gains on investments, net of tax effects
(18
)
(18
)
(18
)
comprehensive income
$
4,141
common stock dividend
(41
)
(41
)
balance at december31, 2006
1,345
$
$
6,406
$
14,376
$
$
20,810
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
unitedhealth group  consolidated statements of cash flows
fortheyearendeddecember31,
(in millions)
(asrestated)
(asrestated)
operating activities
net earnings
$
4,159
$
3,083
$
2,411
noncash items
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes and other
(267
)
(171
)
(232
)
stock-based compensation
net change in other operating items, net of effects from acquisitions, and changes in aarp balances:
accounts receivable and other current assets
(411
)
(86
)
medical costs payable
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
1,284
unearned premiums
(300
)
cash flows from operating activities
6,526
4,083
3,923
investing activities
cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash assumed and other effects
(670
)
(2,562
)
(2,225
)
cash transferred on sale of business
(363
)
purchases of property, equipment and capitalized software
(728
)
(509
)
(356
)
proceeds from disposal of property, equipment and capitalized software
purchases of investments
(4,851
)
(5,876
)
(3,190
)
maturities and sales of investments
4,096
5,821
4,121
cash flows used for investing activities
(2,101
)
(3,489
)
(1,644
)
financing activities
(payments of) proceeds from commercial paper, net
(2,332
)
2,556
proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
3,000
2,000
payments for retirement of long-term debt
(400
)
(150
)
repayments of convertible subordinated debentures
(91
)
common stock repurchases
(2,345
)
(2,557
)
(3,446
)
proceeds from common stock issuances
stock-based compensation excess tax benefits
customer funds administered
1,705
dividends paid
(41
)
(19
)
(18
)
other
(60
)
(12
)
(8
)
cash flows from (used for) financing activities
(550
)
increase in cash and cash equivalents
4,899
1,430
1,729
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
5,421
3,991
2,262
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
10,320
$
5,421
$
3,991
supplemental schedule of noncash investing and financing activities
common stock issued for acquisitions
$
$
5,696
$
5,557
common stock issued for convertible subordinated debentures redemption
$
$
$
promissory note issued for acquisition
$
$
$
supplemental cash flow disclosures
cash paid for interest
$
$
$
cash paid for income taxes
$
1,729
$
1,377
$
see notes to consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
notes to the consolidated financial statements (as restated)
1.
description of business  unitedhealth group incorporated (also
referred to as unitedhealth group, the company, we, us, and our) is a diversified health and well-being company dedicated to making health care work better. through strategically aligned,
market-defined businesses, we design products, provide services and apply technologies that improve access to health and well-being services, simplify the health care experience, promote quality and make health care more affordable.
2.
summary of significant accounting policies  basis of
presentation  we have prepared the consolidated financial statements according to accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america and have included the accounts of unitedhealth group and its subsidiaries. we have eliminated all intercompany balances and transactions.  use
of estimates  these consolidated financial statements include certain amounts that are based on our best estimates and judgments. these estimates
require us to apply complex assumptions and judgments, often because we must make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain and will likely change in subsequent periods. the most significant estimates relate to medical
costs, medical costs payable, historic stock option measurement dates, revenues, intangible asset valuations, asset impairments and contingent liabilities. we adjust these estimates each period, as more current information becomes available. the
impact of any changes in estimates is included in the determination of earnings in the period in which the estimate is adjusted.  revenues
premium revenues are primarily derived from risk-based health insurance arrangements in which the premium is fixed, typically for a one-year period,
and we assume the economic risk of funding our customers health care services and related administrative costs. we recognize premium revenues in the period in which eligible individuals are entitled to receive health care services. we record
health care premium payments we receive from our customers in advance of the service period as unearned premiums.  service revenues consist primarily of
fees derived from services performed for customers that self-insure the medical costs of their employees and their dependents. under service fee contracts, we recognize revenue in the period the related services are performed based upon the fee
charged to the customer. the customers retain the risk of financing medical benefits for their employees and their employees dependents, and we administer the payment of customer funds to physicians and other health care providers from
customer-funded bank accounts. because we neither have the obligation for funding the medical expenses, nor do we have responsibility for delivering the medical care, we do not recognize premium revenue and medical costs for these contracts in our
consolidated financial statements.  for both premium risk-based and fee-based customer arrangements, we provide coordination and facilitation of medical
services; transaction processing; customer, consumer and care provider services; and access to contracted networks of physicians, hospitals and other health care professionals.  through our prescription solutions pharmacy benefits management (pbm) business, revenues are derived from products sold through a contracted network of retail pharmacies, and from administrative services, including
claims processing and formulary design and management. product revenues include ingredient costs net of rebates, a negotiated dispensing fee and customer co-payments for drugs dispensed through our mail-service
table of contents
pharmacy. in all retail pharmacy transactions, revenues recognized always exclude the members applicable co-payment. product revenues are recognized
upon sale or shipment. service revenues are recognized when the prescription claim is adjudicated. the company has entered into retail service contracts that separately obligate us to pay our network pharmacy providers for benefits provided to its
customers, whether or not we are paid. we are also involved in establishing the prices charged by retail pharmacies, determining which drugs will be included in formulary listings and selecting which retail pharmacies will be included in the network
offered to plan sponsors members. as a result, revenues are reported on a gross basis in accordance with emerging issues task force (eitf) issue no.99-19, reporting gross revenue as a principal versus net as an agent. product
revenues also include sales of ingenix syndicated content products which are recognized as revenue upon shipment.  medical costs and medical costs
payable  medical costs and medical costs payable include estimates of our obligations for medical care services that have been rendered on behalf of
insured consumers but for which we have either not yet received or processed claims, and for liabilities for physician, hospital and other medical cost disputes. we develop estimates for medical costs incurred but not reported using an actuarial
process that is consistently applied, centrally controlled and automated. the actuarial models consider factors such as time from date of service to claim receipt, claim backlogs, care provider contract rate changes, medical care consumption and
other medical cost trends. we estimate liabilities for physician, hospital and other medical cost disputes based upon an analysis of potential outcomes, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. each period, we re-examine
previously established medical costs payable estimates based on actual claim submissions and other changes in facts and circumstances. as the liability estimates recorded in prior periods become more exact, we adjust the amount of the estimates, and
include the changes in estimates in medical costs in the period in which the change is identified. in every reporting period, our operating results include the effects of more completely developed medical costs payable estimates associated with
previously reported periods.  cash, cash equivalents and investments  cash and cash equivalents are highly liquid investments that generally have an original maturity of three months or less. the fair value of cash and cash equivalents approximates their carrying value because of the
short maturity of the instruments. investments with maturities of less than one year are classified as short-term. we may sell investments classified as long-term before their maturities to fund working capital or for other purposes. because of
regulatory requirements, certain investments are included in long-term investments regardless of their maturity date. we classify these investments as held-to-maturity and report them at amortized cost. all other investments are classified as
available for sale and reported at fair value based on quoted market prices.  we exclude unrealized gains and losses on investments available for sale from
earnings and report them, net of income tax effects, as a separate component of shareholders equity. we continually monitor the difference between the cost and estimated fair value of our investments. for those investments in an unrealized
loss position, we analyze relevant factors individually and in combination including the length of time and extent to which market value has been less than cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer as well as specific
events or circumstances that may influence the operations of the issuer, and our intent and ability to hold the investment for a sufficient time to recover our cost. new information and the passage of time can change these judgments. we revise
impairment judgments when new information becomes known or when we do not anticipate holding the investment until the forecasted recovery. if any of our investments experience a decline in value that is determined to be other than temporary, based
on analysis of relevant factors, we record a realized loss in investment and other income in our consolidated statements of operations. we manage our investment portfolio to limit our exposure to any one issuer or industry and largely limit our
investments to u.s. government and agency securities, state and municipal securities, and corporate debt obligations that are investment grade. to calculate realized gains and losses on the sale of investments, we use the specific cost or amortized
cost of each investment sold.
table of contents
assets under management  we administer certain aspects of aarps insurance program (see note 13). pursuant to our agreement, aarp assets are managed separately from our general investment portfolio and are used to pay costs associated with the aarp program.
these assets are invested at our discretion, within investment guidelines approved by aarp. we do not guarantee any rates of return on these investments and, upon transfer of the aarp contract to another entity, we would transfer cash equal in
amount to the fair value of these investments at the date of transfer to that entity. because the purpose of these assets is to fund the medical costs payable, the rate stabilization fund (rsf) liabilities and other related liabilities associated
with the aarp contract, assets under management are classified as current assets, consistent with the classification of these liabilities. interest earnings and realized investment gains and losses on these assets accrue to the overall benefit of
the aarp policyholders through the rsf. accordingly, they are not included in our earnings.  property, equipment and capitalized software
property, equipment and capitalized software are stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization. capitalized software consists of
certain costs incurred in the development of internal-use software, including external direct costs of materials and services and payroll costs of employees devoted to specific software development.  we calculate depreciation and amortization using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. the useful lives for property, equipment and
capitalized software are: from three to seven years for furniture, fixtures and equipment; from 35 to 40 years for buildings; the shorter of the useful life or remaining lease term for leasehold improvements; and from three to nine years for
capitalized software. the weighted-average useful life of property, equipment and capitalized software at december31, 2006 was approximately five years. the net book value of property and equipment was $966 million and $932 million as of
december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. the net book value of capitalized software was $928 million and $715 million as of december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.  goodwill and other intangible assets  goodwill represents the amount by which the purchase price of businesses we
have acquired exceeds the estimated fair value of the net tangible assets and separately identifiable intangible assets of these businesses. goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized, but are tested at least
annually for impairment. intangible assets with discrete useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives.  long-lived assets  we review long-lived assets, including property, equipment, capitalized software and intangible assets, for events or
changes in circumstances that would indicate we might not recover their carrying value. we consider many factors, including estimated future utility and cash flows associated with the assets, to make this decision. an impairment charge is recorded
for the amount by which an assets carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value. we record assets held for sale at the lower of their carrying amount or fair value, less any costs for the final settlement.  other policy liabilities  other policy liabilities include the rsf
associated with the aarp program (see note 13), deposits under the medicare part d program (see note 4), customer balances related to experience-rated insurance products and the current portion of future policy benefits for life insurance and
annuity contracts. customer balances represent excess customer payments and deposit accounts under experience-rated contracts. at the customers option, these balances may be refunded or used to pay future premiums or claims under eligible
contracts.
table of contents
income taxes  deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the differences between the financial and income tax reporting bases of assets and liabilities based on enacted tax rates and laws. the deferred income tax provision or benefit
generally reflects the net change in deferred income tax assets and liabilities during the year, excluding any deferred income tax assets and liabilities of acquired businesses. the current income tax provision reflects the tax consequences of
revenues and expenses currently taxable or deductible on various income tax returns for the year reported.  future policy benefits for life and annuity
contracts and reinsurance receivables  future policy benefits for life insurance and annuity contracts represent account balances that accrue to the
benefit of the policyholders, excluding surrender charges, for universal life and investment annuity products. as a result of the october 2005 sale of the life and annuity business within our subsidiary golden rule financial corporation (golden
rule) under an indemnity reinsurance arrangement described in note 5, we have maintained a liability associated with the reinsured contracts, as we remain primarily liable to the policyholders, and have recorded a corresponding reinsurance
receivable due from the purchaser on the consolidated balance sheets. we evaluate the financial condition of the reinsurer and only record the reinsurance receivable to the extent of probable recovery.  policy acquisition costs  our commercial health insurance contracts
typically have a one-year term and may be cancelled upon 30 days notice by either the company or the customer. costs related to the acquisition and renewal of customer contracts are charged to expense as incurred.  stock-based compensation  in december 2004, the financial accounting
standards board (fasb) issued statement of financial accounting standards (fas) no.123 (revised 2004), share-based payment (fas 123r). fas 123r supersedes apb opinion no.25, accounting for stock issued to
employees (apb 25). under apb 25, no compensation expense was recognized for employee stock option grants if the exercise price of the companys stock option was at least equal to the quoted market price of the underlying stock on the
measurement date. fas 123r requires the determination of the fair value of the share-based compensation at the grant date and the recognition of the related expense over the period in which the share-based compensation vests. the company adopted
fas123r effective january1, 2006, using the modified retrospective method. all prior periods have been restated to give effect to the fair-value-based method of accounting for awards granted in fiscal years beginning on or after
january1, 1995. see note 3 for the impact of adoption of this accounting principle on our prior years.  net earnings per common share
we compute basic net earnings per common share by dividing net earnings by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period.
we determine diluted net earnings per common share using the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period, adjusted for potentially dilutive shares associated with the exercise of common stock options, stock-settled sars
and the conversion of convertible subordinated debentures.  derivative financial instruments  as part of our risk management strategy, we enter into interest rate swap agreements to manage our exposure to interest rate risk. the differential between fixed and
variable rates to be paid or received is accrued and
table of contents
recognized over the life of the agreements as an adjustment to interest expense in the consolidated statements of operations. our existing interest rate swap
agreements convert a majority of our interest from a fixed to a variable rate and are accounted for under the short cut method as fair value hedges. additional information on our existing interest rate swap agreements is included in note 9.
fair value of financial instruments  in the normal
course of business, we invest in various financial assets, incur various financial liabilities and enter into agreements involving derivative securities.  fair values are disclosed for all financial instruments for which it is practicable to estimate fair value, whether or not such values are recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. where available, management obtains quoted market
prices for these disclosures; otherwise, fair values are estimated using valuation techniques.  the carrying amounts reported in the consolidated balance
sheets for cash and cash equivalents, premium and other receivables, unearned premiums, accounts payable and accrued expenses, income taxes payable, and certain other current liabilities approximate fair value because of their short-term nature.
the following methods and assumptions were used to estimate the fair value of each class of financial instrument:
current and long-term investments, available-for-sale, at fair value: the carrying amount is stated at fair value, based on quoted market prices, where available.
for securities not actively traded, fair values were estimated using values obtained from independent pricing services or quoted market prices of comparable instruments.
senior unsecured notes: estimated based on third-party quoted market prices for the same or similar issues.
commercial paper: the carrying amount for commercial paper approximates fair value as the underlying instruments have variable interest rates at market value.
interest rate swaps: the fair value of the interest rate swaps are based on the quoted market prices by the financial institution that is the counterparty to the
swap.  recently adopted accounting standards  effective january1, 2006, we adopted fas 123r, which revises fas no.123, accounting for stock-based compensation (fas 123). see note 3 for details on its impact to our consolidated financial statements.
in september 2006, the sec issued staff accounting bulletin no.108, considering the effects of prior year misstatements when quantifying misstatements in
current year financial statements (sab 108). sab108 provides interpretive guidance on how the effects of the carryover or reversal of prior year misstatements should be considered in quantifying a current year misstatement. under sab
108, registrants should quantify errors using both a balance sheet and income statement approach (dual approach) and evaluate whether either approach results in a misstatement that is material when all relevant quantitative and
qualitative factors are considered. we adopted sab 108 on december31, 2006.  in september 2006, the fasb issued fas no.158,
employers accounting for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plansan amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and 132(r) (fas 158). this statement requires balance sheet recognition of the overfunded or
underfunded status of pension and postretirement benefit plans and recognition, as a component of other comprehensive income, net of tax, the gains or losses and prior service costs or credits that arise during the period but are not recognized as
components
table of contents
of net periodic benefit cost. fas 158 also requires additional disclosures in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. we adopted fas 158 on
december31, 2006. the adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements or results of operations.  recently issued accounting standards  in july 2006, the fasb issued fasb interpretation no.48, accounting for uncertainty in
income taxes  an interpretation of fasb statement no.109 (fin 48), which clarifies the accounting for uncertain tax positions. fin 48 provides that the tax effects from an uncertain tax position are recognized only if it is more
likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. the provisions of fin 48 are effective for our 2007 fiscal year. we are currently evaluating the impact of adopting fin 48 on our
consolidated financial statements. the cumulative effect of adopting this interpretation will be recorded as a charge to retained earnings. we do not expect that the adoption of fin 48 will have a material impact on our consolidated financial
statements.  in september 2006, the fasb issued fas no.157, fair value measurements (fas 157), which establishes a framework for
reporting fair value and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. fas157 is effective for our 2008 fiscal year. we are currently evaluating the impact of this standard on our consolidated financial statements.  in february2007, the fasb issued fas no.159, the fair value option for financial assets and financial liabilities  including an amendment of fasb
statement no. 115 (fas 159). fas 159 permits an entity to elect fair value as the initial and subsequent measurement attribute for many financial assets and liabilities. entities electing the fair value option would be required to recognize
changes in fair value in earnings. entities electing the fair value option are required to distinguish, on the face of the statement of financial position, the fair value of assets and liabilities for which the fair value option has been elected and
similar assets and liabilities measured using another measurement attribute. fas 159 is effective for our fiscal year 2008. the adjustment to reflect the difference between the fair value and the carrying amount would be accounted for as a
cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the date of initial adoption. we are currently evaluating the impact, if any, of fas 159 on our consolidated financial statements.
3.
restatement of consolidated financial statements  in march 2006,
media reports questioned whether a number of companies, including unitedhealth group, had engaged in backdating stock option grants. shortly thereafter, the company was notified that the securities and exchange commission (the sec) had
commenced an inquiry into the companys historic practices concerning stock option grants.  on april4, 2006, the companys board of
directors (the board) created an independent committee comprised of three independent directors to review the companys option grant practices over the period from 1994 through 2005 (the independent review period). the
independent committee engaged the law firm of wilmer cutler pickering hale and dorr llp (wilmerhale) as counsel for its independent review, and wilmerhale retained independent accounting advisors.  wilmerhales report of its findings (the wilmerhale report) was furnished to the board and publicly issued on october15, 2006. wilmerhales
findings include, among other things, that many of the stock option grants it reviewed were likely backdated, that a 1999 supplemental grant of stock options was not accounted for correctly in the companys financial statements and that the
companys controls with respect to stock option grants were inadequate.  after substantially completing its analysis of the accounting adjustments
necessary to reflect the findings of the wilmerhale report, on november8, 2006, the company filed with the sec a current report on form 8-k reporting managements conclusion, which the audit committee of the board had approved, that
due solely to the companys historic stock option practices  the companys financial statements for the fiscal years ended
table of contents
december31, 1994 through 2005, the interim periods contained therein, the quarter ended march31, 2006 and all earnings and press releases,
including for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30, 2006, and similar communications issued by the company for such periods, and the related reports of the companys independent registered public accounting firm, should
no longer be relied upon. the form 8-k also reported that management had re-evaluated its assessment of the companys internal controls over financial reporting and had concluded that, as of december31, 2005, the company had a material
weakness solely relating to stock option plan administration and accounting for and disclosure of stock option grants.  after completing its internal
review of the accounting treatment for all option grants, management has concluded, and the audit committee of the board has approved the conclusion, that the company used incorrect measurement dates and made other errors described below in
accounting for stock option grants and, accordingly, that the companys previously issued financial statements should be restated.  summary of the
restatement adjustments  as of january1, 2006, the company adopted fas 123r, using the modified retrospective transition method. under this
method, all prior period financial statements are required to be restated to recognize compensation cost in the amounts historically disclosed in our consolidated financial statements under fas 123. prior to january1, 2006, the company
accounted for share-based compensation granted under its stock option plans using the recognition and measurement provisions of apb 25. under apb 25, a company was not required to recognize compensation expense for stock options issued to employees
if the exercise price of the stock options was at least equal to the quoted market price of the companys common stock on the measurement date. apb 25 defined the measurement date as the first date on which both the number of shares
that an individual employee was entitled to receive and the option or purchase price, if any, were known.  the restatement principally reflects additional
stock-based compensation expense and related tax effects under both fas 123r, the companys current accounting method, and apb 25, the companys historical accounting method, relating to the companys historic stock option practices.
the restatement also reflects certain other accounting adjustments, including adjustments unrelated to historic stock option practices, which are not material either individually or in the aggregate to the current or prior periods.  the principal components of the restatement are as follows:  revised
measurement dates.based on all available evidence, the company applied the methodologies described below to determine the appropriate measurement dates under both fas123 and apb25 for grants in the
following categories: (1)grants of approximately 80 million shares on a split-adjusted basis to section16 officers (section 16 grants); (2)grants of approximately 260 million shares on a split-adjusted basis to middle
management and senior management employees (broad-based grants); and (3)grants of approximately 50 million shares on a split-adjusted basis in connection with the hiring or promotion of employees (new hire and promotion
grants). as a result of this analysis, the company has determined that, in most cases, the stated grant date was not the correct measurement date.
section16 grants  section16 grants, generally made to eight to twelve officers, required approval by the compensation and human resources
committee of the board (the compensation committee).  for the majority of section16 grants, compensation
committee approval was reflected in written actions. the wilmerhale report concluded that the written actions were generally executed subsequent to the stated grant dates. (under minnesota corporate law, it is permissible to make a written action
effective as of a date other than the date on which the last of the required signers affixes his or her signature, even if that effective date is before the last signature affixed.) based on the available evidence, the company has determined that
the appropriate measurement date for each of these section16 grants is the earlier of (a)the date on which a form 4 (or other statement of changes in beneficial ownership) was filed with the sec with respect to a particular
officers grant or (b)the date on which the written action with respect to that grant was likely executed by a majority of the members of the compensation committee.
table of contents
as to certain other section16 grants, compensation committee approval occurred at a meeting or
there was general compensation committee approval of the section16 grant together with a delegation to the chairman of the compensation committee to determine the final amount of stock options, grant date and exercise price for each
section16 officer receiving options. the company has determined, based on all available evidence, that the appropriate measurement date for these section16 grants is the earlier of (a)the date on which a form 4 (or other statement
of changes in beneficial ownership) was filed with the sec with respect to a particular officers grant or (b)the date on which a resolution with respect to that grant was adopted at a meeting of the compensation committee or a decision
was made by the chairman of the compensation committee, if so delegated.  for option grants with stated grant dates in october 1999 that
were made in connection with the entry of employment agreements for our former chief executive officer and our current chief executive officer (both of whom had been employed by the company prior to that date), the company has determined that the
appropriate measurement date is the date on which the employment agreements were executed on behalf of the company. with respect to stock option grants with a stated grant date in october 1999 that represented the number of additional stock options
necessary to equal the minimum annual stock option grant provided for pursuant to each such employment agreement, the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date is the last day of 1999, the calendar year in which the company was
contractually obligated to make the grants.
broad-based grants  between 1,500 and 4,000 middle and senior management employees periodically and customarily received options. as described in the
wilmerhale report, our former chief executive officer, acting pursuant to authority delegated to him by the compensation committee, chose the grant dates and overall amounts for broad-based grants and ultimately reflected the broad-based grants in
ceo certificates.  the company followed separate allocation processes to determine the particular recipients and
individual option amounts of grants to middle management employees and senior management employees. in the majority of broad-based grants, the process of allocating stock option grants among individual employees in both middle management and senior
management continued beyond the stated grant date. after the date on which substantially all granting activities were completed, there were an insignificant number of changes to option awards attributable to circumstances such as the effective
cancellation of a grant because of an employees termination, administrative error corrections, promotion or individual performance reassessment.  based on all available evidence, the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date for broad-based grants was the later of the following two dates: (a)the date on which the evidence identified by
the company indicated that a communication to or from our former chief executive officer refers to a particular grant, or the grant was presented to the compensation committee or (b)the date on which the allocation of the options to individual
employees and grant process associated with the broad-based grant was substantially complete. where information is not available to evidence either (a)or (b)above, the company has determined the appropriate measurement date to be the
date on which the company determined, based upon all available evidence that the ceo certificate for such grant was likely executed. where option award amounts changed subsequent to the date the allocation process was substantially complete, the
company has determined that each award that was changed is a separate grant with its own measurement date and should not be considered indicative that the granting process was not complete.
new hire and promotion grants  during the independent review period, the company granted stock options to approximately 2,500 employees in connection
with their hire or promotion (new hire and promotion grants).  for new hire and promotion grants made prior to
2002, the company typically chose grant dates by determining the lowest closing price of the companys common stock between the date of an event in the recruitment of the newly hired employee (e.g., date of first contact, date of an offer
letter) or promotion of the employee and the end of the quarter in which the employee started work or was promoted. as a result of this practice, some employees received stock options with grant dates that were earlier than that employees
start
table of contents
date. in 2002, the company changed to a practice of determining grant dates for new hires and promotions to be the date of the lowest closing price of the
companys common stock between the start date of employment or date of promotion and the end of the quarter in which the employee started work or was promoted. the company historically used these stated grant dates as the measurement dates for
accounting purposes.  the company has concluded that the measurement dates used with respect to nearly all of the new hire and promotion
grants during the independent review period were not correct because the companys practice was to determine grant dates with the benefit of hindsight. the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date for each new hire and
promotion grant was the date on which the company set the terms of the award, or where the company could not identify such date based on all available evidence, the last date of the fiscal quarter in which a particular new hire or promotion grant
was made.  1999 grant of supplemental options.in the fourth quarter of 1999, following a decline in its stock price,
the company granted supplemental stock options to acquire 2.2million shares of company common stock (17.6 million shares on a split-adjusted basis) to a broad group of employees, including our former chief executive officer and
other section16 officers. the supplemental options were granted in connection with the suspension of the vesting and exercisability of an equal number of options with exercise prices above $46.50 ($5.8125 on a split-adjusted basis) that had
previously been granted to those employees (the suspended options). the supplemental options had a stated grant date of october13, 1999 and an exercise price equal to $40.125 ($5.0156 on a split-adjusted basis).  after taking into account all available evidence regarding the suspended options, the company has concluded that, under apb 25, the grant of the supplemental options
constituted an effective re-pricing subject to variable accounting for each option until exercise, forfeiture or expiration. additionally, the company has determined that, under fas 123, the grant of the supplemental options was a modification that
required an incremental fair value charge to be recognized over the related vesting period.  2000 reactivation of suspended
options.in 2000, the company reactivated the vesting and exercisability of the suspended options. the company has determined that, under apb 25 and fas 123, the reactivation of the vesting and exercisability of the
suspended options was a new stock option grant that should have had a new measurement date, and the company has determined that the appropriate measurement date is the date grantees were again permitted to exercise their previously vested awards.
cliff vesting options.prior to april 2000, the company granted to employees certain stock options that vested 100%
on the sixth or ninth anniversary of the date of grant (the cliff vesting options). under the terms of the options, the company could elect to accelerate the vesting of all or a portion of the cliff vesting options at its discretion. the
company followed a policy of accelerating the vesting of a consistent percentage of the cliff vesting options, unless the option holder was subject to disciplinary action or performing at a less than satisfactory level. this resulted in nearly all
option holders having their cliff vesting options accelerated so that they actually vested as if they had a 20% or 25%per year time-based vesting schedule (i.e., a four-year or five-year vesting period).
grant of cliff vesting options. under apb 25, an award should be accounted for as a performance award if its cliff vesting terms are not considered to be
substantive. based on numerous factors, including evaluation of employee turnover rates, the company has determined that the nine-year vesting term was not substantive in grants after january 1995 to middle management employees. accordingly, these
options should have been subject to variable accounting until each of their vesting dates. with respect to substantially all other cliff vesting options, the company has concluded that the cliff vesting term is substantive.
acceleration of cliff vesting options. in accordance with the provisions of financial accounting standards board interpretation no.44, accounting
for certain transactions involving stock compensation (an interpretation of apb opinion no.25) (fin 44), subsequent to july1, 2000, the acceleration of the six- or nine-year cliff vesting term of a stock option constituted a
modification. accordingly, the company should have measured the intrinsic value of the award at the date of the modification and recognized this amount as
table of contents
compensation cost on the termination of employment if, absent the acceleration, the award would have been forfeited pursuant to its original terms. under
fas123, the performance targets were taken into consideration when determining the expected term of the award and therefore the acceleration of vesting was not considered to be a modification of the terms.  other modifications of option terms.the company has also determined that certain other actions were taken that resulted in the
modification of option terms, as follows:
options modified upon terminations. on approximately 75 occasions from 1998 to 2005, the company entered into amended employment or separation agreements
with employees that resulted in the modification of vesting or cancellation terms of their stock option agreements. under apb 25, the potential compensation expense of the modification should have been measured at the date of the modification and
recognized if the employee ultimately received a benefit on the termination date. under fas 123, the modification should have been recognized at the date of the modification based upon the incremental fair value provided to the employee.
1999 cancellation and reissuance of options. in the fourth quarter of 1999, the company issued stock options to acquire an aggregate of 400,000 shares of
company common stock (3.2 million shares on a split-adjusted basis) to approximately 65 employees in exchange for the cancellation of an equal number of stock options that had previously been granted to those employees at various times earlier in
1999. the reissued stock options had a stated grant date of october13, 1999 and an exercise price equal to $40.125 ($5.0156 on a split-adjusted basis), which was lower than the exercise price of the cancelled options. the company has
determined that, under apb 25, this constituted a re-pricing, resulting in variable accounting for each option until exercise, forfeiture or expiration. additionally, the company has concluded that, under fas 123, this would also be
viewed as a modification to the award and the incremental fair value in addition to the originally measured fair value should have been recognized over the remaining vesting period.  related tax adjustments.the restatement in this form 10-k also reflects the estimated loss of certain tax deductions and additional
interest expense related to the exercise of stock options granted to certain of the companys executive officers that  as a result of the revision of measurement dates  no longer qualify as deductible performance-based compensation
in accordance with internal revenue code section162(m).  restatement adjustments  the following table sets forth, on a year-by-year basis, the impact under fas 123r and apb 25 of recognizing additional stock-based compensation expense and related tax effects as a result of historic stock option
practices as well as immaterial adjustments unrelated to historic stock option practices that were identified through a review of the companys accounting practices. the impact under fas 123r of all errors is $43 million ($57 million net of
tax) in 2005, $40 million ($44 million net of tax) in 2004, and an aggregate of $453 million ($313 million net of tax) for 2003 and all prior years. the impact under apb 25 of all errors is $304 million ($238 million net of tax) in 2005, $200
million ($158 million net of tax) in 2004, and an aggregate of $1,056million ($738 million net of tax) for 2003 and all prior years.  additionally,
on january 1, 2006, our uniprise business segment began reporting premiums and expenses on a gross basis for a large account where we have employed third-party reinsurance. historically, revenues and expenses associated with this account were
reported net of amounts ceded to an unaffiliated reinsurer. while the reinsurance contract has been in place for a number of years, recent accounting interpretations suggest this reinsurance arrangement be presented on a gross versus net basis.
prior period amounts have been restated to conform to the 2006 presentation. the restatement has no effect on our net earnings or shareholders equity as previously reported.
table of contents
fas 123r - current accounting method
decrease (increase) to earnings before income taxes
decrease (increase) tonetearnings
year
section 16 andbroad-based grants
new hireandpromotiongrants
1999 grantofsupplementaloptions
reactivationofsuspendedoptions
cliffvestingoptions
optionmodifications
other stock-basedcompensation(1)
total stock-basedcompensationerrors
othererrors(2)
total
total stock-basedcompensationerrors
othererrors(2)
total
(inmillions)
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(1
)
total impact through 2003
(1
)
first quarter 2005
(11
)
(3
)
second quarter 2005
(27
)
(13
)
(11
)
third quarter 2005
(26
)
(11
)
(13
)
fourth quarter 2005
2005 full year
(13
)
total impact through 2005
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
includes options converted to unitedhealth group options in conjunction with acquisitions that were not fully vested at the acquisition date, options granted to contractors and
restricted stock grants for which expense was not recorded at the time of the initial grant.
(2)
includes immaterial adjustments unrelated to historic stock option practices that were identified through a review of company accounting practices.
table of contents
apb 25 - historical accounting method
decrease (increase) to earnings before income taxes
decrease (increase) tonetearnings
year
section16 andbroad-based grants
new hireandpromotiongrants
1999 grantofsupplementaloptions
reactivationofsuspendedoptions
cliffvestingoptions(3)
optionmodifications
other stock-basedcompensation(1)
total stockbasedcompensationerrors
othererrors(2)
total
total stock-basedcompensationerrors
othererrors(2)
total
(inmillions)
pre-1994
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(1
)
(1
)
total impact through 2003
1,008
1,056
(1
)
first quarter 2005
(1
)
(11
)
(3
)
second quarter 2005
(27
)
(11
)
third quarter 2005
(26
)
(13
)
fourth quarter 2005
(1
)
2005 full year
(1
)
(13
)
total impact through 2005
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
1,526
$
$
1,560
$
1,082
$
$
1,134
(1)
includes options converted to unitedhealth group options in conjunction with acquisitions that were not fully vested at the acquisition date, options granted to contractors and
restricted stock grants for which expense was not recorded at the time of the initial grant.
(2)
includes immaterial adjustments unrelated to historic stock option practices that were identified through a review of company accounting practices.
(3)
includes $50 million of stock-based compensation expense associated with performance-based awards granted on certain dates in 1996, 1997 and 1998 which have been accounted for as
variable awards.
table of contents
the following table illustrates the effect of the restatement adjustments on our pro forma net earnings and pro forma net
earnings per share if we had recorded compensation costs based on the estimated grant date fair value accounting method as defined by fas 123 for 2005 and 2004.
(in millions, except per share data)
net earnings
apb 25
as reported-apb 25
$
3,300
$
2,587
restatement adjustments-apb 25:
compensation expense, net of tax effects
(228
)
(145
)
other adjustments, net of tax effects
(10
)
(13
)
as restated-apb 25
$
3,062
$
2,429
fas 123 pro forma
as restated-apb 25
$
3,062
$
2,429
less: apb 25 compensation expense, net of tax effects
fas 123 historical compensation expense, net of tax effects
(160
)
(132
)
restatement adjustment
fas 123 compensation expense, net of tax effects
(47
)
(31
)
as restated-fas 123 pro forma
$
3,083
$
2,411
basic net earnings per common share
as reported-apb 25
$
2.61
$
2.07
as restated-apb 25
$
2.42
$
1.94
as restated-fas 123 pro forma
$
2.44
$
1.93
diluted net earnings per common share
as reported-apb 25
$
2.48
$
1.97
as restated-apb 25
$
2.31
$
1.86
as restated-fas 123 pro forma
$
2.31
$
1.83
table of contents
the following tables present the effect of the restatement adjustments by financial statement line item for the
consolidated statements of operations, balance sheet, statement of changes in shareholders equity and statements of cash flows. the tables have been presented on both a fas 123r basis, which the company adopted on january 1, 2006, and on an
apb 25 basis, which was used for all periods prior to january 1, 2006.  consolidated statements of operations
for the year ended december31, 2005
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
(in millions, except per share data)
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
revenues
premiums
$
41,058
$
1,038
$
42,096
$
$
$
42,096
services
3,808
(142
)
3,666
3,666
products
investment and other income
total revenues
45,365
1,060
46,425
46,425
operating costs
medical costs
32,725
33,669
33,669
operating costs
6,814
7,145
(67
)
7,134
cost of products sold
depreciation and amortization
total operating costs
39,992
1,364
41,356
(67
)
41,345
earnings from operations
5,373
(304
)
5,069
(56
)
5,080
interest expense
(241
)
(241
)
(241
)
earnings before income taxes
5,132
(304
)
4,828
(56
)
4,839
provision for income taxes
(1,832
)
(1,766
)
(1,756
)
net earnings
$
3,300
$
(238
)
$
3,062
$
$
(47
)
$
3,083
basic net earnings per common share
$
2.61
$
(0.19
)
$
2.42
$
0.05
$
(0.03
)
$
2.44
diluted net earnings per common share
$
2.48
$
(0.17
)
$
2.31
$
0.05
$
(0.05
)
$
2.31
basic weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,265
1,265
1,265
dilutive effect of common stock equivalents
(2
)
diluted weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,330
(2
)
1,328
1,333
(1)
includes $317 million of stock-based compensation and $89 million of deferred tax benefit associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated statement of
operations as well as an adjustment to premium revenue of $1,113 million, medical costs of $1,016 million and operating costs of $97 million to reflect a reinsurance contract on a gross basis to conform to our current presentation. we have also
reclassified certain service revenues and operating costs to product revenues and cost of products sold, respectively, primarily related to our pharmacy benefit management business acquired as part of the pacificare acquisition in december in 2005.
(2)
reflects $250 million of stock-based compensation and $90 million of deferred tax benefit as recorded under the modified retrospective method of adoption of fas 123r that would have
been recognized based on our original pro forma disclosure under fas 123 prior to the restatement, net of the restatement adjustments under apb25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated statement of operations subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method of adoption to correct
the previously presented pro forma disclosures for the effects of the historical stock option practices and includes $56 million of additional stock-based compensation and $9 million of related deferred tax benefit.
table of contents
consolidated statements of operations
for the year ended december31, 2004
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
(in millions, except per share data)
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
revenues
premiums
$
33,495
$
$
34,439
$
$
$
34,439
services
3,335
(92
)
3,243
3,243
products
investment and other income
total revenues
37,218
38,217
38,217
operating costs
medical costs
27,000
27,858
27,858
operating costs
5,743
6,030
6,073
cost of products sold
depreciation and amortization
total operating costs
33,117
1,199
34,316
34,359
earnings from operations
4,101
(200
)
3,901
(2
)
(41
)
3,858
interest expense
(128
)
(128
)
(128
)
earnings before income taxes
3,973
(200
)
3,773
(2
)
(41
)
3,730
provision for income taxes
(1,386
)
(1,344
)
(1,319
)
net earnings
$
2,587
$
(158
)
$
2,429
$
$
(31
)
$
2,411
basic net earnings per common share
$
2.07
$
(0.13
)
$
1.94
$
0.01
$
(0.02
)
$
1.93
diluted net earnings per common share
$
1.97
$
(0.11
)
$
1.86
$
0.01
$
(0.04
)
$
1.83
basic weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,252
1,252
1,252
dilutive effect of common stock equivalents
(2
)
diluted weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,310
(2
)
1,308
1,316
(1)
includes $201 million of stock-based compensation and $56 million of deferred tax benefit associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated statement of
operations as well as an adjustment to premium revenue of $1,016 million, medical costs of $926 million and operating costs of $90 million to reflect a reinsurance contract on a gross basis to conform to our current presentation. we have also
reclassified certain service revenues and operating costs to product revenues and cost of products sold, respectively, primarily related to our pharmacy benefit management business acquired as part of the pacificare acquisition in december 2005.
(2)
reflects $203 million of stock-based compensation and $71 million of deferred tax benefit as recorded under the modified retrospective method of adoption of fas 123r that would have
been recognized based on our original pro forma disclosure under fas 123 prior to the restatement, net of the restatement adjustments under apb25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated statement of operations subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method of adoption to correct
the previously presented pro forma disclosures for the effects of the historical stock option practices and includes $41 million of additional stock-based compensation and $10 million of related deferred tax benefit.
table of contents
consolidated balance sheets
as of december31, 2005
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
(in millions, except per share data)
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
5,421
$
$
5,421
$
$
$
5,421
short-term investments
accounts receivable, net
1,290
(83
)
1,207
1,207
assets under management
1,825
1,825
1,825
deferred income taxes
other current assets
(15
)
total current assets
10,640
(93
)
10,547
10,547
long-term investments
8,971
8,971
8,971
property, equipment, and capitalized software, net
1,647
1,647
1,647
goodwill
16,206
16,238
16,238
other intangible assets, net
2,020
2,020
2,020
other assets
1,890
(25
)
1,865
1,865
total assets
$
41,374
$
(86
)
$
41,288
$
$
$
41,288
liabilities and shareholders equity
current liabilities
medical costs payable
$
7,301
$
(39
)
$
7,262
$
$
$
7,262
accounts payable and accrued liabilities
3,301
(16
)
3,285
(95
)
3,285
other policy liabilities
1,824
1,845
1,845
commercial paper and current maturities of long-term debt
3,261
3,261
3,261
unearned premiums
1,000
1,000
total current liabilities
16,644
16,653
(95
)
16,653
long-term debt, less current maturities
3,850
(16
)
3,834
3,834
future policy benefits for life and annuity contracts
1,761
1,761
1,761
deferred income taxes and other liabilities
1,386
(134
)
1,252
(51
)
1,225
commitments and contingencies
shareholders equity
common stock
additional paid-in capital
6,921
7,259
(413
)
7,510
retained earnings
10,765
(283
)
10,482
(593
)
10,258
accumulated other comprehensive income:
net unrealized gains on investments, net of tax effects
total shareholders equity
17,733
17,788
(44
)
17,815
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
41,374
$
(86
)
$
41,288
$
$
$
41,288
(1)
includes adjustments to increase current income taxes payable by $95 million, decrease non-current deferred tax liabilities by $236 million, increase additional paid-in capital by
$372 million and to decrease retained earnings by $231 million associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated balance sheets.
(2)
reflects adjustments to decrease non-current deferred tax liabilities by $212 million, increase additional paid-in capital by $1,036 million and decrease retained earnings by $824
million associated with the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method as of december 31, 2005 that would have been recognized based on our original pro forma disclosure under fas 123 prior to the restatement, net of the
restatement adjustments under apb 25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated balance sheets subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method to correct the previously
presented pro forma disclosures for the effects of the historical stock option practices and includes adjustments to increase current income taxes payable by $95 million, decrease non-current deferred tax liabilities by $51 million, decrease
additional paid-in capital by $413 million and increase retained earnings by $369 million. includes adjustments to our historical common stock repurchase accounting considering the increase in compensation recognized in relation to the timing of
stock repurchase activity and the related impact to period end reclassifications within shareholders equity to restore additional paid-in capital.
table of contents
consolidated statements of cash flows
for the year ended december31, 2005
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
(in millions)
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
operating activities
net earnings
$
3,300
$
(238
)
$
3,062
$
$
(47
)
$
3,083
noncash items:
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes and other
(85
)
(251
)
(2
)
(171
)
stock-based compensation
(67
)
net change in other operating items, net of effects from acquisitions, and changes in aarp balances
accounts receivable and other assets
(83
)
(3
)
(86
)
(86
)
medical costs payable
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
(3
)
unearned premiums
(284
)
(16
)
(300
)
(300
)
cash flows from operating activities
4,326
4,326
(253
)
4,083
investing activities
cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash assumed and other effects
(2,562
)
(2,562
)
(2,562
)
cash transferred on sale of business
(363
)
(363
)
(363
)
purchases of property, equipment and capitalized software
(509
)
(509
)
(509
)
purchases of investments
(5,876
)
(5,876
)
(5,876
)
maturities and sales of investments
5,821
5,821
5,821
cash flows used for investing activities
(3,489
)
(3,489
)
(3,489
)
financing activities
repayment of commercial paper, net
2,556
2,556
2,556
proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
payments for retirement of long-term debt
(400
)
(400
)
(400
)
common stock repurchases
(2,557
)
(2,557
)
(2,557
)
proceeds from common stock issuances under stock-based compensation plans
stock-based compensation excess tax benefit
(10
)
customer funds administered
dividends paid
(19
)
(19
)
(19
)
other
(12
)
(12
)
(12
)
cash flows from (used for) financing activities
(10
)
increase in cash and cash equivalents
1,430
1,430
1,430
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
3,991
3,991
3,991
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
5,421
$
$
5,421
$
$
$
5,421
(1)
includes adjustments to operating cash flows for stock-based compensation and related tax effects associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated statement of
cash flows, as well as operating cash flow adjustments due to immaterial adjustments, individually and in the aggregate, unrelated to historical stock option practices.
(2)
reflects adjustments to operating cash flows for stock-based compensation and deferred tax assets and to financing cash flows for excess tax benefits as recorded under the modified
retrospective method of adoption of fas 123r that would have been recognized based on our original pro forma disclosure under fas 123 prior to the restatement, net of the restatement adjustments under apb25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated statement of cash flows subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method to correct the
previously presented pro forma disclosures for the effects of the historical stock option practices and includes adjustments to operating cash flows for additional stock-based compensation expense and deferred tax assets and to financing cash flows
for excess tax benefits.
table of contents
consolidated statements of cash flows
for the year ended december31, 2004
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
(in millions)
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
operating activities
net earnings
$
2,587
$
(158
)
$
2,429
$
$
(31
)
$
2,411
noncash items:
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes and other
(108
)
(255
)
(232
)
stock-based compensation
net change in other operating items, net of effects from acquisitions, and changes in aarp balances
accounts receivable and other assets
(30
)
medical costs payable
(40
)
accounts payable and other accrued liabilities
(45
)
unearned premiums
(12
)
cash flows from operating activities
4,135
4,147
(285
)
3,923
investing activities
cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash assumed and other effects
(2,225
)
(2,225
)
(2,225
)
purchases of property, equipment and capitalized software
(356
)
(356
)
(356
)
proceeds from disposal of property, equipment and capitalized software
purchases of investments
(3,190
)
(3,190
)
(3,190
)
maturities and sales of investments
4,121
4,121
4,121
cash flows used for investing activities
(1,644
)
(1,644
)
(1,644
)
financing activities
repayment of commercial paper, net
proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
2,000
2,000
2,000
payments for retirement of long-term debt
(150
)
(150
)
(150
)
common stock repurchases
(3,446
)
(3,446
)
(3,446
)
proceeds from common stock issuances under stock-based compensation plans
stock-based compensation excess tax benefit
(61
)
customer funds administered
dividends paid
(18
)
(18
)
(18
)
other
(12
)
(8
)
(8
)
cash flows from (used for) financing activities
(762
)
(12
)
(774
)
(61
)
(550
)
increase in cash and cash equivalents
1,729
1,729
1,729
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
2,262
2,262
2,262
cash and cash equivalents, end of period
$
3,991
$
$
3,991
$
$
$
3,991
(1)
includes adjustments to operating cash flows for stock-based compensation and related tax effects associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated statement of
cash flows, as well as operating cash flow adjustments due to immaterial adjustments, individually and in the aggregate, unrelated to historical stock option practices.
(2)
reflects adjustments to operating cash flows for stock-based compensation and deferred tax assets and to financing cash flows for excess tax benefits as recorded under the modified
retrospective method of adoption of fas 123r that would have been recognized based on our original pro forma disclosure under fas 123 prior to the restatement, net of the restatement adjustments under apb 25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated statement of cash flows subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method to correct the
previously presented pro forma disclosures for the effects of the historical stock option practices and includes adjustments to operating cash flows for additional stock-based compensation expense and deferred tax assets and to financing cash flows
for excess tax benefits.
table of contents
4.
medicare part d pharmacy benefits contract  beginning
january1, 2006, the company began serving as a plan sponsor offering medicare part d prescription drug insurance coverage under a contract with the centers for medicare& medicaid services (cms). under the medicare part d program,
there are six separate elements of payment received by the company during the plan year. these payment elements are as follows:
cms premium  cms pays a fixed monthly premium per member to the company for the entire plan year.
member premium  additionally, certain members pay a fixed monthly premium to the company for the entire plan year.
low-income premium subsidy  for qualifying low-income members, cms pays some or all of the members monthly premiums to the company on the members
behalf.
catastrophic reinsurance subsidy  cms pays the company a cost reimbursement estimate monthly to fund the cms obligation to pay approximately 80% of the costs
incurred by individual members in excess of the individual annual out-of-pocket maximum of $3,600. a settlement is made based on actual cost experience subsequent to the end of the plan year.
low-income member cost sharing subsidy  for qualifying low-income members, cms pays on the members behalf some or all of a members cost sharing
amounts, such as deductibles and coinsurance. the cost sharing subsidy is funded by cms through monthly payments to the company. the company administers and pays the subsidized portion of the claims on behalf of cms, and a settlement payment is made
between cms and the company based on actual claims experience, subsequent to the end of the plan year.
cms risk-share  if the ultimate per member per month benefit costs of any medicare part d regional plan varies more than 2.5% above or below the level
estimated in the original bid submitted by the company and approved by cms, there is a risk-share settlement with cms that is settled subsequent to the end of the plan year. the risk-share adjustment, if any, is recorded as an adjustment to premium
revenues and other receivables or liabilities.  the cms premium, the member premium, and the low-income premium subsidy represent
payments for the companys insurance risk coverage under the medicare part d program and therefore are recorded as premium revenues in the consolidated statements of operations. premium revenues are recognized ratably over the period in which
eligible individuals are entitled to receive prescription drug benefits. we record premium payments received in advance of the applicable service period as unearned premiums.  the catastrophic reinsurance subsidy and the low-income member cost sharing subsidy represent cost reimbursements under the medicare part d program. the company is fully reimbursed by cms for costs incurred for these
contract elements and, accordingly, there is no insurance risk to the company. amounts received for these subsidies are not reflected as premium revenues, but rather are accounted for as deposits, with the related liability recorded in other policy
liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. related cash flows are presented as customer funds administered within financing cash flows in the consolidated statements of cash flows.  pharmacy benefit costs and administrative costs under the contract are expensed as incurred and are recognized in medical costs and operating costs, respectively, in the consolidated statements of operations.
as a result of the medicare part d product benefit design, the company incurs a disproportionate amount of pharmacy benefit costs early in the contract
year. for example, the company is responsible for approximately 67% of a medicare part d beneficiarys drug costs up to $2,250, while the beneficiary is responsible for 100% of their drug costs from $2,250 up to $5,100 (at the companys
discounted purchase price). consequently, the company incurs a disproportionate amount of benefit costs in the first half of the contract year as compared with
table of contents
the last half of the contract year, when comparatively more members will be incurring claims above the $2,250 initial coverage limit. the uneven timing of
medicare part d pharmacy benefit claims results in losses in the first half of year that entitle the company to risk-share adjustment payments from cms. accordingly, during the interim periods within the contract year we record a net risk-share
receivable from cms in other current assets in the consolidated balance sheets and a corresponding retrospective premium adjustment in premium revenues in the consolidated statement of operations. this represents the estimated amount payable by cms
to the company under the risk-share contract provisions if the program were terminated based on estimated costs incurred through that interim period. those losses reverse in the second half of the year and final risk-share amounts due to or from
cms, if any, are settled approximately six months after the contract year-end. the projected net risk-share payable to be paid to cms as of december31, 2006 was $350 million.
5.
acquisitions and divestitures  on december1, 2006, our health
care services business segment acquired the student insurance division (student resources) of the mega life and health insurance company through an asset purchase agreement. student resources primarily serves college and university students. this
acquisition strengthened our position in this market and provided expanded distribution opportunities for our other unitedhealth group businesses. in exchange and under the terms of the asset purchase agreement, we issued a 10-year, $95 million
promissory note bearing a 5.4% fixed interest rate and paid approximately $1 million in cash. the results of operations and financial condition of student resources have been included in our consolidated financial statements since the acquisition
date. the pro forma effects of the student resources acquisition on our consolidated financial statements were not material.  on february24, 2006,
the company acquired john deere health care, inc. (jdhc). jdhc serves employers primarily in iowa, central and western illinois, eastern tennessee and southwestern virginia. this acquisition strengthened our resources and capabilities in these
areas. the operations of jdhc reside primarily within our health care services and uniprise segments. we paid approximately $515 million in cash, including transaction costs, in exchange for all of the outstanding equity of jdhc. the purchase price
and costs associated with the acquisition exceeded the estimated preliminary fair value of the net tangible assets acquired by approximately $376 million. based on managements consideration of fair value, which included completion of a
valuation analysis, we have allocated the excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible assets acquired to finite-lived intangible assets of $60 million and goodwill of $316 million. the finite-lived intangible assets consist
primarily of member lists and physician and hospital networks, with an estimated weighted-average useful life of approximately 15 years. the acquired goodwill is deductible for income tax purposes. the results of operations and financial condition
of jdhc have been included in our consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date. the pro forma effects of the jdhc acquisition on our consolidated financial statements were not material. acquired net tangible assets and liabilities
are categorized as follows: cash and cash equivalents of $46 million; investments of $197 million; accounts receivable and other current assets of $60 million; property, equipment and capitalized software and other assets of $29 million; medical
costs payable of $131 million and other liabilities of $62 million. jdhc has been renamed unitedhealthcare services company of the river valley, inc.  on
december20, 2005, the company acquired pacificare health systems, inc. (pacificare). pacificare provides health care and benefit services to individuals and employers, principally in markets in the western united states. this merger
significantly strengthened our resources by enhancing our capabilities on the pacific coast and in other western states and broadening the scope of our product offerings for a host of specialized services. the operations of pacificare reside
primarily within our health care services and specialized care services segments. under the terms of the agreement, pacificare shareholders received 1.1 shares of unitedhealth group common stock and $21.50 in cash for each share of pacificare common
stock they owned. total consideration issued for the transaction was approximately $8.8 billion, composed of approximately 99.2million shares of unitedhealth group common stock (valued at approximately $5.3 billion based upon the average of
unitedhealth groups share closing price for two days before, the day of and two days after the acquisition announcement date of july6, 2005), approximately $2.1 billion in cash, $960 million cash paid to retire
table of contents
pacificares existing debt and unitedhealth group vested common stock options with an estimated fair value of approximately $420 million issued in
exchange for pacificares outstanding vested common stock options. the purchase price and costs associated with the acquisition exceeded the estimated fair value of the net tangible assets acquired by approximately $7.0 billion. based on
managements consideration of fair value, which included completion of a valuation analysis, we have allocated the excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible assets acquired to finite-lived intangible assets of $954 million
and associated deferred tax liabilities of $377 million, and goodwill of approximately $6.4 billion. the finite-lived intangible assets and related weighted-average useful lives consist of the following ($ in millions):
fairvalue
weighted-average useful life
customer contracts and membership lists
$
12years
trademarks
17 years
physician and hospital networks
15 years
total acquired finite-lived intangible assets
$
13 years
the acquired goodwill is not deductible for income tax purposes. acquired net tangible assets and liabilities are
categorized as follows: cash and cash equivalents of $808 million; investments of $2.4 billion; accounts receivable and other current assets of $832 million; property, equipment and capitalized software and other assets of $454 million; medical
costs payable of $1.4 billion and other liabilities of $1.1 billion.  the results of operations and financial condition of pacificare have been included in
our consolidated financial statements since its acquisition date. the unaudited pro forma financial information presented below assumes that the acquisition occurred as of the beginning of the period. the pro forma adjustments include the pro forma
effect of unitedhealth group shares issued in the acquisition, the amortization of finite-lived intangible assets arising from the purchase price allocations, interest expense related to financing the cash portion of the purchase price and the
associated income tax effects of the pro forma adjustments. the following unaudited pro forma results have been prepared for comparative purposes only and do not purport to be indicative of the results of operations that would have occurred had the
acquisition been consummated at the beginning of the period.
for the year endeddecember31,2005
(in millions, except per share data)
proforma-unaudited
revenues
$
60,486
net earnings
$
3,351
earnings per share:
basic
$
2.46
diluted
$
2.33
table of contents
we record liabilities related to integration activities in connection with business combinations when integration plans
are finalized and approved by management within one year of the acquisition date in accordance with the requirements of the emerging issues task force (eitf) issue no.95-3, recognition of liabilities in connection with a purchase
business combination. liabilities recorded relate to activities that have no future economic benefit to the company and represent contractual obligations. these liabilities result in an increase to goodwill acquired. at each reporting date, we
evaluate our liabilities associated with integration activities and make adjustments as appropriate. integration activities relate primarily to severance costs for certain workforce reductions largely in the health care services segment, costs of
terminated or vacated leased facilities and other contract termination costs. the following table illustrates the changes in employee termination benefit costs and other integration costs related to the pacificare acquisition as of december31,
2006 (in millions):
employee termination benefitcosts
otherintegration activities
total
accrued integration liabilities at december31,2005
$
$
$
additional integration costs accrued and estimate adjustments
payments made against liability
(43
)
(5
)
(48
)
accrued integration liabilities at december31,2006
$
$
$
on september19, 2005, our health care services business segment acquired neighborhood health partnership
(nhp). nhp serves local employers primarily in south florida. this acquisition strengthened our market position in this region and provided expanded distribution opportunities for our other unitedhealth group businesses. we paid approximately $185
million in cash in exchange for all of the outstanding equity of nhp. the results of operations and financial condition of nhp have been included in our consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date. the pro forma effects of the nhp
acquisition on our consolidated financial statements were not material.  in october 2005, we sold the life insurance and annuity business within golden
rule to oneamerica financial partners, inc. (oneamerica) through an indemnity reinsurance arrangement. under the arrangement, oneamerica assumes the risks associated with the future policy benefits for the life and annuity contracts. we remain
liable for claims if oneamerica fails to meet its obligations to policy holders. because we remain primarily liable to the policy holders, the liabilities and obligations associated with the reinsured contracts remain on our consolidated balance
sheets with a corresponding reinsurance receivable from oneamerica, which is classified in other current and noncurrent assets and totaled approximately $121 million and $1.9 billion, respectively, as of december31, 2006. we transferred
approximately $1.3 billion of investments and $363 million in cash to oneamerica in conjunction with the arrangement. we realized a small gain on the sale which has been deferred and is being amortized over the estimated remaining life of the
reinsured contracts.  for the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, aggregate consideration paid or issued for smaller acquisitions accounted
for under the purchase method was $276 million, $196 million and $158 million, respectively. these acquisitions were not material to our consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
6.
cash, cash equivalents and investments  as of december31, the
amortized cost, gross unrealized gains and losses, and fair value of cash, cash equivalents and investments were as follows (in millions):
amortizedcost
grossunrealizedgains
grossunrealizedlosses
fairvalue
cash and cash equivalents
$
10,320
$
$
$
10,320
debt securities  available for sale
9,710
(52
)
9,715
equity securities  available for sale
(1
)
debt securities  held to maturity
total cash and investments
$
20,556
$
$
(53
)
$
20,582
cash and cash equivalents
$
5,421
$
$
$
5,421
debt securities  available for sale
9,011
(52
)
9,019
equity securities  available for sale
(1
)
debt securities  held to maturity
total cash and investments
$
14,930
$
$
(53
)
$
14,982
as of december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, debt securities consisted of $3,310 million and $2,256
million in u.s. government and agency obligations, $4,203 million and $4,554 million in state and municipal obligations, and $2,437 million and $2,490 million in corporate obligations. at december31, 2006, we held $833 million in debt
securities with maturities of less than one year, $3,694 million in debt securities with maturities of one to five years, $2,733 million in debt securities with maturities of five to 10 years and $2,690 million in debt securities with maturities of
more than ten years.  in accordance with fasb staff position fas 115-1/124-1, the meaning of
other-than-temporary impairment and its application to certain investments, the following table shows the gross unrealized losses and fair value of investments with unrealized losses that, in our judgment, are other-than-temporarily impaired.
these investments are aggregated by investment type and length of time that individual securities have been in a continuous unrealized loss position (in millions)1:
as of december31, 2006
less than 12 months
12 months orgreater
total
fairvalue
gross unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
gross unrealizedlosses
fairvalue
gross unrealizedlosses
u.s. government and agency obligations
$
1,433
$
(7
)
$
$
(11
)
$
2,076
$
(18
)
state and municipal obligations
(4
)
1,171
(12
)
2,127
(16
)
corporate obligations
(4
)
(14
)
1,490
(18
)
total debt securities  available for sale
$
3,024
$
(15
)
$
2,669
$
(37
)
$
5,693
$
(52
)
total equity securities
$
(1
)
$
$
$
(1
)
(1)
debt securities classified as held-to-maturity investments have been excluded from this analysis. these investments are predominantly held in u.s. government or agency obligations
and the contractual terms do not permit the issuer to settle the securities at a price less than the amortized cost of the investment. additionally, the fair values of these investments approximate their amortized cost.  the unrealized losses on investments in u.s. government and agency obligations, state and municipal obligations and corporate obligations at december31, 2006 were
mainly caused by interest rate increases and not
table of contents
by unfavorable changes in the credit ratings associated with these securities. we evaluate impairment at each reporting period for each of the securities
where the fair value of the investment is less than its cost. the contractual cash flows of the u.s. government and agency obligations are either guaranteed by the u.s. government or an agency of the u.s. government. it is expected that the
securities would not be settled at a price less than the cost of our investment. we evaluated the credit ratings of the state and municipal obligations and the corporate obligations, noting neither a significant deterioration since purchase nor
other factors leading to other-than-temporary impairment.  a portion of the companys investments in equity securities consists of investments held by
our unitedhealth capital business in various public and nonpublic companies concentrated in the areas of health care delivery and related information technologies. market conditions that affect the value of health care and related technology stocks
will likewise impact the value of our equity portfolio. the equity securities were evaluated for severity and duration of unrealized loss, overall market volatility and other market factors.  we analyze relevant factors individually and in combination including the length of time and extent to which market value has been less than cost, the financial
condition and near-term prospects of the issuer as well as specific events or circumstances that may influence the operations of the issuer, and our intent and ability to hold the investment for a sufficient time to recover our cost. we revise
impairment judgments when new information becomes known or when we do not anticipate holding the investment until recovery. if any of our investments experience a decline in fair value that is determined to be other-than-temporary, based on analysis
of relevant factors, we record a realized loss in our consolidated statements of operations. we do not consider the unrealized losses on each of the investments described above to be other-than-temporarily impaired at december31, 2006.
we recorded realized gains and losses on sales of investments, as follows:
for the year endeddecember31,
(in millions)
gross realized gains
$
$
$
gross realized losses
(37
)
(50
)
(18
)
net realized gains
$
$
$
included in the realized losses above are impairment charges of $4 million, $8 million and $8 million for 2006,
2005 and 2004, respectively.
7.
goodwill and other intangible assets  changes in the carrying
amount of goodwill, by segment, during the years ended december31, 2006 and 2005 (as restated), were as follows:
(in millions)
healthcareservices
uniprise
specializedcareservices
ingenix
consolidated
balance at december31, 2004
$
7,505
$
$
$
$
9,479
acquisitions and subsequent payments/adjustments
6,359
6,759
balance at december31, 2005
13,864
16,238
acquisitions and subsequent payments/adjustments
balance at december31, 2006
$
13,996
$
$
1,054
$
$
16,822
table of contents
the above amounts reflect fourth quarter 2006 goodwill adjustments related to the finalization and review of the
pacificare valuation analysis resulting in a decrease of $247 million in health care services goodwill and an increase of $252 million in specialized care services goodwill, each representing less than 4% of total goodwill resulting from the
pacificare acquisition.  the weighted-average useful life, gross carrying value, accumulated amortization and net carrying value of other intangible assets
as of december31, 2006 and 2005 were as follows:
december31, 2006
december31, 2005
(in millions)
weighted-averageusefullife
grosscarryingvalue
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingvalue
grosscarryingvalue
accumulatedamortization
netcarryingvalue
customer contracts and membership lists
15 years
$
1,871
$
(246
)
$
1,625
$
1,830
$
(106
)
$
1,724
patents, trademarks and technology
13 years
(89
)
(62
)
other
12 years
(38
)
(24
)
total
14years
$
2,277
$
(373
)
$
1,904
$
2,212
$
(192
)
$
2,020
amortization expense relating to intangible assets was $181 million in 2006, $94 million in 2005 and $62 million
in 2004. estimated future amortization expense relating to intangible assets for the years ending december31 is as follows: $178 million in 2007, $173 million in 2008, $155 million in 2009, $147 million in 2010, and $142 million in 2011.
8.
medical costs and medical costs payable  medical costs and medical
costs payable include estimates of our obligations for medical care services that have been rendered on behalf of insured consumers but for which we have either not yet received or processed claims, and for liabilities for physician, hospital and
other medical cost disputes. we develop estimates for medical costs incurred but not reported using an actuarial process that is consistently applied, centrally controlled and automated. the actuarial models consider factors such as time from date
of service to claim receipt, claim backlogs, care provider contract rate changes, medical care consumption and other medical cost trends. we estimate liabilities for physician, hospital and other medical cost disputes based upon an analysis of
potential outcomes, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. each period, we re-examine previously established medical costs payable estimates based on actual claim submissions and other changes in facts and circumstances. as
the liability estimates recorded in prior periods become more exact, we adjust the amount of the estimates, and include the changes in estimates in medical costs in the period in which the change is identified. for example, in every reporting period
our operating results include the effects of more completely developed medical costs payable estimates associated with previously reported periods.
table of contents
the following table shows the components of the change in medical costs payable for the years ended december31:
(in millions)
medical costs payable, beginning of period
$
7,262
$
5,500
$
4,152
acquisitions
1,469
1,040
reported medical costs
current year
53,738
34,069
28,068
prior years
(430
)
(400
)
(210
)
total reported medical costs
53,308
33,669
27,858
claim payments
payments for current year
(46,566
)
(28,928
)
(24,071
)
payments for prior years
(6,152
)
(4,448
)
(3,479
)
total claim payments
(52,718
)
(33,376
)
(27,550
)
medical costs payable, end of period
$
8,076
$
7,262
$
5,500
9. commercial paper and debt  commercial paper and debt consisted of the following as of december31:
december31, 2006
december31, 2005
carryingvalue(1)
fairvalue(2)
carryingvalue(1)
fairvalue(2)
commercial paper
$
$
$
2,829
$
2,829
3.0% convertible subordinated debentures
$400 million par, 5.2% senior unsecured notes due january 2007
$550 million par, 3.4% senior unsecured notes due august 2007
$500 million par, 3.3% senior unsecured notes due january 2008
$250 million par, 3.8% senior unsecured notes due february 2009
senior unsecured floating-rate notes due march 2009
$450 million par, 4.1% senior unsecured notes due august 2009
$750 million par, 5.3% senior unsecured notes due march 2011
$450 million par, 4.9% senior unsecured notes due april 2013
$250 million par, 4.8% senior unsecured notes due february 2014
$500 million par, 5.0% senior unsecured notes due august 2014
$500 million par, 4.9% senior unsecured notes due march 2015
$750 million par, 5.4% senior unsecured notes due march 2016
$95 million par, 5.4% senior unsecured note due november 2016
$850 million par, 5.8% senior unsecured notes due march 2036
interest rate swaps
total commercial paper and debt
7,456
7,430
7,095
7,098
less current maturities
(1,483
)
(1,475
)
(3,261
)
(3,261
)
long-term debt, less current maturities
$
5,973
$
5,955
$
3,834
$
3,837
(1)
the carrying value of debt has been adjusted based upon the applicable interest rate swap fair values in accordance with the fair value hedge short-cut method of accounting
described below.
(2)
estimated based on third-party quoted market prices for the same or similar issues.  as of december31, 2006, our outstanding commercial paper had interest rates ranging from 5.3% to 5.5%. maturities of
commercial paper and debt for the years ending december31 are as follows: $1,483 million in 2007, $500 million in 2008, $1,350 million in 2009, $0 in 2010, $750 in 2011 and $3,373 million thereafter.
table of contents
on october16, 2006, we executed a $7.5 billion 364-day revolving credit facility in order to ensure the
companys immediate and continued access to additional liquidity. the credit facility is available for working capital purposes as well as to pay or repay any outstanding borrowings of the company. we have entered into amendments to our $7.5
billion credit facility to provide us with additional time to deliver to the lenders our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30, 2006 and our annual report on form 10-k for the year ended
december31, 2006. as of december31, 2006, we had no amounts outstanding under our $7.5 billion credit facility.  in march 2006, we refinanced
outstanding commercial paper by issuing $650 million of floating-rate notes due march 2009, $750 million of 5.3% fixed-rate notes due march 2011, $750 million of 5.4% fixed-rate notes due march 2016 and $850 million of 5.8% fixed-rate notes due
march 2036. the floating-rate notes due march 2009 are benchmarked to the london interbank offered rate (libor) and had an interest rate of 5.5% at december31, 2006.  in december 2005, we amended and restated our $1.0 billion five-year revolving credit facility supporting our commercial paper program. we increased the credit facility to $1.3 billion and extended the maturity date
to december 2010. we have entered into amendments to our $1.3 billion credit facility to provide us with additional time to deliver to the lenders our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30,
2006 and our annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2006, to obtain our lenders agreement and acknowledgement that the delivery of a notice of default or notice of acceleration under any indenture or credit agreement that is
being contested by the company in good faith does not cause a default or event of default under the credit agreement, and to obtain a waiver of any potential default that may arise as a result of our determination that our historical financial
information should not be relied upon and as a result of our restatement of our historical financial statements. as of december31, 2006, we had no amounts outstanding under our $1.3 billion credit facility.  in november and december 2005, we issued $2.6 billion of commercial paper primarily to finance the cash portion of the purchase price of the pacificare acquisition
described above and to retire a portion of the pacificare debt at the closing of the acquisition, as well as to refinance current maturities of long-term debt.  in october 2005, we executed a $3.0 billion 364-day revolving credit facility to support a $3.0 billion increase in our commercial paper program in order to finance the cash portion of the pacificare acquisition. we terminated the 364-day
revolving credit facility in march 2006.  in march 2005, we issued $500 million of 4.9% fixed-rate notes due march 2015. we used the proceeds from this
borrowing for general corporate purposes, including repayment of commercial paper, capital expenditures, working capital and share repurchases.  to more
closely align interest costs with the floating interest rate received on our cash and cash equivalent balances, we have entered into interest rate swap agreements to convert the majority of our interest rate exposure from a fixed rate to a variable
rate. these interest rate swap agreements qualify as fair value hedges. the interest rate swap agreements have aggregate notional amounts of $4.9 billion as of december31, 2006 with variable rates that are benchmarked to libor, and are
recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. as of december31, 2006, the aggregate liability, recorded at fair value, for all existing interest rate swaps was approximately $73 million. these fair value hedges are accounted for using the
short-cut method under fas no. 133, accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities (fas 133), whereby the hedges are reported on our consolidated balance sheets at fair value, and the carrying value of the long-term debt is
adjusted for an offsetting amount representing changes in fair value attributable to the hedged risk. since these amounts completely offset, we have reported both the swap liability and the debt liability within debt on our consolidated balance
sheets, and there have been no net gains or losses recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. at december31, 2006, the rates used to accrue interest expense on these agreements ranged from 4.9% to 5.7%.
table of contents
our debt arrangements and credit facilities contain various covenants, the most restrictive of which require us to
maintain a debt-to-total-capital ratio (calculated as the sum of commercial paper and debt divided by the sum of commercial paper, debt and shareholders equity) below 50%. after giving effect to the credit agreement amendments and waivers that
we obtained from our lenders, we believe we are in compliance with the requirements of all debt covenants. on august28, 2006, we received a purported notice of default from persons claiming to hold certain of our debt securities alleging a
violation of our indenture governing our debt securities. this followed our announcement that we would delay filing our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2006. on or about november2, 2006, we received a
purported notice of acceleration from the holders who previously sent the notice of default that purports to declare an acceleration of our 5.8% senior unsecured notes due march15, 2036. our indenture requires us to provide to the trustee
copies of the reports we are required to file with the sec, such as our quarterly reports, within 15 days of filing such reports with the sec. on october25, 2006, we filed an action in the united states district court for the district of
minnesota seeking a declaratory judgment that we are not in default under the terms of the indenture. immediately prior to the filing of this form 10-k, we filed our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june 30, 2006 and september
30, 2006, as well as an amendment to our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2006. should the company ultimately be unsuccessful in this matter, the company may be required to retire all or a portion of the $850 million of
senior unsecured notes due march 2036. we intend to prosecute the declaratory judgment action vigorously.  pacificare had approximately $100 million par
value of 3% convertible subordinated debentures (convertible notes) which were convertible into approximately 5.2million shares of unitedhealth groups common stock and $102 million of cash as of december31, 2005. in december 2005,
we initiated a consent solicitation to all of the holders of outstanding convertible notes pursuant to which we offered to compensate all holders who elected to convert their notes in accordance with existing terms and consent to an amendment to a
covenant in the indenture governing the convertible notes. the compensation consisted of the present value of interest through october18, 2007, the earliest redemption date, plus a pro rata share of $1 million. on january31, 2006,
approximately 91% of the convertible notes were tendered pursuant to the offer, for which we issued approximately 4.8million shares of unitedhealth group common stock, valued at $282 million, and cash of $93 million.
10.
shareholders equity  regulatory capital and dividend
restrictions  we conduct a significant portion of our operations through subsidiaries that are subject to standards established by the national
association of insurance commissioners (naic). these standards, among other things, require these subsidiaries to maintain specified levels of statutory capital, as defined by each state, and restrict the timing and amount of dividends and other
distributions that may be paid to their parent companies. generally, the amount of dividend distributions that may be paid by a regulated subsidiary, without prior approval by state regulatory authorities, is limited based on the entitys level
of statutory net income and statutory capital and surplus. at december31, 2006, approximately $1.9 billion of our $20.6 billion of cash and investments was held by non-regulated subsidiaries and available for general corporate use, including
acquisitions and share repurchases.  as of december31, 2006, our regulated subsidiaries had aggregate statutory capital and surplus of approximately
$8.2 billion, which is significantly more than the aggregate minimum regulatory requirements.  stock repurchase program  under our board of directors authorization, we maintain a common stock repurchase program. repurchases may be made from time to time at prevailing prices, subject
to certain restrictions on volume, pricing and timing. during 2006, we repurchased 40.2million shares at an average price of approximately $56 per share and an aggregate cost of approximately $2.2 billion. as of december31, 2006, we had
board of directors authorization to purchase up to an additional 136.7million shares of our common stock. the company suspended purchases under this stock repurchase program in the third quarter of 2006 pending completion of the
restatement (which is reflected in this form 10-k) and becoming current in its periodic sec filings. the company intends to resume its stock repurchase program in 2007.
table of contents
preferred stock  at
december31, 2006, we had 10million shares of $0.001 par value preferred stock authorized for issuance, and no preferred shares issued and outstanding.
11.
stock-based compensation and other employee benefit plans  as
further described in note 1, we adopted fas 123r as of january1, 2006. fas 123r requires companies to measure compensation expense for all share-based payments (including employee stock options, stock appreciation rights and restricted stock)
at fair value and recognize the expense over the related service period. we adopted fas 123r using the modified retrospective transition method, under which all prior period financial statements were restated to recognize compensation cost in the
amounts historically disclosed under fas 123.  as of december31, 2006, we had approximately 83.0million shares available for future grants of
stock-based awards under our stock-based compensation plan, including, but not limited to, incentive or non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock and restricted stock units. our existing stock-based awards consist
mainly of non-qualified stock options and stock-settled stock appreciation rights (sars). stock options and sars generally vest ratably over four years and may be exercised up to 10 years from the date of grant. stock option and sar activity is
summarized in the table below (shares in millions):
shares
weighted-average exerciseprice
shares
weighted-average exerciseprice
shares
weighted-averageexerciseprice
outstanding at beginning of year
186.8
$
176.3
$
174.6
$
granted
19.6
$
26.2
$
34.1
$
assumed in acquisitions
$
10.9
$
15.2
$
exercised
(20.4
)
$
(23.6
)
$
(43.5
)
$
forfeited
(5.8
)
$
(3.0
)
$
(4.1
)
$
outstanding at end of year
180.2
$
186.8
$
176.3
$
vested or expected to vest at end of year
176.2
$
181.4
$
170.9
$
exercisable at end of year
121.4
$
110.7
$
89.6
$
as of december31, 2006 (shares in millions):
options outstanding
options exercisable
range of exercise prices
numberoutstanding
weighted-averageremainingoptionterm(years)
weighted-averageexerciseprice
numberexercisable
weighted-averageexerciseprice
$1.68  $15.63
51.9
2.9
$
51.9
$
$15.65  $26.18
50.1
5.6
$
43.1
$
$26.23  $47.34
46.7
7.6
$
22.3
$
$47.39  $62.90
31.5
9.1
$
4.1
$
$1.68  $62.90
180.2
6.0
$
121.4
$
to determine compensation expense related to our stock options and sars, the fair value of each award grant is
estimated on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. to estimate the 2006, 2005 and 2004 fair value of our employee stock option and sar grants, we utilize a binomial model. the principal assumptions we used in applying the option-pricing
models were as follows:
risk-free interest rate
4.1%5.2%
2.1%4.5%
1.9%4.2%
expected volatility
26.0%
23.5%
28.5%
expected dividend yield
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
forfeiture rate
5.0%
5.0%
4.1%
expected life in years
4.1
4.1
4.2
table of contents
the risk-free interest rate is based on u.s. treasury yields in effect at the time of grant. expected volatilities are
based on a blend of the implied volatilities from traded options on our common stock and the historical volatility of our common stock. we use historical data to estimate option and sar exercises and employee terminations within the valuation model.
the expected term of options and sars granted represents the period of time that the awards granted are expected to be outstanding based on historical exercise patterns.  the weighted-average fair value of stock options and sars granted was $11 per share, $14 per share and $12 per share for 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. the aggregate fair value of stock options and sars that
vested during 2006, 2005 and 2004 was $371 million, $350 million and $322 million, respectively. as of december31, 2006, the aggregate intrinsic value of outstanding stock options and sars was $4.6 billion, with a weighted-average remaining
contractual term of 6.0 years. the aggregate intrinsic value of exercisable stock options and sars at that same date was $4.0 billion, with a weighted-average remaining contractual term of 4.8 years. the total intrinsic value of options and sars
exercised during 2006, 2005 and 2004 was $753 million, $847 million and $951 million, respectively.  restricted stock awards generally vest ratably over
two to four years. compensation expense related to restricted stock awards is determined based upon the fair value of each award on the date of grant. restricted stock award activity is summarized in the table below (shares in millions):
shares
weighted-average grantdatefair value
shares
weighted-average grantdatefair value
shares
weighted-averagegrantdatefair value
outstanding at beginning of year
1.8
$
0.6
$
0.1
$
granted
0.1
$
1.4
$
0.5
$
vested
(0.6
)
$
(0.2
)
$
$
outstanding at end of year
1.3
$
1.8
$
0.6
$
we recognize compensation cost for stock-based awards, including stock options, sars, restricted stock and
restricted stock units, on a straight-line basis over the related service period (generally the vesting period) of the award, or to an employees eligible retirement date under the award agreement, if earlier. for 2006, 2005 and 2004, we
recognized compensation expense related to our stock-based compensation plans of $404 million ($259 million net of tax effects), $306 million ($194 million net of tax effects) and $244 million ($155 million net of tax effects), respectively.
stock-based compensation expense is recognized within operating costs in the consolidated statements of operations. stock compensation expense for 2006 included $31 million associated with the cash settlement of stock options expiring or forfeiting
during the period. our registration statement, which covers issuances of common stock upon stock option exercise, was unavailable as a result of the determination that our historical financial statements should no longer be relied upon. as of
december31, 2006, there was $634 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to stock awards that is expected to be recognized as an expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 1.4 years.  for 2006, 2005 and 2004, the income tax benefit realized from stock-based awards was $287 million, $311 million and $304 million, respectively.  in november and december 2006, 15 executives of the company entered into options repricing agreements with the company to ensure that there was no potential for
financial gain from the incorrect dating of any option the executives had received in light of the conclusions of the wilmerhale report, as well as to avoid potential additional surtax liability under section409a of the internal revenue code
(section 409a). these repricings increased the exercise prices of certain awards to either the highest closing price of the stated grant year or to the closing price of the companys common stock on the accounting measurement date. there was no
incremental fair value associated with these modifications.
table of contents
as further discussed in note 10, we maintain a common stock repurchase program. the objective of our share repurchase
program is to optimize our capital structure, cost of capital and return to shareholders, as well as to offset the dilutive impact of shares issued for stock-based award exercises.  our employee stock purchase plan allows employees to purchase the companys stock at a discounted price based on the lower of the price on the first day or the last day of the six-month purchase period. the
compensation expense is included in the compensation expense amounts recognized and discussed above. we also offer a 401(k) plan for all employees of the company. compensation expense relating to this plan was not significant in relation to our
consolidated financial results in 2006, 2005 and 2004.  we have provided supplemental executive retirement plan benefits (serps), which are non-qualified
defined benefit plans, for our current ceo, former ceo and certain nonexecutive officer employees (which were assumed in an acquisition). no additional amounts will accrue under the serps to our former ceo and current ceo. the serps are
non-contributory, unfunded and provide benefits based on years of service and compensation during employment. pension expense is determined using various actuarial methods to estimate the total benefits ultimately payable to executives, and is
allocated to service periods. the actuarial assumptions used to calculate pension costs are reviewed annually. pension expense was $4 million, $3 million and $9 million for the years 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. the total serp liability was
$131 million and $128 million as of december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, and is recorded within other long term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.  in addition, the company maintains non-qualified, unfunded deferred compensation plans, which allow certain senior management and executives to defer portions of their salary or bonus and receive certain company
contributions on such deferrals, subject to plan limitations. the deferrals are recorded within long-term investments with an equal offsetting amount in other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. the total deferrals are
distributable based upon termination of employment or other periods as elected under the plans, and are $212 million and $179 million as of december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.  as discussed in note 3, the company has restated its previously filed financial statements to reflect additional stock-based compensation expense and related tax effects following an independent investigation of its
historic stock option practices.
12.
income taxes  the components of the provision for income taxes are
as follows:
year ended december31, (in millions)
current provision
federal
$
2,236
$
1,594
$
1,166
state and local
total current provision
2,394
1,719
1,255
deferred provision
(25
)
total provision for income taxes
$
2,369
$
1,756
$
1,319
the reconciliation of the tax provision at the u.s. federal statutory rate to the provision for income taxes is as
follows:
year ended december31, (in millions)
tax provision at the u.s. federal statutory rate
$
2,285
$
1,693
$
1,306
state income taxes, net of federal benefit
tax-exempt investment income
(50
)
(40
)
(33
)
other, net
(14
)
provision for income taxes
$
2,369
$
1,756
$
1,319
table of contents
the components of deferred income tax assets and liabilities are as follows:
as of december31, (in millions)
deferred income tax assets
accrued expenses and allowances
$
$
unearned premiums
medical costs payable and other policy liabilities
long term liabilities
net operating loss carryforwards
stock-based compensation
other
subtotal
$
1,146
$
1,115
less: valuation allowances
(53
)
(56
)
total deferred income tax assets
$
1,093
$
1,058
deferred income tax liabilities
capitalized software development
(420
)
(270
)
net unrealized gains on investments
(8
)
(19
)
intangible assets
(766
)
(776
)
property and equipment
(49
)
total deferred income tax liabilities
$
(1,130
)
$
(1,114
)
net deferred income tax assets (liabilities)
$
(37
)
$
(56
)
valuation allowances are provided when it is considered more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be
realized. the valuation allowances primarily relate to future tax benefits on certain federal and state net operating loss carryforwards. federal net operating loss carryforwards expire beginning in 2017 through 2026, and state net operating loss
carryforwards expire beginning in 2007 through 2026.  consolidated income tax returns for fiscal years 2003 to 2005 are currently being examined by the
internal revenue service (irs). additionally, our 2006 tax year return is under advance review by the irs under its compliance assurance program (cap). the company and some of its subsidiaries also have ongoing audits with various state and local
jurisdictions. we do not believe any adjustments that may result from these examinations will have a significant impact on our consolidated balance sheets or statements of operations.
13.
aarp  in january 1998, we entered into a ten-year contract with
aarp to provide health insurance products and services to members of aarp. these products and services are provided to supplement benefits covered under traditional medicare (medicare supplement insurance), hospital indemnity insurance, health
insurance focused on persons between 50 and 64 years of age, and other products. under the terms of the contract, we are compensated for transaction processing and other services as well as for assuming underwriting risk. we are also engaged in
product development activities to complement the insurance offerings under this program. premium revenues from these aarp insurance offerings were approximately $5.0 billion in 2006, $4.9 billion in 2005 and $4.5 billion in 2004.  the underwriting gains or losses related to the aarp medicare supplement insurance business are directly recorded as an increase or decrease to a rate stabilization fund
(rsf). the primary components of the underwriting results are premium revenue, medical costs, investment income, administrative expenses, member service expenses, marketing expenses and premium taxes. underwriting gains and losses are recorded as an
increase or decrease to the rsf and accrue to the overall benefit of the aarp policyholders, unless cumulative net losses were to exceed the balance in the rsf. to the extent underwriting losses exceed the balance in the rsf, we would have to fund
the deficit. any deficit we fund could be recovered by underwriting gains in future
table of contents
periods of the contract. to date, we have not been required to fund any underwriting deficits. the rsf balance is reported in other policy liabilities in the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets and changes in the rsf are reported in medical costs in the consolidated statements of operations. we believe the rsf balance at december31, 2006 is currently sufficient to cover potential future
underwriting or other risks associated with the contract.  the following aarp program-related assets and liabilities are included in our consolidated
balance sheets:
balance as ofdecember 31,
(in millions)
accounts receivable
$
$
assets under management
$
1,924
$
1,792
medical costs payable
$
1,004
$
1,001
other policy liabilities
$
1,008
$
other current liabilities
$
$
the effects of changes in balance sheet amounts associated with the aarp program accrue to the overall benefit of
the aarp policyholders through the rsf balance. accordingly, we do not include the effect of such changes in our consolidated statements of cash flows.  pursuant to our agreement, aarp assets under management are managed separately from our general investment portfolio and are used to pay costs associated with the aarp program. these assets are invested at our discretion, within investment
guidelines approved by aarp. we do not guarantee any rates of investment return on these investments and, upon transfer of the aarp contract to another entity, we would transfer cash equal in amount to the fair value of these investments at the date
of transfer to that entity. interest income and realized gains and losses related to assets under management are recorded as an increase to the aarp rsf and were $94 million, $90 million and $103 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. assets
under management are reported at their fair market value, and unrealized gains and losses are included directly in the rsf associated with the aarp program. as of december31, 2006 and 2005, the amortized cost, gross unrealized gains and
losses, and fair value of cash, cash equivalents and investments associated with the aarp insurance program, included in assets under management, were as follows (in millions):
amortizedcost
grossunrealizedgains
grossunrealizedlosses
fairvalue
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
$
$
debt securities  available for sale
1,404
(16
)
1,392
total cash and investments
$
1,936
$
$
(16
)
$
1,924
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
$
$
debt securities  available for sale
1,390
(13
)
1,383
total cash and investments
$
1,799
$
$
(13
)
$
1,792
as of december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, debt securities consisted of $797 million and $779 million in
u.s. government and agency obligations, $12 million and $19 million in state and municipal obligations and $583 million and $585 million in corporate obligations. at december31, 2006, the aarp assets under management included debt securities
of $154 million with maturities of less than one year, $396million with maturities of one to five years, $457 million with maturities of five to 10 years and $385 million with maturities of more than 10 years. as of december31, 2006, we
had investments with an aggregate fair value of $499 million under the aarp agreement in a continuous unrealized loss position of $12 million for 12 months or greater. these investments are subject to the same processes and reviews as the rest of
our investment portfolio,
table of contents
including impairment analyses. as a result of these reviews, as is further discussed in note 7, we did not identify any other-than-temporary impairments.
interest earnings and realized investment gains and losses on these assets accrue to the overall benefit of the aarp policyholders through the rsf and are, therefore, not included in our earnings.  under a separate license agreement with aarp, we sell medicare prescription drug benefit plans under the aarp brand name. we assume all operational and underwriting
risks and losses for these plans.
14.
commitments and contingencies  we lease facilities, computer
hardware and other equipment under long-term operating leases that are noncancelable and expire on various dates through 2025. rent expense under all operating leases was $209million in 2006, $152 million in 2005 and $137 million in 2004. at
december31, 2006, future minimum annual lease payments, net of sublease income, under all noncancelable operating leases were as follows: $156 million in 2007, $144 million in 2008, $129 million in 2009, $99 million in 2010, $68 million in
2011, and $370 million thereafter. in 2006, we signed a facility lease agreement, which is expected to commence in march 2009 with total estimated lease payments of $229 million over a 20 year period. these estimated lease payments are included in
our total future minimum annual lease payments above.  we have noncancelable contracts for certain support services, which expire on various dates through
2012. expenses incurred in connection with these agreements were $281 million in 2006, $241 million in 2005 and $266 million in 2004. at december31, 2006, future minimum obligations under our noncancelable contracts were as follows: $182
million in 2007, $94 million in 2008, $50 million in 2009, $22 million in 2010, $8 million in 2011 and $5 million thereafter.  in conjunction with the
pacificare acquisition we committed to make $50 million in charitable contributions to the benefit of california health care consumers, which has been accrued on our consolidated balance sheets. additionally, we agreed to invest $200 million in
californias health care infrastructure to further health care services to the underserved populations of the california marketplace. the timing and amount of individual contributions and investments are at our discretion, subject to the advice
and oversight of local regulatory authorities; however, our goal is to have the investment commitment fully funded by the end of 2010. the investment commitment remains in place for 20 years after full funding. we have committed to specific projects
totaling $12 million of the $50 million charitable commitment at this time.  due to the financial restatements previously discussed, the company has
determined that certain options exercised by nonexecutive officer employees in 2006 were discount options subject to section 409a of the internal revenue code. the company notified the internal revenue service (irs) on february 28, 2007 that it
would participate in the irss resolution program, which allows the company to pay its employees additional tax costs under section 409a. as such, the company will take a charge, net of tax benefit, of approximately $55 million in the
first quarter of 2007.  we have various outstanding, unused letters of credit with financial institutions with an aggregate commitment of approximately $57
million at december31, 2006.  legal matters  legal matters relating to our historic stock option practices  regulatory inquiries  in march 2006, we received an informal inquiry from the sec relating to our historic stock option practices.  on may17, 2006, we received a document request from the internal revenue service seeking documents relating to stock option grants and other compensation for the persons who from 2003 to the present were the
named executive officers in our annual proxy statements.
table of contents
on may17, 2006, we received a subpoena from the u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york requesting
documents from 1999 to the present relating to our stock option practices.  on june6, 2006, we received a civil investigative demand from the
minnesota attorney general requesting documents from january1, 1997 to the present concerning our executive compensation and stock option practices. after filing an action in ramsey county court, state of minnesota, captioned unitedhealth
group incorporated vs. state of minnesota, by lori swanson, attorney general, we filed a motion for protective order which was denied by the trial court. we are pursuing a stay of the civil investigative demand as well as an appeal of the order
denying the protective order.  on december19, 2006, we received from the enforcement division staff of the sec a formal order of investigation into
the companys historic stock option practices.  we have also received requests for documents from u.s. congressional committees relating to our
historical stock option practices and compensation of executives. with the exception of the civil investigative demand from the minnesota attorney general, we have generally cooperated and will continue to cooperate with the regulatory authorities.
at the conclusion of these regulatory inquiries, we could be subject to regulatory or criminal fines or penalties as well as other sanctions or other contingent liabilities, which could be material.  litigation matters  on march29, 2006, the first of several
shareholder derivative actions was filed against certain of our current and former officers and directors in the united states district court for the district of minnesota. the action has been consolidated with six other actions and is captioned
in re unitedhealth group incorporated shareholder derivative litigation. the consolidated amended complaint is brought on behalf of the company by several pension funds and other shareholders and names certain of our current and former
directors and officers as defendants, as well as the company as a nominal defendant. the consolidated amended complaint generally alleges that defendants breached their fiduciary duties to the company, were unjustly enriched, and violated the
securities laws in connection with our historic stock option practices. the consolidated amended complaint seeks unspecified money damages, injunctive relief and rescission of the options. on june26, 2006, our board of directors created a
special litigation committee, consisting of two former minnesota supreme court justices, under minnesota statute 302a.241 with the power to investigate the claims raised in the derivative actions and a shareholder demand, and determine whether the
companys rights and remedies should be pursued. based on the existence of our special litigation committee, defendants have moved to dismiss or in the alternative to stay the litigation pending resolution of the special litigation committee
process. a consolidated derivative action, reflecting a consolidation of two actions, is also pending in hennepin county district court, state of minnesota. the consolidated complaint is captioned in re unitedhealth group incorporated derivative
litigation. the action was brought by two individual shareholders and names certain of our current and former officers and directors as defendants, as well as the company as nominal defendant. on february6, 2007, the state court judge
entered an order staying the action pending resolution of the special litigation committee process.  on may5, 2006, the first of seven putative class
actions alleging a violation of the federal securities laws was brought by an individual shareholder against certain of our current and former officers and directors in the united states district court for the district of minnesota. on
december8, 2006 a consolidated amended complaint was filed consolidating the actions into a single action. the action is captioned in re unitedhealth group incorporated pslra litigation. the action was brought by lead plaintiff
california public employees retirement system against the company and certain of our current and former officers and directors. the consolidated amended complaint alleges that defendants, in connection with the same alleged course of conduct
identified in the shareholder derivative actions described above, made misrepresentations and omissions during the period between january20, 2005 and may17, 2006, in press releases and public filings that artificially inflated the price
of our common stock. the consolidated amended complaint also asserts that during the class period, certain defendants sold shares of our common stock while in possession of material, non-public information concerning the matters set forth in the
complaint. the consolidated amended complaint alleges
table of contents
claims under sections 10(b), 14(a), 20(a) and 20a of the securities and exchange act of 1934 and sections 11 and 15 of the securities act of 1933. the action
seeks unspecified money damages and equitable relief. defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint on february6, 2007. we intend to vigorously defend against the action.  on june6, 2006, a purported class action captioned zilhaver v. unitedhealth group incorporated, was filed against the company and certain of our current and
former officers and directors in the united state district court for the district of minnesota. this action alleges that the fiduciaries to the company-sponsored 401(k) plan violated erisa by allowing the plan to continue to hold company stock.
defendants filed a motion to dismiss on february6, 2007. we intend to vigorously defend against the action.  on august28, 2006, we received a
purported notice of default from persons claiming to hold certain of our debt securities alleging a violation of our indenture governing our debt securities. this follows our announcement that we would delay filing our quarterly report on form 10-q
for the quarter ended june30, 2006. on october25, 2006, we filed an action in the united states district court for the district of minnesota, captioned unitedhealth group incorporated v. cede& co. and the bank of new
york, seeking a declaratory judgment that we are not in default under the terms of the indenture. on or about november2, 2006, we received a purported notice of acceleration from the holders who previously sent the notice of default that
purports to declare an acceleration of our 5.80% senior unsecured notes due march15, 2036 as a result of our announcement that we would delay filing our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2006. immediately prior
to the filing of the form 10-k, we filed our quarterly reports on form 10-q for the quarters ended june30, 2006 and september30, 2006, as well as an amendment to our quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march31,
2006. should the company ultimately be unsuccessful in this matter, we may be required to retire all or a portion of the $850 million of senior unsecured notes due march 2036. we intend to vigorously prosecute the declaratory judgment action.
in addition, we may be subject to additional litigation or other proceedings or actions arising out of the independent committees review, the
special litigation committees review and the related restatement of our historical financial statements. litigation and any potential regulatory proceeding or action may be time consuming, expensive and distracting from the conduct of our
business. the adverse resolution of any specific lawsuit or any potential regulatory proceeding or action could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.  in addition, other adjustments for non-operating cash charges may be required in connection with the resolution of stock option-related matters arising under litigation,
and regulatory reviews by the sec, irs, u.s. attorney, u.s. congressional committees and minnesota attorney general, the amount and timing of which are uncertain, but which could be material.  other legal matters  because of the nature of our businesses,
we are routinely made party to a variety of legal actions related to the design and management of our service offerings. we record liabilities for our estimates of probable costs resulting from these matters. these matters include, but are not
limited to, claims relating to health care benefits coverage, medical malpractice actions, contract disputes and claims related to disclosure of certain business practices.  beginning in 1999, a series of class action lawsuits were filed against both unitedhealthcare and pacificare, and virtually all major entities in the health benefits business. in december 2000, a multidistrict
litigation panel consolidated several litigation cases involving the company and our affiliates in the southern district court of florida, miami division. generally, the health care provider plaintiffs allege violations of erisa and the racketeer
influenced corrupt organization act (rico) in connection with alleged undisclosed policies intended to maximize profits. other allegations include breach of state prompt payment laws and breach of contract claims
table of contents
for failure to timely reimburse providers for medical services rendered. the consolidated suits seek injunctive, compensatory and equitable relief as well as
restitution, costs, fees and interest payments. the trial court granted the health care providers motion for class certification and that order was reviewed by the eleventh circuit court of appeals. the eleventh circuit affirmed the class
action status of the rico claims, but reversed as to the breach of contract, unjust enrichment and prompt payment claims. during the course of the litigation, there have been co-defendant settlements. on january31, 2006, the trial court
dismissed all remaining claims against pacificare, and on june19, 2006, the trial court dismissed all remaining claims against unitedhealthcare brought by the lead plaintiff. the tag-along lawsuits remain outstanding. on july27, 2006,
the plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal to the eleventh circuit court of appeals challenging the dismissal of the claims against unitedhealthcare. we intend to vigorously defend against the action.  on march15, 2000, the american medical association filed a lawsuit against the company in the supreme court of the state of new york, county of new york. on
april13, 2000, we removed this case to the unitedstates district court for the southern district of new york. the suit alleges causes of action based on erisa, as well as breach of contract and the implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing, deceptive acts and practices, and trade libel in connection with the calculation of reasonable and customary reimbursement rates for non-network providers. the suit seeks declaratory, injunctive and compensatory relief as well as costs,
fees and interest payments. an amended complaint was filed on august25, 2000, which alleged two classes of plaintiffs, an erisa class and a non-erisa class. after the court dismissed certain erisa claims and the claims brought by the american
medical association, a third amended complaint was filed on january11, 2002. on october25, 2002, the court granted in part and denied in part our motion to dismiss the third amended complaint. on may21, 2003, we filed a
counterclaim complaint in this matter alleging antitrust violations against the american medical association and asserting claims based on improper billing practices against an individual provider plaintiff. on may26, 2004, we filed a motion
for partial summary judgment seeking the dismissal of certain claims and parties based, in part, due to lack of standing. on july16, 2004, plaintiffs filed a motion for leave to file an amended complaint, seeking to assert rico violations. on
december29, 2006, the trial court granted plaintiffs motion to amend the complaint. we intend to vigorously defend against the action.  government regulation  our business is regulated at federal, state, local and international levels. the laws and rules governing our
business and interpretations of those laws and rules are subject to frequent change. broad latitude is given to the agencies administering those regulations. state legislatures and congress continue to focus on health care issues as the subject of
proposed legislation. existing or future laws and rules could force us to change how we do business, restrict revenue and enrollment growth, increase our health care and administrative costs and capital requirements, and increase our liability in
federal and state courts for coverage determinations, contract interpretation and other actions. further, we must obtain and maintain regulatory approvals to market many of our products.  we typically have been and are currently involved in various governmental investigations, audits and reviews. these include routine, regular and special investigations, audits, and reviews by cms, state insurance and
health and welfare departments, state attorneys general, the office of the inspector general, the office of personnelmanagement, the office of civil rights, u.s. congressional committees, the u.s. department of justice and u.s. attorneys. such
government actions can result in assessment of damages, civil or criminal fines or penalties, or other sanctions, including loss of licensure or exclusion from participation in government programs. we also are subject to a formal investigation of
our historic stock option practices by the sec, internal revenue service, u.s. attorney for the southern district of new york, minnesota attorney general, and a related review by the special litigation committee of the company, and we have received
requests for documents from u.s. congressional committees. with the exception of the civil investigative demand from the minnesota attorney general, we generally have cooperated and will continue to cooperate with the regulatory authorities. at the
conclusion of these regulatory inquiries, we could be subject to regulatory or criminal fines or penalties as well as other sanctions or other contingent liabilities, which could be material.
table of contents
15.
segment financial information  factors used in determining our
reportable business segments include the nature of operating activities, existence of separate senior management teams, and the type of information presented to the companys chief operating decision-maker to evaluate our results of operations.
our accounting policies for business segment operations are the same as those described in the summary of significant accounting policies (see note 2).
transactions between business segments principally consist of customer service and transaction processing services that uniprise provides to health care services, certain product offerings sold to uniprise and health care services customers by
specialized care services, and sales of medical benefits cost, quality and utilization data and predictive modeling to health care services and uniprise by ingenix. these transactions are recorded at managements estimate of fair value. all
intersegment transactions are eliminated in consolidation. assets and liabilities that are jointly used are assigned to each segment using estimates of pro-rata usage. cash and investments are assigned such that each segment has at least minimum
specified levels of regulatory capital or working capital for non-regulated businesses.  substantially all of our operations are conducted in the united
states. in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states, segments with similar economic characteristics may be combined. the financial results of unitedhealthcare, ovations and americhoice have been combined in the
health care services segment column in the following tables because these businesses have similar economic characteristics and have similar products and services, types of customers, distribution methods and operational processes, and operate in a
similar regulatory environment, typically within the same legal entity.
table of contents
the following table presents segment financial information as of and for the years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and
2004 (in millions):
healthcareservices
uniprise
specialized careservices
ingenix
intersegmenteliminations
consolidated
revenues  external customers
$
63,423
$
4,253
$
2,309
$
$
$
70,671
revenues  intersegment
1,132
1,632
(3,054
)
investment and other income
total revenues
$
64,180
$
5,451
$
3,989
$
$
(3,054
)
$
71,542
earnings from operations
$
5,128
$
$
$
$
$
6,984
total assets (1)
$
39,118
$
3,133
$
2,641
$
1,279
$
1,588
$
47,759
net assets (1)
$
22,916
$
1,646
$
1,848
$
1,038
$
1,588
$
29,036
purchases of property, equipment and capitalized software
$
$
$
$
$
$
depreciation and amortization
$
$
$
$
$
$
revenues  external customers
$
39,582
$
4,102
$
1,686
$
$
$
45,920
revenues  intersegment
1,095
(2,104
)
investment and other income
total revenues
$
40,023
$
4,893
$
2,806
$
$
(2,104
)
$
46,425
earnings from operations
$
3,664
$
$
$
$
$
5,080
total assets (1)
$
35,643
$
2,598
$
2,175
$
1,063
$
(841
)
$
40,638
net assets (1)
$
22,516
$
1,410
$
1,447
$
$
(841
)
$
25,342
purchases of property, equipment and capitalized software
$
$
$
$
$
$
depreciation and amortization
$
$
$
$
$
$
revenues  external customers
$
32,319
$
3,639
$
1,363
$
$
$
37,804
revenues  intersegment
(1,785
)
investment and other income
total revenues
$
32,681
$
4,318
$
2,296
$
$
(1,785
)
$
38,217
earnings from operations
$
2,688
$
$
$
$
$
3,858
total assets (1)
$
23,777
$
2,364
$
1,268
$
$
(879
)
$
27,501
net assets (1)
$
13,123
$
1,375
$
$
$
(879
)
$
15,141
purchases of property, equipment and capitalized software
$
$
$
$
$
$
depreciation and amortization
$
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
total assets and net assets exclude, where applicable, debt and accrued interest of $7,569 million, $7,161 million and $4,054 million, income tax-related assets of $561 million,
$650 million and $361 million, and income tax-related liabilities of $1,218 million, $1,016 million and $676 million as of december31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
table of contents
16.
quarterly financial data (unaudited)  the following tables present
selected quarterly financial information for all quarters of 2006 and 2005. first quarter 2006 and all quarters of 2005 have been restated from previously reported information filed on form 10-q and form 10-k, as a result of the restatement of our
financial results discussed in this form 10-k. 2005 has been presented on both a fas 123r basis, which we adopted on january1, 2006, and on an apb 25 basis, which was the accounting method used for all historical periods prior to
january1, 2006.
fas 123r - current accounting method
for the quarter ended
(in millions, except per share data)
march31
june30
september30
december31
revenues
$
17,581
$
17,863
$
17,970
$
18,128
operating costs
$
16,108
$
16,196
$
16,107
$
16,147
earnings from operations
$
1,473
$
1,667
$
1,863
$
1,981
net earnings
$
$
$
1,112
$
1,175
basic net earnings per common share
$
0.66
$
0.73
$
0.83
$
0.87
diluted net earnings per common share
$
0.63
$
0.70
$
0.80
$
0.84
fas 123r - current accounting method
for the quarter ended
(in millions, except per share data)
march 31
june 30
september 30
december31(1)
revenues
$
11,147
$
11,379
$
11,613
$
12,286
operating costs
$
9,949
$
10,117
$
10,290
$
10,989
earnings from operations
$
1,198
$
1,262
$
1,323
$
1,297
net earnings
$
$
$
$
basic net earnings per common share
$
0.58
$
0.61
$
0.64
$
0.61
diluted net earnings per common share
$
0.55
$
0.58
$
0.61
$
0.58
apb 25 - historical accounting method
for the quarter ended
(in millions, except per share data)
march 31
june 30
september 30
december31(1)
revenues
$
11,147
$
11,379
$
11,613
$
12,286
operating costs
$
9,944
$
10,114
$
10,312
$
10,986
earnings from operations
$
1,203
$
1,265
$
1,301
$
1,300
net earnings
$
$
$
$
basic net earnings per common share
$
0.58
$
0.61
$
0.62
$
0.61
diluted net earnings per common share
$
0.55
$
0.58
$
0.59
$
0.58
(1)
see the explanatory note immediately preceding part 1, item1 and note 3, restatement of consolidated financial statements, in notes to consolidated
financial statements of this form 10-k and the following table.
table of contents
consolidated quarterly statements of operations
for the quarter ended december31, 2005
apb 25  historical accounting method
fas 123r  current accounting method
(in millions, except per share data)
asreported
adjustments(1)
asrestated
adoption(2)
adjustments(3)
asrestated
revenues
premiums
$
10,880
$
$
11,123
$
$
$
11,123
services
1,044
(80
)
products
investment and other income
total revenues
12,045
12,286
12,286
operating costs
medical costs
8,624
8,883
8,883
operating costs
1,872
1,938
(11
)
1,941
cost of products sold
depreciation and amortization
total operating costs
10,616
10,986
(11
)
10,989
earnings from operations
1,429
(129
)
1,300
(14
)
1,297
interest expense
(75
)
(75
)
(75
)
earnings before income taxes
1,354
(129
)
1,225
(14
)
1,222
provision for income taxes
(484
)
(449
)
(444
)
net earnings
$
$
(94
)
$
$
$
(12
)
$
basic net earnings per common share
$
0.69
$
(0.08
)
$
0.61
$
0.01
$
(0.01
)
$
0.61
diluted net earnings per common share
$
0.65
$
(0.07
)
$
0.58
$
0.01
$
(0.01
)
$
0.58
basic weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,271
1,271
1,271
dilutive effect of common stock equivalents
(2
)
diluted weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
1,338
(2
)
1,336
1,342
(1)
includes $78 million of stock-based compensation and $21 million of deferred tax benefit associated with the restatement of our historical apb 25 consolidated statement of
operations as well as an adjustment to premium revenue of $280 million, medical costs of $256 million and operating costs of $24 million to reflect a reinsurance contract on a gross basis. we have also reclassified certain service revenues and
operating costs to product revenues and cost of products sold, respectively, primarily related to our pharmacy benefit management business acquired as part of the pacificare acquisition in december 2005 in order to conform to our current
presentation.
(2)
reflects $67 million of stock-based compensation and $24 million of deferred tax benefit as recorded under the modified retrospective method of adoption of fas 123r, net of the
restatement adjustments under apb 25.
(3)
represents adjustments made to restate our consolidated statement of operations subsequent to the adoption of fas 123r under the modified retrospective method of adoption and
includes $14 million of additional stock-based compensation and $2 million of related deferred tax benefit.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm  to the board of directors and shareholders of unitedhealth group incorporated and subsidiaries:  we have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of unitedhealth group incorporated and subsidiaries (the company) as of december 31, 2006 and 2005, and the related consolidated statements of
operations, changes in shareholders equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2006. these consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility
is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.  we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.  in our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of unitedhealth group incorporated and subsidiaries as of december 31, 2006 and 2005, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended
december 31, 2006, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america.  as discussed in note 3, the accompanying
2005 and 2004 consolidated financial statements have been restated to reflect certain adjustments resulting from the companys historical stock option granting practices.  as discussed in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the company adopted the provisions of statement of financial accounting standards no. 123 (revised 2004), share based payment in 2006.
we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the effectiveness of the
companys internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2006, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
and our report dated march 5, 2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on managements assessment of the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting and an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the
companys internal control over financial reporting.  deloitte & touche llp  minneapolis, minnesota  march 5, 2007
table of contents
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure  none
item9a.controls
and procedures  as discussed in the explanatory note preceding
parti, in light of the findings of the wilmerhale report and the restatement reflected in this form 10-k, management re-evaluated the assessment presented in managements report on internal control over financial reporting in the
companys annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31, 2005. as reported in a current report on form 8-k filed with the sec on november8, 2006, management concluded that the company had a material weakness
in internal control over financial reporting solely relating to stock option plan administration and accounting for and disclosure of stock option grants as of december31, 2005 and that, solely for this reason, its internal control over
financial reporting and its disclosure controls and procedures were not effective as of that date.  evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures
as of december31, 2006  the company maintains disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the
securities exchange act of 1934) that are designed to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by the company in reports that it files or submits under the exchange act is (i)recorded, processed, summarized and
reported within the time periods specified in sec rulesand forms; and (ii)accumulated and communicated to the companys management, including its principal executive officer and principal financial officer, as appropriate to allow
timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  in connection with the filing of this form 10-k, management evaluated, under the supervision and with the
participation of the companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer, the effectiveness of the design and operation of the companys disclosure controls and procedures as of december31, 2006. based upon that evaluation,
the companys chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that the company has remediated the material weakness in internal control over financial reporting relating to stock option plan administration and accounting for and
disclosure of stock option grants and that the companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective at the reasonable assurance level as of december31, 2006.  changes in internal control over financial reporting  during 2006, the company took the following actions to
remediate the material weakness in its internal control over financial reporting relating to stock option plan administration and accounting for and disclosure of stock option grants:
the board of directors took the following actions related to the companys historic stock option granting practices:
formed an independent committee to perform an independent investigation of the companys historic option granting practices from 1994 to 2005. the independent
committee retained independent counsel, wilmerhale, which was assisted by accounting advisors and was given full access to company documents and personnel. the full wilmerhale report was posted immediately on the companys web site and copies
were provided to the sec and u.s. attorneys office. the restatement in this form 10-k reflects the companys analysis of the accounting adjustments necessary to address wilmerhales findings, as well as other accounting adjustments
described in this form 10-k that were not related to the findings in the wilmerhale report.
formed an independent special litigation committee, consisting of two former minnesota supreme court justices, to investigate the claims raised in the shareholder
derivative actions and demands related to the companys historic option granting practices. the special litigation committee retained independent legal counsel, which is assisted by accounting advisors, and was given full access to company
documents and personnel.
table of contents
the board of directors took the following actions related to the companys policy governing the granting of equity awards:
required that all grants of equity awards to employees are to be made at the sole discretion of the compensation committee and no authority to grant equity awards
is delegated to management.
required that all grants of equity awards in connection with commencement of employment or the promotion or retention of existing employees are to be made at
regularly scheduled quarterly meetings of the compensation committee.
provides that all broad-based grants of equity awards to employees are only to be considered by the compensation committee on an annual basis at the meeting of the
compensation committee held in connection with the companys annual meeting of shareholders.
amended the compensation committee charter to remove the delegation of authority to the chair of the compensation committee to grant equity awards to executive
officers of the company.
amended the compensation committee charter to clarify the responsibilities of the compensation committee to oversee and administer the companys equity
incentive compensation plans.
the company recommended, and the compensation committee approved, a policy regarding equity awards that:
documents the actions taken by the board of directors referred to above.
permits that, in the event that the compensation committee determines not to make equity awards on the dates set forth above because the company is in possession of
material nonpublic information on that date, then the compensation committee may grant such equity awards on a later date, which need not be a regularly scheduled committee meeting, when the company is no longer in possession of material nonpublic
information.
requires that the date of grant of an equity award shall only be the date on which the compensation committee acts to authorize the equity award.
addresses equity award approval requirements, award levels, award date requirements, awards to individuals with significant stock ownership, modifications to
existing awards, and review of and amendments to equity award policies.
the company took the following actions to strengthen its internal control processes relating to equity awards:
engaged an outside professional services firm to review and advise the company on improving the design of the control environment around the companys equity
award initiation and modification, equity award approval, equity award administration and equity exercise administration processes.
evaluated and enhanced the design and documentation of the end-to-end process for equity compensation, including grant initiation, grant approval, grant
administration, exercise administration and grant modification.
evaluated, strengthened and implemented processes and controls throughout the end-to-end process, including controls to ensure cross-functional communication,
controls around the oversight and approval for all equity grant activity and controls around the preparation and review of stock-based compensation information in the companys financial reports.
established an equity award working and oversight group, comprised of senior tax, legal, human capital and accounting/finance personnel, to review all recommended
equity awards to employees prior to consideration by the compensation committee and, following each compensation committee action, to review the equity awards granted by the compensation committee.
enhanced training and education to ensure that all relevant personnel involved in the administration of stock option grants understand the terms of the
companys stock option plans and the relevant accounting
table of contents
guidance under generally accepted accounting principles for stock options and other share-based payments.
engaged an outside professional services firm to conduct regular testing of controls relating to equity award initiation and modification, equity award approval,
equity award administration and equity exercise administration processes and report the results of its review to the compensation committee on a quarterly basis.
the company made the following personnel changes during the fourth quarter of 2006:
the companys chief executive officer, general counsel and head of human resources left the company;
the board of directors split the roles of ceo and chairman of the board and appointed richard t. burke to serve as nonexecutive chairman of the board;
stephen j. hemsley was appointed chief executive officer and president of the company;
g. mike mikan was appointed executive vice president and chief financial officer of the company;
eric s. rangen was appointed senior vice president and chief accounting officer of the company; and
karen l. erickson was appointed senior vice president and controller of the company.
certain former and current senior executives of the company took the following actions:
executed written agreements to reset the exercise prices of all applicable exercised and unexercised options granted to such executives with recorded grant dates
between 1994 and 2002 to ensure that there is no potential for financial gain from the incorrect dating of any option.
ceo stephen hemsley has acted to relinquish the value of all options he received for which vesting and exercisability were suspended in 1999 and reinstated in 2000.
there have been no other changes in the companys internal control over financial reporting during the quarter ended
december31, 2006 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial reporting.
table of contents
report of management on internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2006
the companys management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in rules
13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the securities exchange act of 1934. the companys internal control system is designed to provide reasonable assurance to our management and board of directors regarding the reliability of financial reporting and
the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. the companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and
(iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  management assessed the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2006. in making this assessment, we used
the criteria set forth by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso) in internal control  integrated framework. based on our assessment and those criteria, we believe that, as of december31, 2006,
the company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting.  the companys independent registered public accounting firm has audited
managements assessment of the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2006, as stated in the report of independent registered public accounting firm, appearing under item9a,
which expresses unqualified opinions on managements assessment and on the effectiveness of the companys internal controls over financial reporting as of december31, 2006.
/s/stephen j.
hemsley
stephen j. hemsley
president and chief executive officer
/s/george l. mikan
iii
george l. mikan iii
executive vice president and chief financial officer
/s/eric s.
rangen
eric s. rangen
senior vice president and chief accounting officer
march , 2007
new york stock exchange certification  pursuant to section303a.12(a) of the nyse listed company manual, the company submitted an unqualified certification of its chief executive officer to the nyse in 2006. we have also filed, as exhibits to this
form 10-k, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer certifications required under the sarbanes-oxley act.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm  to the board of directors and shareholders of unitedhealth group incorporated and subsidiaries:  we have audited managements assessment, included in the accompanying report of management, that unitedhealth group incorporated and subsidiaries (the company) maintained effective internal control
over financial reporting as of december 31, 2006, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. the companys management
is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on managements assessment
and an opinion on the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.  we conducted our audit in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial
reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, evaluating managements assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.  a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the companys principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar
functions, and effected by the companys board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and
fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.  because of
the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely
basis. also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  in our opinion, managements assessment that the company maintained effective internal
control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2006, is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission. also in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2006, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.  we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of
the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended december 31, 2006 of the company and our report dated march 5, 2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial
statements and includes an explanatory paragraph related to the adoption of statement of financial accounting standards no. 123 (revised 2004), share based payment, as discussed in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
deloitte & touche llp  minneapolis, minnesota  march 5, 2007
table of contents
item9b.
other information  none.
part iii
item10.directors,
executive officers and corporate governance  code of ethics
we have adopted a code of business conduct and ethics that applies to all of our employees and directors. the code of ethics is published on our
web site at www.unitedhealthgroup.com. any amendments to the code of ethics and waivers of the code of ethics for our chief executive officer, chief financial officer, chief accounting officer or controller will be published on our web site.
we will provide a copy of our code of business conduct and ethics, free of charge, upon request. to request a copy, please submit your request to: unitedhealth group incorporated, 9900 bren road east, minnetonka, mn 55343, attn: corporate secretary.
pursuant to general instruction g(3) to form 10-k and instruction 3 to item401(b) of regulation s-k, information regarding our executive officers is
provided in item1 of part i of this annual report on form 10-k under the caption executive officers of the registrant.  the remaining
information required by items 401, 405 and 407(c)(3), (d)(4) and (d)(5) of regulation s-k will be included under the headings corporate governance, election of directors and section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance in our definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of shareholders to be held may29, 2007, and such required information is incorporated herein by reference.
item11.executive
compensation  the information required by item402 of
regulation s-k will be included under the heading executive compensation in our definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of shareholders to be held may29, 2007, and such required information is incorporated herein by
reference.
item12.security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters  the following table sets forth certain information, as of december31, 2006, concerning shares of common stock authorized for issuance under all of our equity compensation plans.  equity compensation plan information
plan category
(a) numberofsecurities tobe issued uponexercise
of outstanding options, warrants and rights
(b) weighted-average exercise
priceofoutstanding options, warrantsand rights
(c) number of securities remaining available for futureissuanceunderequity compensationplans(excluding securitiesreflectedincolumn(a)
equity compensation plans approved by shareholders (1)
172,024,026
$
28.57
86,944,746
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by shareholders (2)
total
172,024,026
$
28.57
86,944,746
(1)
consists of the unitedhealth group incorporated 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended, and the 1993 qualified employee stock purchase plan, as amended. includes
26,779,128 options to acquire shares of common stock that were originally issued under the united healthcare corporation 1998 broad-based
table of contents
stock incentive plan, as amended, which was not approved by the companys shareholders, but the shares issuable under the 1998 broad-based stock
incentive plan were subsequently included in the number of shares approved by the companys shareholders when approving the 2002 stock incentive plan.
(2)
excludes 8,154,346 shares underlying stock options assumed by us in connection with our acquisition of the companies under whose plans the options originally were granted. these
options have a weighted-average exercise price of $17.86 and an average remaining term of approximately 4.80 years. the options are administered pursuant to the terms of the plan under which the option originally was granted. no future options or
other awards will be granted under these acquired plans.
(3)
includes 3,944,915 shares of common stock available for future issuance under the employee stock purchase plan as of december31, 2006, and 82,999,831 shares available under
the 2002 stock incentive plan as of december31, 2006. shares available under the 2002 stock incentive plan may become the subject of future awards in the form of stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock
units, performance awards and other stock-based awards, except that only 26,165,516 of these shares are available for future grants of awards other than stock options or stock appreciation rights.  the information required by item403 of regulation s-k will be included under the heading security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
in our definitive proxy statement for our annual meeting of shareholders to be held may29, 2007, and such required information is incorporated herein by reference.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence  the information required by items 404 and 407(a) of regulation s-k will be included under the headings certain relationships and transactions and corporate governance in our definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of shareholders to be held may29, 2007, and such required information is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.principal
accountant fees and services  the information required by
item9(e) of schedule 14a will be included under the heading independent registered public accounting firm in our definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting of shareholders to be held may29, 2007, and such required
information is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
part iv
item15.exhibits
and financial statement schedules  (a) 1. financial
statements  the financial statements are included under item8 of this report:  consolidated statements of operations for the year ended december31, 2006, 2005 (as restated) and 2004 (as restated).  consolidated balance sheets as of december31, 2006 and 2005 (as restated).  consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
for the year ended december31, 2006, 2005 (as restated) and 2004 (as restated).  consolidated statements of cash flows for the year ended
december31, 2006, 2005 (as restated) and 2004 (as restated).  notes to consolidated financial statements.  reports of independent registered public accounting firm.  2.
financial statement schedules  none  3. exhibits**
3(a)
articles of amendment to second restated articles of incorporation of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys current report on form 8-k
dated may24, 2005)
3(b)
articles of amendment to second restated articles of incorporation of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys annual report on form 10-k
for the year ended december31, 2001)
3(c)
articles of merger amending the articles of incorporation of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the
year ended december 31, 1999)
3(d)
second restated articles of incorporation of united healthcare corporation (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december
31, 1995)
3(e)
second amended and restated bylaws of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(d) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2002)
4(a)
senior indenture, dated as of november 15, 1998, between united healthcare corporation and the bank of new york (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to the companys registration
statement on form s-3/a, filed on january 11, 1999)
4(b)
amendment, dated as of november 6, 2000, to senior indenture, dated as of november 15, 1998, between the unitedhealth group incorporated and the bank of new york (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 4.1 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2001)
10(a)
credit agreement, dated as of october16, 2006, among unitedhealth group incorporated, the lenders party thereto, jp morgan chase bank, n.a., as administrative agent, and citibank, n.a. and
bank of america, n.a., as co-syndication agents, providing for a $7,500,000,000 364-day revolving credit facility (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 16, 2006)
table of contents
*10(b)
unitedhealth group incorporated 2002 stock incentive plan, amended and restated effective may 15, 2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) to the companys annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december 31, 2002)
*10(c)
form of agreement for initial stock option award to non-employee directors under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(d)
form of agreement for stock option award to non-employee directors under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(e)
form of stock appreciation rights award agreement to non-employee directors under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(f)
form of restricted stock award agreement to officers under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(g)
form of stock appreciation rights award agreement to officers under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october31, 2006
*10(h)
unitedhealth group incorporated executive incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(b) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2002)
*10(i)
unitedhealth group executive savings plans (2004 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(e) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2003)
*10(j)
first amendment to unitedhealth group executive savings plans (2004 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 31,
2006)
*10(k)
unitedhealth group directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(d) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2002)
*10(l)
first amendment to unitedhealth group directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(g) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for
the year ended december 31, 2003)
*10(m)
second amendment to unitedhealth group directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to the companys current report on form 8-k
dated october 31, 2006)
*10(n)
employment agreement, dated as of november 7, 2006, between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report
on form 8-k dated november 7, 2006)
*10(o)
agreement for supplemental executive retirement pay, effective april 1, 2004, between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(b) to the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2004)
*10(p)
amendment to agreement for supplemental executive retirement pay, dated as of november 7, 2006, between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley (incorporated by reference to
exhibit a to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated november 7, 2006)
*10(q)
letter agreement, dated as of november 6, 2006, by and between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley
*10(r)
employment agreement, effective as of november 7, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and george l. mikan iii (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys
current report on form 8-k dated january 30, 2007)
*10(s)
employment agreement, dated as of november 1, 2004, between united healthcare services, inc. and richard h. anderson (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(p) of the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004)
table of contents
*10(t)
form of memorandum of understanding, effective as of october 31, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and richard h. anderson (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the
companys current report on form 8-k dated october 31, 2006)
*10(u)
employment agreement, dated as of october1, 1998, as amended, between united healthcare services, inc. and tracy l. bahl (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) to the companys
quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2004)
*10(v)
employment agreement, dated as of november 2, 2004, between united healthcare services, inc. and forrest g. burke
*10(w)
employment agreement, dated as of october 1, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and patrick j. erlandson (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(m) to the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000)
*10(x)
employment agreement, dated as of october 1, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and william a. munsell, as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(t) of the companys
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004)
*10(y)
employment agreement, dated as of october 16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and lois e. quam, as amended, and memorandum of understanding, effective as of october 11, 1999,
between lois e. quam and united healthcare services, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(l) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000)
*10(z)
letter, dated as of november 9, 2006, from lois e. quam to unitedhealth group incorporated
*10(aa)
employment agreement, dated as of december 15, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and eric s. rangen (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current
report on form 8-k dated december 15, 2006)
*10(bb)
employment agreement, dated as of october 16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and robert j. sheehy, as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(l) to the companys
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001)
*10(cc)
employment agreement, dated as of october 1, 1998, as amended, between united healthcare services, inc. and david s. wichmann (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(o) to the companys
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2003)
*10(dd)
employment agreement, dated as of october 13, 1999, between united healthcare corporation and william w. mcguire, m.d. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(f) to the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1999)
*10(ee)
letter to william w. mcguire, m.d., dated as of february 13, 2001, regarding employment agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(h) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for
the year ended december 31, 2000)
*10(ff)
amendment to employment agreement, dated as of august 5, 2005, between unitedhealth group incorporated and william w. mcguire, m.d. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(c) of the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2005)
*10(gg)
letter agreement, dated as of november 6, 2006, between unitedhealth group incorporated and william w. mcguire, m.d.
*10(hh)
employment agreement, dated as of october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and david j. lubben, as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(p) to the
companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2000)
*10(ii)
form of memorandum of understanding, effective as of october 31, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and each of tracy l. bahl, patrick j. erlandson, david j. lubben, william
a. munsell, lois e. quam, robert j. sheehy, and david s. wichmann (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 31, 2006)
table of contents
*10(jj)
form of letter agreement, dated as of november 6, 2006, by and between unitedhealth group incorporated and each of tracy l. bahl, patrick j. erlandson, david j. lubben, william a. munsell, lois
e. quam, robert j. sheehy, and david s. wichmann (the agreements executed by the above-named individuals are on terms substantially in the form of letter agreement filed herewith)
*10(kk)
form of letter agreement, effective as of december 22, 2006, by and between unitedhealth group incorporated and each of tracy l. bahl, patrick j. erlandson, stephen j. hemsley, david j. lubben,
william w. mcguire, m.d., lois e. quam, robert j. sheehy, and david s. wichmann (the agreements executed by the above-named individuals are on terms substantially in the form of letter agreement filed herewith)
statement regarding computation of per share earnings (incorporated by reference to the information contained under the heading net earnings per common share in note 2 to the notes
to consolidated financial statements included under item 8)
ratio of earnings to fixed charges
subsidiaries of the company
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
power of attorney
certifications pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certifications pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
court order dated november29, 2006 issued by the united states district court for the district of minnesota relating to the matters entitled in re unitedhealth group incorporated
shareholder derivative litigation and in re unitedhealth group incorporated pslra litigation (incorporated by reference to exhibit 99.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated november 29, 2006)
*
denotes management contracts and compensation plans in which certain directors and named executive officers participate and which are being filed pursuant to
item601(b)(10)(iii)(a) of regulation s-k.
**
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulation s-k, copies of instruments defining the rights of certain holders of long-term debt are not filed. the company will furnish copies
thereof to the sec upon request.
table of contents
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.  dated: march 6, 2007
unitedhealth group incorporated
by
/s/stephen j.
hemsley
stephen j. hemsley president and chief executive officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by
the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/stephen j.
hemsley stephen j. hemsley
director, president and chiefexecutive officer(principal executive officer)
march 6, 2007
/s/george l. mikan iii
george l. mikan iii
executive vice president and chieffinancial officer(principal financial officer)
march 6, 2007
/s/eric s.
rangen eric s. rangen
senior vice president and chiefaccounting officer(principal accounting officer)
march 6, 2007
* william c. ballard, jr.
director
march 6, 2007
* richard t. burke
director
march 6, 2007
* james a. johnson
director
march 6, 2007
* thomas h. kean
director
march 6, 2007
* douglas w. leatherdale
director
march 6, 2007
* mary o. mundinger
director
march 6, 2007
* robert l. ryan
director
march 6, 2007
* donna e. shalala
director
march 6, 2007
* gail r. wilensky
director
march 6, 2007
*by
/s/dannette l.
smith
as attorney-in-fact
table of contents
exhibit index
item
description
3(a)
articles of amendment to second restated articles of incorporation of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys current report on form 8-k
dated may24, 2005)
3(b)
articles of amendment to second restated articles of incorporation of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys annual report on form 10-k
for the year ended december31, 2001)
3(c)
articles of merger amending the articles of incorporation of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the
year ended december 31, 1999)
3(d)
second restated articles of incorporation of united healthcare corporation (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(a) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december
31, 1995)
3(e)
second amended and restated bylaws of unitedhealth group incorporated (incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(d) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2002)
4(a)
senior indenture, dated as of november 15, 1998, between united healthcare corporation and the bank of new york (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to the companys registration
statement on form s-3/a, filed on january 11, 1999)
4(b)
amendment, dated as of november 6, 2000, to senior indenture, dated as of november 15, 1998, between the unitedhealth group incorporated and the bank of new york (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 4.1 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2001)
10(a)
credit agreement, dated as of october16, 2006, among unitedhealth group incorporated, the lenders party thereto, jp morgan chase bank, n.a., as administrative agent, and citibank, n.a. and
bank of america, n.a., as co-syndication agents, providing for a $7,500,000,000 364-day revolving credit facility (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 16, 2006)
*10(b)
unitedhealth group incorporated 2002 stock incentive plan, amended and restated effective may 15, 2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) to the companys annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december 31, 2002)
*10(c)
form of agreement for initial stock option award to non-employee directors under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(d)
form of agreement for stock option award to non-employee directors under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(e)
form of stock appreciation rights award agreement to non-employee directors under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(f)
form of restricted stock award agreement to officers under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october 31, 2006
*10(g)
form of stock appreciation rights award agreement to officers under the companys 2002 stock incentive plan, as amended on october31, 2006
*10(h)
unitedhealth group incorporated executive incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(b) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2002)
table of contents
item
description
*10(i)
unitedhealth group executive savings plans (2004 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(e) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31,
2003)
*10(j)
first amendment to unitedhealth group executive savings plans (2004 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 31,
2006)
*10(k)
unitedhealth group directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(d) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2002)
*10(l)
first amendment to unitedhealth group directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(g) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for
the year ended december 31, 2003)
*10(m)
second amendment to unitedhealth group directors compensation deferral plan (2002 statement) (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to the companys current report on form 8-k
dated october 31, 2006)
*10(n)
employment agreement, dated as of november 7, 2006, between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report
on form 8-k dated november 7, 2006)
*10(o)
agreement for supplemental executive retirement pay, effective april 1, 2004, between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(b) to the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2004)
*10(p)
amendment to agreement for supplemental executive retirement pay, dated as of november 7, 2006, between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley (incorporated by reference to
exhibit a to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated november 7, 2006)
*10(q)
letter agreement, dated as of november 6, 2006, by and between unitedhealth group incorporated and stephen j. hemsley
*10(r)
employment agreement, effective as of november 7, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and george l. mikan iii (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys
current report on form 8-k dated january 30, 2007)
*10(s)
employment agreement, dated as of november 1, 2004, between united healthcare services, inc. and richard h. anderson (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(p) of the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004)
*10(t)
form of memorandum of understanding, effective as of october 31, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and richard h. anderson (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the
companys current report on form 8-k dated october 31, 2006)
*10(u)
employment agreement, dated as of october1, 1998, as amended, between united healthcare services, inc. and tracy l. bahl (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(a) to the companys
quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2004)
*10(v)
employment agreement, dated as of november 2, 2004, between united healthcare services, inc. and forrest g. burke
*10(w)
employment agreement, dated as of october 1, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and patrick j. erlandson (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(m) to the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000)
*10(x)
employment agreement, dated as of october 1, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and william a. munsell, as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(t) of the companys
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2004)
table of contents
item
description
*10(y)
employment agreement, dated as of october 16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and lois e. quam, as amended, and memorandum of understanding, effective as of october 11, 1999,
between lois e. quam and united healthcare services, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(l) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000)
*10(z)
letter, dated as of november 9, 2006, from lois e. quam to unitedhealth group incorporated
*10(aa)
employment agreement, dated as of december 15, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and eric s. rangen (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current
report on form 8-k dated december 15, 2006)
*10(bb)
employment agreement, dated as of october 16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and robert j. sheehy, as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(l) to the companys
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001)
*10(cc)
employment agreement, dated as of october 1, 1998, as amended, between united healthcare services, inc. and david s. wichmann (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(o) to the companys
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2003)
*10(dd)
employment agreement, dated as of october 13, 1999, between united healthcare corporation and william w. mcguire, m.d. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(f) to the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1999)
*10(ee)
letter to william w. mcguire, m.d., dated as of february 13, 2001, regarding employment agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(h) to the companys annual report on form 10-k for
the year ended december 31, 2000)
*10(ff)
amendment to employment agreement, dated as of august 5, 2005, between unitedhealth group incorporated and william w. mcguire, m.d. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(c) of the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2005)
*10(gg)
letter agreement, dated as of november 6, 2006, between unitedhealth group incorporated and william w. mcguire, m.d.
*10(hh)
employment agreement, dated as of october16, 1998, between united healthcare services, inc. and david j. lubben, as amended (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(p) to the
companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2000)
*10(ii)
form of memorandum of understanding, effective as of october 31, 2006, by and between united healthcare services, inc. and each of tracy l. bahl, patrick j. erlandson, david j. lubben, william
a. munsell, lois e. quam, robert j. sheehy, and david s. wichmann (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 31, 2006)
*10(jj)
form of letter agreement, dated as of november 6, 2006, by and between unitedhealth group incorporated and each of tracy l. bahl, patrick j. erlandson, david j. lubben, william a. munsell, lois
e. quam, robert j. sheehy, and david s. wichmann (the agreements executed by the above-named individuals are on terms substantially in the form of letter agreement filed herewith)
*10(kk)
form of letter agreement, effective as of december 22, 2006, by and between unitedhealth group incorporated and each of tracy l. bahl, patrick j. erlandson, stephen j. hemsley, david j. lubben,
william w. mcguire, m.d., lois e. quam, robert j. sheehy, and david s. wichmann (the agreements executed by the above-named individuals are on terms substantially in the form of letter agreement filed herewith)
statement regarding computation of per share earnings (incorporated by reference to the information contained under the heading net earnings per common share in note 2 to the notes
to consolidated financial statements included under item 8)
table of contents
item
description
ratio of earnings to fixed charges
subsidiaries of the company
consent of independent registered public accounting firm
power of attorney
certifications pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certifications pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
court order dated november29, 2006 issued by the united states district court for the district of minnesota relating to the matters entitled in re unitedhealth group incorporated
shareholder derivative litigation and in re unitedhealth group incorporated pslra litigation (incorporated by reference to exhibit 99.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated november 29, 2006)
*
denotes management contracts and compensation plans in which certain directors and named executive officers participate and which are being filed pursuant to
item601(b)(10)(iii)(a) of regulation s-k.
**
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulation s-k, copies of instruments defining the rights of certain holders of long-term debt are not filed. the company will furnish copies
thereof to the sec upon request.
