10-k
tenkye2001.htm
10-k 2001
utctenk2001
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
[ x] annual report pursuant to section 13 or
15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december 31,
commission file number 1-812
united technologies corporation
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or
organization)
06 0570975
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
one financial plaza, hartford, connecticut
(address of principal executives offices)
(zip code)
registrant's telephone number, including
area code: (860) 728-7000
securities registered
pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock ($1 par value)
new york stock exchange
(cusip 913017 10 9)
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by section 13 or
15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months, and (2) has
been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes x .
no .
at january 31, 2002, there
were 472,617,013 shares of common stock outstanding. the aggregate market value of
the voting common stock held by non-affiliates at january 31, 2002 was approximately
$32,401,386,168, based on the new york stock exchange closing price for such shares on
that date. for purposes of this calculation, the registrant has assumed that its
directors and executive officers are affiliates.
list hereunder documents
incorporated by reference and the part of the form 10-k into which the document is
incorporated: (1) portions of the united technologies corporation 2001 annual report
to shareowners are incorporated by reference in parts i, ii and iv hereof; and (2)
portions of the united technologies corporation proxy statement for the 2002 annual
meeting of shareowners are incorporated by reference in part iii hereof.
indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k is not contained
herein, and is not to be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive
proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or
any amendments to this form 10-k. [ ]
united technologies corporation
_______________________________
index to annual report
on form 10-k for
year ended december 31, 2001
page
part
i
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of
matters to a vote of security holders
------
executive officers
of the registrant
part ii
item 5.
market for the
registrant's common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6.
selected financial
data
item 7.
management's
discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial position
item 7a.
quantitative and
qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial statements
and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and
disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10.
directors and
executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive
compensation
item 12.
security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management
item 13.
certain
relationships and related transactions
part iv
item 14.
exhibits, financial
statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
united technologies corporation
annual report on form 10-k for year
ended december 31, 2001
whenever
reference is made in this form 10-k to specific sections or pages of the
corporations 2001 annual report to shareowners, such sections or pages, as
applicable, are incorporated herein by reference. the corporation, unless the
context requires otherwise, means united technologies corporation (or utc) and its
subsidiaries.
item 1. business
united technologies corporation was incorporated in delaware in 1934. growth is
attributable to acquisitions and the internal development of existing businesses of the
corporation. the following description of the corporation's business should be read in
conjunction with management's discussion and analysis of results of operations and
financial position appearing on pages 1 through 9 of the corporation's 2001 annual report
to shareowners, especially the information contained therein under the heading
business environment."
the corporation conducts its business through four principal segments. the segments
were generally determined based on the management of the businesses and on the basis of
separate groups of operating companies, each with general operating autonomy over
diversified products and services. the principal products of each segment are as
follows:
otis
--
otis elevators, escalators,
automated people movers and service.
carrier
--
carrier commercial and residential
heating, ventilating and air conditioning (hvac) systems and equipment,
commercial and transport refrigeration equipment, and aftermarket service and components.
pratt & whitney
--
pratt & whitney commercial,
general aviation and military aircraft engines, parts, service, industrial gas turbines
and space propulsion.
flight systems
--
--
sikorsky commercial and military
helicopters, parts and service.
hamilton sundstrand aerospace products and aftermarket services include aircraft power
generation and management systems, engine and flight controls, auxiliary power units,
environmental control systems and propeller systems. industrial products include air
compressors, metering devices, fluid handling equipment and enclosed gear drives.
segment financial data for the years 1999 through 2001,
including financial information about foreign and domestic operations and export sales, is
included in note 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 24 through 26
of the corporation's 2001 annual report to shareowners.
description
of business by segment
otis
otis is the world's largest elevator and
escalator manufacturing, installation and service company. otis designs,
manufactures, sells and installs a wide range of passenger and freight elevators,
including hydraulic and traction elevators for low- and medium-speed applications and
gearless elevators for high-speed passenger operations in high-rise buildings. since
the february 2000 introduction of otis new gen2 elevator system, installations
have continued in europe and the asia/pacific region. the first gen2 installation in
north america is expected to occur by the second half of 2002. otis also produces a
broad line of escalators and, for horizontal transportation, moving walks and automated
people movers and shuttles. in addition to new equipment, otis provides
modernization products and services to upgrade elevators and escalators and maintenance
services for a substantial portion of the elevators and escalators which it sells, as well
as those of other manufacturers. otis' products and services are sold principally to
commercial building contractors and building owners.
otis operations can be affected by
a variety of economic and other factors including those described in managements
discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial position included in the
corporations 2001 annual report to shareowners and those described in the business
section of this form 10-k under the heading other matters relating to the
corporations business as a whole, as well as competition from a large number
of companies in the united states and other countries. otis competes on the basis of
price, delivery schedule, product performance and service.
revenues generated by otis'
international operations were 76 and 77 percent of total otis segment revenues in 2001 and
2000, respectively. at december 31, 2001, otis business backlog was $3,777
million, as compared to $3,770 million at december 31, 2000. substantially all of
the business backlog at december 31, 2001 is expected to be realized as sales in 2002.
carrier
carrier is the world's largest manufacturer of commercial and residential hvac systems and
equipment. carrier is also a leading producer of commercial and transport
refrigeration equipment, and provides aftermarket service and components for its products
and those of other manufacturers in both the hvac and refrigeration industries. the
products manufactured by carrier include chillers and airside equipment, commercial
unitary systems, residential split systems (cooling only and heat pump), duct-free split
systems, window and portable room air conditioners and furnaces, as well as transport
refrigeration, commercial refrigeration and food service equipment. carrier's
products and services are sold under carrier and other brand names to building contractors
and building owners, homeowners, shipping and trucking companies, supermarkets and food
service companies. sales are made both directly to the customer and through
manufacturers' representatives, distributors, dealers, individual wholesalers and retail
outlets.
carrier has grown significantly in
recent years as a result of acquisitions. major acquisitions have included the
august 1999 acquisition of international comfort products corporation, a north american
residential and light commercial hvac equipment company; the february 2000 acquisition of
the electrolux groups commercial refrigeration business in europe; and the november
2000 acquisition of specialty equipment companies, a manufacturer of commercial
refrigeration and food service equipment in the united states and europe. carrier
participates in a joint venture with toshiba corporation in japan. carrier and the
joint venture company, toshiba carrier corporation, also participate in hvac joint
ventures in the u.k. and thailand.
carriers operations can be
affected by a variety of economic and other factors including those described in
managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial position
included in the corporations 2001 annual report to shareowners and those described
in the business section of this form 10-k under the heading other matters relating
to the corporations business as a whole, as well as competition from a large
number of companies in the united states and other countries and the level of activity in
industries using commercial refrigeration equipment. carrier competes on the basis
of price, delivery schedule, product performance and service.
revenues generated by carrier's
international operations, including u.s. export sales, were 47 and 48 percent of total
carrier segment revenues in 2001 and 2000, respectively. at december 31, 2001,
carriers business backlog was $1,042 million, as compared to $1,004 million at
december 31, 2000. substantially all of the business backlog at december 31, 2001 is
expected to be realized as sales in 2002.
pratt & whitney
pratt & whitney is among the
worlds leading suppliers of commercial, general aviation and military aircraft
engines. pratt & whitney provides overhaul and repair services, spare parts, and
fleet management services for the engines it produces, as well as for many other models of
commercial and military jet and gas turbine engines. pratt & whitney also
produces industrial gas turbines for power generation, mechanical pump drive and marine
propulsion applications; liquid rocket propulsion systems and solid rocket motors.
pratt & whitney products are sold
principally to aircraft manufacturers, airlines and other aircraft operators, aircraft
leasing companies and the u.s. and foreign governments. pratt & whitney sales in
the u.s. and canada are also made directly to the customer and, to a limited extent,
through independent distributors. other export sales are made with the assistance of
independent sales representatives. sales to the boeing company (boeing)
and airbus industrie (airbus) were each 14 percent of total pratt &
whitney revenues in 2001, before taking into account discounts or financial incentives
offered to customers.
pratt & whitney currently produces
three families of large commercial jet engines. pratt & whitney jt8d-200 series
engines power the boeing md-80 aircraft. applications for the pw2000 series include
the boeing 757-200/pf aircraft and the iluyshin il-96 aircraft. the pw4000 engine
family powers the airbus a310-300, a300-600 and a330-200/300 series; the boeing 747-400,
767-200/300 and 777-200/300 series of aircraft; and the boeing md-11 aircraft.
(boeing phased out production of new md-80 and md-11 aircraft.) pratt & whitney
has entered into a memorandum of understanding with airbus to develop, market and sell
pw6000 series engines for installation on airbus a318 aircraft. the pw6000 was
certified by u.s. airworthiness authorities in january 2002.
- 2 -
in view of the risk and cost associated
with developing new engines, pratt & whitney has entered into certain collaboration
arrangements in which costs, revenues and risks are shared. at december 31, 2001,
the interests of other participants in these items were approximately as follows: 24
percent of the jt8d-200 series engine program, 29 percent of the pw2000 series engine
program, 14 percent of the 94 and 100 inch fan models of the pw4000, 26 percent of the
pw4084 and pw4090 models and 24 percent of the pw4098 model. iae international aero
engines ag, a collaboration in which pratt & whitney has a 33 percent interest,
markets and supports the v2500 engine. applications for the v2500 engine include
airbus' a319, a320 and a321 aircraft and boeing's md-90. (boeing phased out
production of md-90 aircraft in 2000.) pratt & whitney also has a 50 percent
interest in ge-p&w engine alliance, llc, an alliance formed in 1996 with ge aircraft
engines to develop, market and manufacture a new jet engine known as the gp7000. the
new engine is intended to power the airbus a380 aircraft. in december 2000, airbus
announced the launch of the a380 aircraft, with first deliveries scheduled for 2006.
pratt & whitney currently produces
three military aircraft engines: the f119 (powering the two-engine f-22 fighter aircraft),
the f100 (powering two-engine f-15 and single-engine f-16 fighter aircraft) and the f117
(powering four-engine c-17 transport aircraft). with respect to the f119, pratt
& whitney is under contract with the u.s. air force (usaf) for both the
completion of flight testing and an initial engine production program. the f119 is
the only anticipated source of propulsion for the f-22 fighter aircraft. all of
pratt & whitney's f100 sales contracts are with the usaf or with foreign governments.
all of pratt & whitneys f117 sales contracts are with either the usaf or
boeing. pratt & whitney is also under contract with the usaf to develop the f135
engine, a derivative of pratt & whitneys f119 engine, to power the single-engine
f35 joint strike fighter aircraft. in 2001, the u.s. government proceeded into the
next phase of the development of the f35 by awarding an aircraft system development
contract to lockheed martin corporation. management cannot predict with certainty
whether, when, and in what quantities pratt & whitney will produce f135 engines.
pratt & whitney canada
(pwc) is one of the worlds leading manufacturers of turbofan, turboprop
and turboshaft engines used in a variety of aircraft, including up to seventy passenger
business and regional/commuter airline aircraft, general aviation aircraft and light and
medium helicopters. pwc also provides auxiliary power units for large commercial
aircraft, advanced gas turbine engines for industrial and power generation applications
and worldwide engine maintenance services.
pratt & whitney space propulsion
(sp) produces hydrogen fueled rocket engines for commercial and u.s.
government space applications and advanced turbo pumps for nasa's space shuttle program.
sp has a 50 percent interest in rd-amross, llc, a joint venture with npo energomash
that currently provides the lox-kerosene rd-180 booster engine for two lockheed martin
launch vehicles. chemical systems, a unit of sp, manufactures solid fuel propulsion
systems and booster motors for commercial and civil applications and several u.s. military
launch vehicles and missiles.
pratt & whitney power systems
(pwps) supplies industrial power generation and mechanical drive equipment in
the 300 kilowatts to 50 megawatts range. pwps also provides gas turbines for marine
propulsion applications.
revenues from pratt & whitney's
international operations, including u.s. export sales, were 50 percent of total pratt
& whitney segment revenues in each of 2001 and 2000. at december 31, 2001, pratt
& whitneys business backlog was $11,161 million, including $1,949 million of
u.s. government funded contracts and subcontracts, as compared to $9,866 million and
$1,434 million, respectively, at december 31, 2000. of the total pratt & whitney
backlog at december 31, 2001, approximately $4,272 million is expected to be realized as
sales in 2002.
flight systems
the corporation's flight systems business is conducted through sikorsky aircraft and
hamilton sundstrand. the corporation acquired sundstrand corporation in 1999 and
combined it with the operations of the former hamilton standard.
sikorsky is one of the world's largest manufacturers of military and commercial
helicopters and the primary supplier of transport helicopters to the u.s. army and navy.
sikorsky also supplies helicopters to foreign governments and the worldwide
commercial market. sikorsky produces helicopters for passenger, utility/transport,
cargo, anti-submarine warfare, and search and rescue operations. sikorsky's business
base also includes remanufacturing of used aircraft, spare parts sales, overhaul and
repair, and service contracts.
- 3 -
current production programs at sikorsky include the black hawk medium-transport helicopter
for the u.s. and foreign governments; the mh-60 fleet combat support helicopter for the
u.s. navy; the international naval hawk, a derivative of the u.s. navy's seahawk
medium-sized helicopter for multiple naval missions; and the s-76 intermediate-sized
helicopter for executive transport, offshore oil platform support, search and rescue,
emergency medical service and other utility operations.
under a multi-year contract with the u.s. government as amended through december 31, 2001,
sikorsky has delivered 205 of 252 black hawk family helicopters as of december 31, 2001.
in 2001, sikorsky and the u.s. government signed a three year $220 million
research, development and test contract to evaluate the potential for upgrading the u.s.
army fleet of black hawks. in addition, sikorsky has contracts with foreign
government customers for the delivery of 21 helicopters from 2002 through 2004.
sikorsky is engaged in development of the s-92 helicopter for the commercial market and an
h-92 variant for the military market. a portion of the development is being carried
out by companies in brazil, the people's republic of china, japan, spain and taiwan under
collaborative arrangements. regulatory certification of the s-92 is expected in
2002. marketing efforts for the s-92 and h-92 are in progress and several
non-binding deposit agreements have been received for s-92 helicopters. management
cannot predict with certainty whether, when, and in what quantities the s-92 and h-92 will
be produced.
sikorsky has a 50 percent interest in a joint venture with boeing for the development of
the rah-66 comanche light attack and reconnaissance helicopter. the sikorsky-boeing
joint venture is performing under a cost reimbursement contract awarded in 1991. the
first two prototype helicopters are undergoing flight testing, and the sikorsky-boeing
joint venture has entered into a $3.1 billion engineering and manufacturing development
program with the u.s. army to deliver thirteen comanche helicopters in 2004 and 2005 for
test and evaluation purposes. under this emd program, the first u.s. army comanche
unit is scheduled to be operationally equipped in 2006. management cannot predict
with certainty whether, when, and in what quantities any additional comanche helicopters
will be produced.
hamilton sundstrand provides aerospace and industrial products and aftermarket services
for a diverse group of industries worldwide. hamilton sundstrand's principal
aerospace products include aircraft power generation management and distribution systems;
environmental, flight, fuel and engine control systems; fuel and special fluid pumps;
auxiliary power units; propeller systems; electronic controls and components; and
specialized instruments and chemical detection and monitoring equipment. hamilton
sundstrand is also the prime contractor for nasa's space suit/life support system and
produces environmental control, life support, mechanical systems and thermal control
systems for international space programs. hamilton sundstrand's principal industrial
products include air compressors, metering devices, fluid handling equipment and enclosed
gear drives.
hamilton sundstrand's aerospace businesses serve commercial, military, regional, business
and general aviation, as well as space and undersea applications. aftermarket
services include spare parts, overhaul and repair and engineering and technical support.
hamilton sundstrand aerospace products are sold directly to airframe manufacturers,
the u.s. government, aircraft operators and independent distributors. hamilton
sundstrand sales of aerospace products to boeing, pratt & whitney and airbus,
collectively, including sales where the u.s. government was the ultimate customer, were 14
percent of flight systems segment sales in 2001. in 2001, hamilton sundstrand
acquired claverham group ltd., a u.k.- based supplier of actuation systems for flight
control systems.
hamilton sundstrand's industrial products serve industries involved with raw material
processing, bulk material handling and construction (including mining; metal and other
material processing; hydrocarbon and chemical processing; and water and waste water
treatment). these industrial products are sold directly to end-users, through
manufacturer representatives and distributors and through engineering contractors.
demand for hamilton sundstrand's industrial products is tied closely to the level of
general economic activity.
hamilton sundstrand has competitors or potential competitors in both its aerospace (as
described below) and industrial businesses. hamilton sundstrand believes that its
research and development, proprietary technology, and product and service reputations have
been significant in maintaining its competitive standing.
revenues generated by the flight systems segment's international operations, including
export sales, were 39 percent and 44 percent of total flight systems segment
revenues in 2001 and 2000, respectively. at december 31, 2001, flight systems
business backlog was $4,276 million, including $2,333 million under funded contracts and
subcontracts with the u.s. government, as compared to $4,593 million and $2,532 million,
respectively, at december 31, 2000. of the total flight systems segment backlog at
december 31, 2001, approximately $2,791 million is expected to be realized as sales in
2002.
- 4 -
pratt & whitney and flight systems aerospace
and defense products
the corporations aerospace and
defense businesses are subject to substantial competition from domestic manufacturers,
foreign manufacturers (whose governments sometimes provide research and development
assistance, marketing subsidies and other assistance for their commercial products) and
companies that obtain regulatory agency approval to manufacture spare parts. in
particular, pratt & whitney experiences intense competition for new commercial
airframe/engine combinations. manufacturers of many aircraft offer their customers a
choice of engines at the time of sale of aircraft. as a result, engine suppliers may
offer substantial discounts and other financial incentives, performance and operating cost
guarantees, participation in financing arrangements and maintenance agreements.
pratt & whitneys major competitors in the sale of engines are general electric
company and rolls royce plc. the initial selections of engines and other components
by manufacturers and purchasers of new aircraft can also have a significant impact on
later sales of spare parts and maintenance services. in addition to the terms and
conditions of sale mentioned above, the principal methods of competition in the pratt
& whitney and flight systems segments are price, product performance, service and
delivery schedule. (for information regarding customer financing commitments,
participation in guarantees of customer financing arrangements and performance and
operating cost guarantees, see notes 4 and 14 of notes to consolidated financial
statements on pages 17 and 24 of the corporation's 2001 annual report to shareowners.)
other factors that can affect the
results of the corporations aerospace and defense businesses include lengthy and
costly development cycles and heavy dependence on a small number of products and programs.
sales of military products are affected by defense budgets in the u.s. and other
countries, u.s. foreign policy and the level of activity in military flight operations.
military spare parts sales are affected by policies of the u.s. and other
governments of purchasing parts from suppliers other than the original equipment
manufacturer. pratt & whitneys and flight systems operations can
also be affected by a variety of economic and other factors including those described in
managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial position
included in the corporations 2001 annual report to shareowners and those described
in the business section of this form 10-k under the heading other matters relating
to the corporations business as a whole.
significant elements of pratt &
whitney's and flight systems business, such as spare parts sales for engines and
aircraft in service, have short lead times. therefore, backlog information may not
be indicative of future demand. also, since a substantial portion of the backlog for
commercial customers is scheduled for delivery beyond 2002, changes in economic conditions
may cause customers to request that firm orders be rescheduled or canceled.
other
utc fuel cells, llc (utc fuel
cells) is a world leader in fuel cell production and development for commercial,
transportation, residential and space applications. utc fuel cells is the sole
supplier of fuel cells for u.s. space missions and also offers a commercially available
fuel cell power plant, known as the pc25. over 245 pc25 units have been
delivered around the world. fuel cell power plants using proton exchange membrane
technology ("pem") are currently in development for transportation, commercial
stationary, and residential applications. utc fuel cells is working with automakers
and bus manufacturers, as well as the u.s. department of energy, on development and
demonstration programs for automobiles. in 2001, utc fuel cells and shell hydrogen
us formed a joint venture to develop, manufacture and sell fuel processors and hydrogen
generation systems.
although fuel cells are believed to be
superior to conventional power generators in terms of efficiency and environmental
characteristics, current production rates remain low across the industry. continued
technology advancement and wider market acceptance are required to reduce the production
cost of fuel cell components and power plants. there is still significant
uncertainty as to whether and when commercially viable pem fuel cells will be produced.
utc fuel cells continues to seek strategic partners to develop sources of supply,
as well as marketing and distribution channels. toshiba corporation owns a 10
percent equity interest in utc fuel cells.
the results of utc fuel cells are
included in the eliminations and other category in the segment financial data
in note 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 24 to 25 of the
corporations 2001 annual report to shareowners.
- 5 -
other matters relating to the corporation's business as a whole
research and development
since changes in technology can have a
significant impact on the corporations operations and competitive position, the
corporation spends substantial amounts of its own funds on research and development.
such expenditures, which are charged to expense as incurred, were $1,254 million or
4.6 percent of total sales in 2001, as compared with $1,302 million or 5.0 percent of
total sales in 2000 and $1,292 million or 5.4 percent of total sales in 1999. the
corporation also performs research and development work under contracts funded by the u.s.
government and other customers. such contract research and development, which is
performed principally in the pratt & whitney segment and to a lesser extent in the
flight systems segment, amounted to $845 million in 2001, as compared with $866 million in
2000 and $963 million in 1999.
contracts, other risk factors, environmental and
other matters
u.s. government contracts are subject to
termination at the convenience of the u.s. government, in which event the corporation
normally would be entitled to reimbursement for its allowable costs incurred plus a
reasonable profit. most of the corporation's sales are made under fixed-price type
contracts; approximately $1.1 billion of the corporation's total sales for 2001 were made
under cost-reimbursement type contracts.
like many defense contractors, the corporation has received
allegations from the u.s. government that some contract prices should be reduced because
cost or pricing data submitted in negotiation of the contract prices may not have been in
conformance with government regulations. the corporation
has made voluntary refunds in those cases it believes appropriate, has settled some
allegations, and does not believe that any further price reductions that may be required
will have a material effect upon its financial position, results of operations or cash
flows.
the corporation is now, and believes that in light of the current
government contracting environment it will be, the subject of one or more government
investigations. see item 3 - legal proceedings on page 8 of this form 10-k and note
14 of notes to consolidated financial statements on page 24 of the corporations 2001
annual report to shareowners for further discussion. if the corporation or one of
its business units were charged with wrongdoing as a result of any of these
investigations, it could be suspended from bidding on or receiving awards of new
government contracts pending the completion of legal proceedings. if convicted or
found liable, the corporation could be fined and debarred from new government contracting
for a period generally not to exceed three years. any
contracts found to be tainted by fraud could be voided by the government.
the corporation conducts its businesses through subsidiaries and
affiliates worldwide, some of which have significant minority interests. changes in
legislation or government policies can have an impact on the corporations worldwide
operations. for example, governmental regulation of refrigerants is important to
carriers businesses, while government safety regulations, restrictions on aircraft
engine noise and emissions and government procurement practices can impact the
corporations aerospace and defense businesses. the corporations
international operations are also subject to changes in local government regulations and
policies, including those related to investments, exchange controls and repatriation of
earnings. some foreign customers in the
corporations aerospace and defense businesses may require counter-purchase or offset
arrangements as a condition to a sale, such as requiring the corporation to purchase
supplies in the customers country or to participate in manufacturing and financial
support projects.
the corporation's operations are subject to environmental regulation
by federal, state and local authorities in the united states and regulatory authorities
with jurisdiction over its foreign operations. the corporation has incurred and will
likely continue to incur liabilities under various state and federal statutes for the
cleanup of pollutants previously released into the environment. the corporation does
not anticipate that compliance with current provisions relating to the protection of the
environment or that any payments it may be required to make for these cleanup liabilities
will have a material adverse effect upon its cash flows, competitive position, financial
position or results of operations. (environmental matters are further addressed in
management's discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial position on
page 8 and notes 1 and 14 of notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 16 and 24
of the corporation's 2001 annual report to shareowners.)
most of the laws governing environmental
matters include criminal provisions. if the corporation were convicted of a
violation of the federal clean air act or the clean water act, the facility or facilities
involved in the violation would be ineligible to be used in performing any u.s. government
contract awarded to the corporation until the environmental protection agency certifies
that the condition giving rise to the violation has been corrected.
- 6 -
while the corporation's patents,
trademarks, licenses and franchises are cumulatively important to its business, the
corporation does not believe that the loss of any one or group of related patents,
trademarks, licenses or franchises would have a material adverse effect on the overall
business of the corporation or on any of its operating segments.
like other users in the u.s., the
corporation is largely dependent upon foreign sources for certain of its raw materials
requirements such as cobalt (africa), tantalum (australia and chile) and chromium (africa,
eastern and central europe and the countries of the former soviet union). to
alleviate this dependence and accompanying risk, the corporation has a number of on-going
programs which include the development of new suppliers; the increased use of more readily
available materials through material substitutions and the development of new alloys; and
the conservation of materials through scrap reclamation and new manufacturing processes
such as net shape forging.
the corporation has sought cost
reductions in its purchases of certain other materials, components, and supplies by
consolidating its purchases, reducing the number of suppliers and using online bidding
competitions among potential suppliers. in some instances, the corporation is
reliant upon a single source of supply. a disruption in deliveries from its
suppliers, therefore, could have an adverse effect on the corporation's ability to meet
its commitments to customers. the corporation believes that it has appropriately
balanced the risks against the costs of sustaining a greater number of suppliers.
the corporation does not foresee any unavailability of materials, components, or supplies
which will have any material adverse effect on its overall business, or on any of its
business segments, in the near term.
for a discussion of other risks to which
the corporations financial position, results of operations or cash flows may be
subject, including the risks of the corporations international operations, see the
business section of this form 10-k under the heading description of business by segment
and managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial
position appearing on pages 1 through 9 of the corporations 2001 annual report to
shareowners.
cautionary note concerning factors that may affect
future results
this form 10-k contains statements which, to the extent they
are not statements of historical or present fact, constitute forward-looking
statements under the securities laws. from time to time, oral or written
forward-looking statements may also be included in other materials released to the public.
these forward-looking statements are intended to provide management's current
expectations or plans for the future operating and financial performance of the
corporation, based on assumptions currently believed to be valid. forward-looking
statements can be identified by the use of words such as believe,
expect, plans, strategy, prospects,
estimate, project, anticipate and other words of
similar meaning in connection with a discussion of future operating or financial
performance. these include, among others, statements relating to:
future earnings and other measurements of financial
performance
future cash flow and uses of cash
the effect of economic downturns or growth in particular
regions
the effect of changes in the level of activity in particular
industries or markets
the scope, nature or impact of acquisition activity and
integration into the corporations businesses
product developments and new business opportunities
restructuring costs and savings
the outcome of contingencies
the transition to the use of the euro as a currency.
all forward-looking statements involve
risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those
expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. this annual report on form
10-k for 2001 includes important information as to risk factors in the
business section under the headings description of business by
segment and other matters relating to the corporation's business as a
whole and in the legal proceedings section. additional
important information as to risk factors is included in the corporation's 2001 annual
report to shareowners in the section titled management's discussion and analysis of
results of operations and financial position, which is incorporated by reference in
this form 10-k. for additional information identifying factors that may cause actual
results to vary materially from those stated in the forward-looking statements, see the
corporation's reports on forms 10-q and 8-k filed with the securities and exchange
commission from time to time.
- 7 -
employees
at december 31, 2001, the corporation's
total employment was approximately 152,000. for discussion of the effects of the
corporation's restructuring actions on employment, see management's discussion and
analysis of results of operations and financial position on page 4 and note 11 of notes to
consolidated financial statements on pages 22 to 23 of the corporation's 2001 annual
report to shareowners.
item 2. properties
the corporation's fixed assets as of
december 31, 2001 include the plants and warehouses described below and a substantial
quantity of machinery and equipment, most of which is general purpose machinery and
equipment using special jigs, tools and fixtures and in many instances having automatic
control features and special adaptations. the plants, warehouses, machinery and
equipment in use as of december 31, 2001 are in good operating condition, are well
maintained, and substantially all are in regular use.
the following square footage numbers are
approximations. at december 31, 2001, the corporation operated (a) plants in the
u.s. which had 29.2 million square feet, of which 3.5 million square feet were leased; (b)
plants outside the u.s. which had 20.0 million square feet, of which 2.3 million square
feet were leased; (c) warehouses in the u.s. which had 10.6 million square feet, of which
6.9 million square feet were leased; and (d) warehouses outside the u.s. which had 5.9
million square feet, of which 3.7 million square feet were leased.
for discussion of the effect of the
corporation's restructuring actions on production facilities, see management's discussion
and analysis of results of operations and financial position on page 4 and note 11of
notes to the consolidated financial statements on pages 22 to 23 of the corporation's 2001
annual report to shareowners.
management believes that the fixed
assets capitalized and the facilities in operation at december 31, 2001 for the production
of the corporation's products are suitable and adequate for the business conducted therein
in the current business environment, are being appropriately utilized consistent with
experience and have sufficient production capacity for their present intended purposes.
utilization of the facilities varies based on demand for the products. the
corporation continuously reviews its anticipated requirements for facilities and, based on
that review, may from time to time acquire additional facilities or dispose of existing
facilities.
item 3. legal proceedings
as previously reported, the department
of defense and the corporation are litigating whether pratt & whitney's accounting
practices for certain engine parts are acceptable. the litigation, filed with
the armed services board of contract appeals (asbca), no. 47416 et al.,
relates to the accounting for engine parts produced by foreign companies under commercial
engine collaboration programs from 1984 through 1995. in december 1996 the
government claimed damages of $157.6 million, plus $102.7 million in interest through
1996. pratt & whitney believes its accounting practices are proper and has not
modified them. on july 31, 2001, the asbca issued a decision in favor of the
corporation. the department of defense appealed this decision to the court of
appeals for the federal circuit on november 29, 2001. should the government
ultimately prevail on liability, damages could be larger than initially claimed because
the government may amend its claim to include the period after 1995 and interest continues
to accrue on the claim asserted in 1996.
as previously reported, the corporation
has been served with two qui tam complaints under the civil false claims act in united
states district court for the district of connecticut: u.s. ex rel. drake v. norden
systems, inc. and utc, no. 394cv00963 (filed july 1997, and involving allegations of
improper accounting for fixed assets) and u.s. ex rel. capella v. utc and norden systems
inc., no. 394cv02063 (filed december 1994, and involving allegations of improper
accounting for insurance costs). the civil false claims act provides for penalties
in a civil case of up to $10,000 per false claim submitted. the number of false
claims implicated by the foregoing qui tam complaints cannot currently be ascertained;
however, if determined adversely to the corporation, the number could result in
significant penalties. the qui tam relator in each case has claimed unspecified
damages (trebled) and penalties, and the department of justice in each case has declined
to take over the litigation. in august 2000, the court dismissed portions of the
complaints. in august 2001, the court dismissed additional claims in the drake
case.
in march 1999, the department of justice
filed a civil false claims act complaint against the corporation in united states district
court for the southern district of ohio (western division), no. c-3-99-093. this
lawsuit is related to the fighter engine competition between pratt &
whitney's f100 engine and ge's f110 engine, for contracts awarded by the u.s. air force
between fiscal years 1985 and 1990, inclusive. the government alleges that pratt
& whitney inflated its estimated costs for purchased parts and withheld data that
would have revealed the overstatements. the government seeks damages of at least $95
million (some portion of which would be trebled plus penalties of up to $10,000 per claim
submitted).
- 8 -
the corporation does not believe that
resolution of any of the foregoing or any other legal matters will have a material adverse
effect upon the corporation's competitive position, results of operations, cash flows, or
financial position. a further discussion of government contracts and related
investigations, as well as a discussion of the corporations environmental
liabilities, can be found under the heading other matters relating to the
corporations business as a whole  contracts, other risk factors, environmental
and other matters in item 1  business on page 6 of this form 10-k.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
no matters were
submitted to security holders for a vote during the fourth quarter ended december 31,
2001.
-----  executive officers of the registrant
the following persons are executive officers of united
technologies corporation:
name
title
other business experience
since 1/1/97
age
2/1/02
dean c. borgman
president,
sikorsky aircraft
(since 1998)
senior vice
president, the boeing company; president, mcdonnell douglas helicopter company
ari bousbib
executive
vice president and chief operating officer, otis (since january 2001)
vice
president, corporate strategy and development; vice president, strategic planning, united
technologies corporation; managing director, the strategic partners group
kent l. brittan
vice
president, supply management (since 1997)
vice
president-finance, otis elevator
william l. bucknall, jr.
senior vice
president, human resources and organization (since 1992)
-------
john f. cassidy, jr.
senior vice
president  science and technology (since 1998) and vice president, united
technologies research center
vice
president, united technologies research center
louis chenevert
president,
pratt & whitney (since 1999)
executive
vice president-operations, pratt & whitney
geraud darnis
president,
carrier corporation
(since october 2001)
president, ut
power solutions; president, carrier asia pacific operations; president, carrier
europe-middle east-africa
george david
chairman
(since 1997) and chief executive officer
(since 1994)
president
(1992-1999)
john j. doucette
vice
president, e-business and chief information officer
(since 2000)
vice
president & chief information officer, otis; vice president & chief information
officer, ge lighting; chief information officer, ge silicones
- 9 -
name
title
other business experience
since 1/1/97
age
2/1/02
john e. evard, jr.
vice
president, taxes
(since august 2000)
senior vice
president, corporate development & general tax counsel, senior vice president &
general tax counsel, cnh global n.v.; vice president & general tax counsel, case
corporation
david j. fitzpatrick
senior vice
president and chief financial officer
(since 1998)
senior vice
president, chief financial officer and treasurer, united technologies corporation
(2000-2001); vice president and controller, eastman kodak co.
ruth r. harkin
senior vice president, international affairs and government relations, united
technologies corporation and chair, united technologies international (since 1997)
president and chief executive officer, overseas private investment corporation
karl j. krapek
president and
chief operating officer (from 1999 until his retirement effective january 30, 2002)
executive
vice president, united technologies corporation (1997-1999) and president, pratt &
whitney (1992-1999)
robert f. leduc
executive
vice president and chief operating officer, pratt & whitney (since 2000) and
president, large commercial engines (since 2001)
executive
vice president, pratt & whitney
ronald f. mckenna
president,
hamilton sundstrand corporation (since 1999)
executive
vice president, sundstrand corporation and chief operating officer, sundstrand aerospace
david g. nord
vice
president, controller
(since 2000)
acting controller; assistant controller,
financial reporting and accounting, united technologies corporation
stephen f. page
executive
vice president, united technologies corporation and president and chief executive officer,
otis (since 1997)
executive
vice president and chief financial officer, united technologies corporation
thomas i. rogan
vice
president, treasurer
(since october 2001)
vice president-finance, hamilton sundstrand
william h. trachsel
senior vice
president, general counsel and secretary (since 1998)
vice
president, secretary and deputy general counsel
all of the officers serve at the pleasure of the
board of directors of united technologies corporation or the subsidiary designated.
- 10 -
item 5. market for registrant's common equity and
related stockholder matters
see comparative stock data appearing on
page 26 of the corporation's 2001 annual report to shareowners containing the following
data relating to the corporation's common stock: principal market, quarterly high
and low sales prices, approximate number of shareowners and frequency and amount of
dividends.
item 6. selected financial data
see the five year summary appearing
inside the front cover of the corporation's 2001 annual report to shareowners containing
the following data: revenues, net income, basic and diluted earnings per share, cash
dividends per common share, total assets and long-term debt. see notes to
consolidated financial statements appearing on pages 15 to 26 of the corporation's 2001
annual report to shareowners for a description of any accounting changes and acquisitions
or dispositions of businesses materially affecting the comparability of the information
reflected in such five year summary.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of
results of operations and financial position
see management's discussion and analysis
of results of operations and financial position appearing on pages 1 through 9 of the
corporation's 2001 annual report to shareowners.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk
for information concerning market
risk sensitive instruments, see discussion under the headings market risk and risk
management in managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and
financial position on page 7 of the corporations annual report to shareowners and
hedging activity in note 1, summary of accounting principles, note
12, foreign exchange and note 13, financial instruments of notes
to consolidated financial statements on pages 16 and 23 to 24 of the corporation's 2001
annual report to shareowners.
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
the 2001 and 2000 consolidated balance sheet, and other financial statements for the years
2001, 2000, and 1999, together with the report thereon of pricewaterhousecoopers llp dated
january 17, 2002, appearing on pages 10 through 26 in the corporation's 2001 annual report
to shareowners are incorporated by reference in this form 10-k. the 2001 and 2000
selected quarterly financial data appearing on page 26 in the corporation's 2001 annual
report to shareowners are incorporated by reference in this form 10-k.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item
10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
the information required by item 10 with respect to directors is incorporated herein by
reference to the section of the corporation's proxy statement for the 2002 annual meeting
of shareowners entitled general information concerning the board of
directorsnominees. information regarding executive officers is contained
in part i of this form 10-k under the heading --executive officers of the
registrant. information concerning section 16(a) compliance is contained in
the section of the corporation's proxy statement for the 2002 annual meeting of
shareowners entitled section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance.
item 11. executive compensation
the information required by item 11 is
incorporated herein by reference to the sections of the corporation's proxy statement for
the 2002 annual meeting of shareowners entitled report of the committee on
compensation and executive development and compensation of named executive
officers. such incorporation by reference shall not be deemed to specifically
incorporate by reference the information referred to in item 402(a)(8) of regulation s-k.
item 12. security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management
the information required by item 12 is
incorporated herein by reference to the section of the corporation's proxy statement for
the 2002 annual meeting of shareowners entitled security ownership of directors and
executive officers.
item 13. certain relationships and related
transactions
the information required by item 13 is
incorporated herein by reference to the section of the corporation's proxy statement for
the 2002 annual meeting of shareowners entitled certain business
relationships.
- 11 -
item 14. exhibits, financial statement
schedules, and reports of form 8-k transactions
(a)
financial statements, financial
statement schedules and exhibits
(1)
financial statements (incorporated
by reference from the 2001 annual report to shareowners):
page number in annual report
report of
independent accountants
consolidated statement of operations for the three years ended december 31, 2001
consolidated balance sheetdecember 31, 2001 and 2000
consolidated statement of cash flows for the three years ended december 31, 2001
notes to consolidated financial statements
15-26
selected quarterly financial data (unaudited)
(2)
financial statement schedule for
the three years ended december 31, 2001:
page number in form 10-k
report of
independent accountants on financial statement schedule
s-i
schedule ii
valuation and qualifying accounts
s-ii
consent of
independent accountants
f-i
all other
schedules are omitted because they are not applicable or the required
information is shown in the financial statements or the notes thereto.
(3)
exhibits:
the following list of exhibits
includes exhibits submitted with this form 10-k as filed with the sec and those
incorporated by reference to other filings.
exhibit number
3(i)
restated certificate of incorporation,
incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(i) to the corporations quarterly report on
form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june 30, 2000.
3(ii)
bylaws as amended and restated effective march
21, 2001, incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(ii) to the corporations quarterly
report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly period ended march 31,
2001.
- 12 -
4(a)
amended and restated indenture, dated as of
may 1, 2001, between the corporation and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 4(a) to the corporations registration statement on form s-3,
file no. 333-60276, filed with the sec on may 4, 2001). the corporation hereby
agrees to furnish to the commission upon request a copy of each other instrument defining
the rights of holders of long-term debt of the corporation and its consolidated
subsidiaries and any unconsolidated subsidiaries.
10.1
united technologies corporation 1979 long term
incentive plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(i) to the corporations
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december
31, 1992.
10.2
united technologies corporation annual
executive incentive compensation plan, as amended.*
10.3
united technologies corporation disability
insurance benefits for executive control group, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10
(iii) to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812)
for fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.4
united technologies corporation executive
estate preservation program, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(iv) to the
corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal
year ended december 31, 1992.
10.5
united technologies corporation pension
preservation plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(v) to the corporations
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december
31, 1992.
10.6
united technologies corporation senior
executive severance plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(vi) to the
corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal
year ended december 31, 1992.
10.7
united technologies corporation deferred
compensation plan, as amended.*
10.8
otis elevator company incentive compensation
plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(viii) to the corporations annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31,
1992.
10.9
united technologies corporation directors
retirement plan, as amended.*
10.10
united technologies corporation deferred
compensation plan for non-employee directors, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(x)
to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for
fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.11
united technologies corporation long term
incentive plan, as amended.*
10.12
united technologies corporation executive
disability, income protection and standard separation agreement plan, incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10(xii) to the corporations annual report on form 10-k
(commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.13
united technologies corporation directors'
restricted stock/unit program, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(xiii) to the
corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal
year ended december 31, 1992.
10.14
united technologies corporation board of
directors deferred stock unit plan*, and amendment 1 thereto (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (10)(iii)(a)(1) to the corporations report on form 10-q (commission file
number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june 30, 2000).
- 13 -
10.15
united technologies corporation pension
replacement plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(xv) to the corporations
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december
31, 1993.
10.16
united technologies corporation special
retention and stock appreciation program, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(xvi) to
the corporations report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly
period ended september 30, 1995.
10.17
united technologies corporation nonemployee
director stock option plan*, amendment 1 thereto (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (10)(iii)(a)(2) to the corporations report on form 10-q (commission file
number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june 30, 2000), amendment 2 thereto (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10(iii)(a)(1) to the corporations report on form 10-q
(commission file number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june 30, 2001) and amendment 3
thereto**.
statement re: computation of per share
earnings.**
statements re: computation of ratios.**
annual report to shareowners for year ended
december 31, 2001 (except for the pages and information thereof expressly incorporated by
reference in this form 10-k, the annual report to shareowners is provided solely for the
information of the securities and exchange commission and is not to be deemed
filed as part of this form 10-k).**
subsidiaries of the registrant.**
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp,
included as page f-i of this form 10-k.
powers of attorney of antonia handler chayes,
jean-pierre garnier, jamie s. gorelick, charles r. lee, richard d. mccormick, frank
p. popoff, h. patrick swygert, andre villeneuve, h. a. wagner and sanford i. weill.**
notes to exhibits
list:
*
incorporated by reference to exhibit of the
same number to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number
1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1995.
**
submitted electronically herewith.
exhibits 10.1 through 10.17 are
contracts or compensatory plans required to be filed as exhibits pursuant to item 14(c) of
the requirements for form 10-k reports.
(b)
no reports on form 8-k were filed
by the corporation during the quarter ended december 31, 2001.
- 14 -
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
united technologies
corporation
(registrant)
by /s/ david j.
fitzpatrick
david j. fitzpatrick
date: february 11,
senior vice president and chief financial officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities indicated, on the date set forth below.
signature
title
date
/s/ george david
george david
chairman, director and chief executive officer
february 11, 2002
/s/ david j. fitzpatrick
david j. fitzpatrick
senior vice president and chief financial officer
february 11, 2002
/s/ david g. nord
david g. nord
vice president, controller
february 11, 2002
antonia handler chayes*
(antonia handler chayes)
director
)
jean-pierre garnier*
(jean-pierre garnier)
director
)
*by: /s/ william h. trachsel
jamie s. gorelick*
(jamie s. gorelick)
director
)
william h. trachsel
attorney-in-fact
date: february 11, 2002
charles r. lee*
(charles r. lee)
director
)
richard d. mccormick*
(richard d. mccormick)
director
)
frank p. popoff*
(frank p. popoff)
director
)
h. patrick swygert*
(h. patrick swygert)
director
)
andre villeneuve*
andre villeneuve
director
)
h. a. wagner*
h. a. wagner
director
)
sanford i. weill*
(sanford i. weill)
director
)
- 15 -
report of independent accountants on
financial statement schedule
to the board of
directors
of united technologies corporation
our audits
of the consolidated financial statements referred to in our report dated january 17,
2002, appearing in the 2001 annual report to shareowners of united technologies
corporation (which report and consolidated financial statements are incorporated by
reference in this annual report on form 10-k) also included an audit of the financial
statement schedule listed in item 14(a)(2) of this form 10-k. in our opinion, the
financial statement schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the information
set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial
statements.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
hartford, connecticut
january 17, 2002
s-i
united technologies corporation and subsidiaries
schedule ii - valuation and qualifying accounts
three years ended december 31, 2001
(millions of dollars)
allowances for doubtful accounts
and other customer financing activity:
balance december 31,
$
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off
(net)
(14)
other adjustments
balance december 31,
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off
(net)
(27)
other adjustments
(6)
balance december 31,
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off
(net)
(59)
other adjustments
(33)
balance december 31,
$
=====
future income
tax benefits - valuation allowance:
balance december 31,
$
additions charged to income tax
expense
reductions credited to income tax
expense
(56)
balance december 31,
additions charged to income tax
expense
reductions credited to income tax
expense
(49)
balance december 31,
additions charged to income tax
expense
reductions credited to income tax
expense
(94)
balance december 31,
$
=====
s-ii
consent of independent accountants
we hereby
consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements on form s-3 (nos.
333-60276 and 333-51830), in the registration statement on form s-4 (no. 333-77991) as
amended by post-effective amendment no. 1 on form s-8 (no. 333-77991-01), and in the
registration statements on form s-8 (nos. 333-21853, 333-18743, 333-21851, 33-57769,
33-45440, 33-11255, 33-26580, 33-26627, 33-28974, 33-51385, 33-58937, 2-87322, 333-77817
and 333-82911) of united technologies corporation of our report datedjanuary 17,
2002 relating to the financial statements, which appears in the 2001 annual report to
shareowners, which is incorporated by reference in this annual report on form 10-k.
we also consent to the incorporation by reference of our report dated january 17, 2002 on
the financial statement schedule, which appears on page s-i of this form 10-k.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
hartford, connecticut
february 11, 2002
f-i
