10-k
tenk2002.htm
10-k 2002
10-k-2002
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
[x]
annual report pursuant to
section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2002
commission file number 1-812
united technologies corporation
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other
jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s.
employer identification no.)
one
financial plaza, hartford, connecticut
(address of
principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrant's telephone number, including
area code: (860) 728-7000
securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of
the act:
title
of each class
name
of each exchange on which registered
common stock
($1 par value)
new york stock
exchange
(cusip 913017
10 9)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed
all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12 months, and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements
for the past 90 days. yes x . no __.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an
accelerated filer (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the act). yes x . no __.
at january 31, 2003, there were 470,366,023 shares of
common stock outstanding. the aggregate market value of the voting common stock held by
non-affiliates at january 31, 2003 was approximately $29,844,016,541, based on the new
york stock exchange closing price for such shares on that date. for purposes of this
calculation, the registrant has assumed that its directors and executive officers are
affiliates.
list hereunder documents incorporated by reference and the
part of the form 10-k into which the document is incorporated: (1) portions of the united
technologies corporation 2002 annual report to shareowners are incorporated by reference
in parts i, ii and iv hereof; and (2) portions of the united technologies corporation
proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareowners are incorporated by reference
in part iii hereof.
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and is not to be
contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendments to
this form 10-k. [ ]
united technologies corporation
index to annual report
on form 10-k for
year ended december 31, 2002
part
i
page
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal
proceedings
item 4.
submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
-----
executive
officers of the registrant
part
ii
item 5.
market
for registrant's common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6.
selected
financial data
item 7.
management's
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
part
iii
item 10.
directors
and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive
compensation
item 12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain
relationships and related transactions
item 14.
controls
and procedures
part
iv
item 15.
exhibits,
financial statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
signatures
certifications
united technologies corporation
annual report on form 10-k for the
year ended december 31, 2002
whenever reference is made in this form 10-k to specific sections or pages of the
corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners, such sections or pages, as applicable,
are incorporated herein by reference. the "corporation", unless the context
requires otherwise, means united technologies corporation (or utc) and its subsidiaries.
item 1. business
general
united
technologies corporation was incorporated in delaware in 1934. growth is attributable to
acquisitions and the internal development of existing businesses of the corporation. the
following description of the corporation's business should be read in conjunction with
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
appearing on pages 2 through 13 of the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners,
especially the information contained therein under the heading "business
environment."
the
corporation's operating units include a diverse portfolio of businesses with operations
throughout the world. otis and carrier primarily serve customers in the commercial and
residential property industries worldwide. in 2002, the revenues generated by otis and
carrier operations were 54 percent of the corporation's total segment revenues. pratt
& whitney and the flight systems segment, which includes hamilton sundstrand and
sikorsky aircraft, primarily provide aerospace products and services to commercial and
government customers. in 2002, commercial aerospace and u.s. government aerospace revenues
were approximately 30 percent and 16 percent, respectively, of the corporation's total
segment revenues. revenues in 2002 from outside the united states, including u.s. export
sales, were 55 percent of the corporation's total segment revenues.
as worldwide
businesses, the corporation's operations can be affected by a variety of economic and
other factors, including those described in management's discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations included in the corporation's 2002 annual
report to shareowners and those described in the "business" section of this form
10-k under the heading "other matters relating to the corporation's business as a
whole." each business unit is subject to significant competition from a large number
of companies in the united states and other countries, and each competes on the basis of
price, delivery schedule, product performance and service.
the
corporation's annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports
on form 8-k, and all amendments to those reports will be made available free of charge
through the investor relations section of the corporation's internet website
(http://www.utc.com) as soon as practicable after such material is electronically filed
with, or furnished to, the securities and exchange commission.
description of business by segment
the corporation
conducts its business through four principal segments. the segments were generally
determined based on the management structure of the businesses and the grouping of similar
operating companies, where each management organization has general operating autonomy
over diversified products and services. the principal products of each segment are as
follows:
otis
--otis elevators, escalators,
automated people movers and service.
carrier
--carrier commercial and
residential heating, ventilating and air conditioning ("hvac") systems and
equipment, commercial and transport refrigeration equipment, and aftermarket service and
components.
pratt & whitney
--pratt & whitney commercial,
general aviation and military aircraft engines, parts, service, industrial gas turbines
and space propulsion.
flight systems
--hamilton sundstrand aerospace
products and aftermarket services include aircraft power generation and management
systems, engine and flight controls, auxiliary power units, environmental control systems
and propeller systems. industrial products include air compressors, metering devices,
fluid handling equipment and gear drives.
-- sikorsky commercial and
military helicopters, aftermarket helicopter and aircraft parts and service.
segment financial data for the years 2000 through 2002,
including financial information about foreign and domestic operations and export sales, is
included in note 17 of notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 31 through 33
of the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners.
otis
otis is the world's largest elevator and
escalator manufacturing, installation and service company. otis designs, manufactures,
sells and installs a wide range of passenger and freight elevators, including hydraulic
and traction elevators for low- and medium-speed applications and gearless elevators for
high-speed passenger operations in high-rise buildings. otis also produces a broad line of
escalators and, for horizontal transportation, moving walkways and shuttles. in addition
to new equipment, otis provides modernization products and services to upgrade elevators
and escalators as well as maintenance services for a substantial portion of the elevators
and escalators that it sells, as well as those of other manufacturers. otis serves an
international customer base, principally in the commercial and residential property
industries.
revenues
generated by otis' international operations were 77 and 76 percent of total otis segment
revenues in 2002 and 2001, respectively. at december 31, 2002, otis' business backlog was
$4,177 million as compared to $3,777 million at december 31, 2001. substantially all of
the business backlog at december 31, 2002 is expected to be realized as sales in 2003.
carrier
carrier is the world's largest manufacturer of
commercial and residential hvac systems and equipment. carrier is also a leading producer
of commercial and transport refrigeration equipment, and provides aftermarket service and
components for its products and those of other manufacturers in both the hvac and
refrigeration industries. the products manufactured by carrier include chillers and air
handling equipment, commercial unitary systems, residential split systems, residential
furnaces, duct-free split systems and window air conditioners, as well as transport
refrigeration, commercial refrigeration and food service equipment. carrier's products and
services are sold under carrier and other brand names to building contractors and building
owners, homeowners, shipping and trucking companies, supermarkets and food service
companies. sales are made both directly to the customer and through manufacturers'
representatives, distributors, dealers, individual wholesalers and retail outlets.
carrier has
grown significantly in recent years as a result of acquisitions. major acquisitions have
included the august 1999 acquisition of international comfort products corporation, a
north american residential and light commercial hvac equipment company; the february 2000
acquisition of the electrolux group's commercial refrigeration business in europe; and the
november 2000 acquisition of specialty equipment companies, a manufacturer of commercial
refrigeration and food service equipment in the united states and europe. carrier
participates in a joint venture with toshiba corporation in japan. carrier and the joint
venture company, toshiba carrier corporation, also participate in hvac joint ventures in
the u.k. and thailand.
revenues
generated by carrier's international operations, including u.s. export sales, were 48 and
47 percent of total carrier segment revenues in 2002 and 2001, respectively. at december
31, 2002, carrier's business backlog was $1,028 million as compared to $1,042 million at
december 31, 2001. substantially all of the business backlog at december 31, 2002 is
expected to be realized as sales in 2003.
pratt & whitney
pratt & whitney is among the world's
leading suppliers of commercial, general aviation and military aircraft engines. pratt
& whitney provides overhaul and repair services, spare parts, and fleet management
services for the engines it produces and other commercial and military jet and gas turbine
engines. pratt & whitney products are sold principally to aircraft manufacturers,
airlines and other aircraft operators, aircraft leasing companies and the u.s. and foreign
governments. pratt & whitney sales in the u.s. and canada are made directly to the
customer and, to a limited extent, through independent distributors. other export sales
are made with the assistance of independent sales representatives. sales to the boeing
company ("boeing") and airbus industrie ("airbus") were 11 and 10
percent, respectively, of total pratt & whitney revenues in 2002, before taking into
account discounts or financial incentives offered to customers.
pratt &
whitney currently produces two families of large commercial jet engines: the pw4000 engine
series (powering the airbus a310-300, a300-600 and a330-200/300 series of aircraft; the
boeing 747-400, 767-200/300 and 777-200/300 series of aircraft; and the out-of-production
boeing md-11 aircraft) and the pw2000 engine series (powering the boeing 757-200/pf/300
aircraft). also, pratt & whitney has entered into a memorandum of understanding with
airbus to develop, market and sell pw6000 series engines for installation on airbus a318
aircraft, expected to enter service during 2005. the pw6000 was certified by u.s.
airworthiness authorities in january 2002.
in view of the
risk and cost associated with developing new engines, pratt & whitney has entered into
certain collaboration arrangements in which costs, revenues and risks are shared. at
december 31, 2002, the interests of other participants in pratt & whitney's current
commercial jet engine production programs ranged from 14 to 29 percent. pratt &
whitney also has a 33 percent interest in the international aero engines collaboration
that sells and supports v2500 engines. applications for the v2500 engine include airbus'
a319, a320 and a321 aircraft and boeing's out-of-production md-90. pratt & whitney has
a 50 percent interest in an alliance with ge aircraft engines to develop, market and
manufacture the gp7000 engine. at december 31, 2002, other participants held interests
totaling 35 percent in pratt & whitney's share of this program. the alliance
anticipates the first full engine test in 2004. the new engine will power the airbus a380
aircraft, with first aircraft deliveries scheduled for 2006.
pratt &
whitney currently produces three military aircraft engines: the f119 (powering the
two-engine f/a-22 fighter aircraft), the f100 (powering two-engine f-15 and single-engine
f-16 fighter aircraft) and the f117 (powering four-engine c-17 transport aircraft). the
f119 and f117 are currently the only sources of propulsion for the f/a-22 fighter aircraft
and c-17 transport aircraft, respectively. pratt & whitney is under contract with the
u.s. air force ("usaf") to complete flight-testing and initial production of
f119 engines through 2003. all of pratt & whitney's f100 sales contracts are with the
usaf or with foreign governments. all of pratt & whitney's f117 sales contracts are
with either the usaf or boeing. pratt & whitney is also under contract with the usaf
to develop the f135 engine, a derivative of pratt & whitney's f119 engine, to power
the single-engine f-35 joint strike fighter aircraft being developed by lockheed martin.
management cannot predict with certainty whether, when, and in what quantities pratt &
whitney will produce f135 engines.
pratt &
whitney canada ("p&wc") is a world leader in aviation engines powering
business, regional, utility and military aircraft and helicopters. p&wc also designs
and manufactures engines for auxiliary power units and industrial applications. its
operations and service network span the globe.
pratt &
whitney space propulsion ("sp") produces hydrogen fueled rocket engines for
commercial and u.s. government space applications, advanced turbo pumps for nasa's space
shuttle program and solid fuel propulsion systems for civil and military
applications. sp also has a 50 percent interest in a joint venture with npo
energomash that provides kerosene fueled rd-180 rocket engines for satellite launch
applications.
pratt &
whitney power systems ("pwps") supplies industrial power generation and
mechanical drive equipment in the one megawatt to 50 megawatts range. pwps also provides
gas turbines for marine propulsion applications.
revenues from
pratt & whitney's international operations, including u.s. export sales, were 54
percent and 50 percent of total pratt & whitney segment revenues in each of 2002 and
2001, respectively. at december 31, 2002, pratt & whitney's business backlog was
$13,030 million, including $2,001 million of u.s. government funded contracts and
subcontracts, as compared to $11,161 million and $1,949 million, respectively, at december
31, 2001. of the total pratt & whitney backlog at december 31, 2002, approximately
$4,365 million is expected to be realized as sales in 2003. pratt & whitney's backlog
includes certain contracts for which actual costs may ultimately exceed total revenues.
see note 1 to consolidated financial statements on page 21 of the corporation's 2002
annual report to shareholders for a description of the corporation's accounting for
long-term contracts.
flight systems
the corporation's flight systems business
provides global products and services through hamilton sundstrand and sikorsky aircraft.
the corporation acquired sundstrand corporation in 1999 and combined it with the
operations of the former hamilton standard.
hamilton
sundstrand provides aerospace and industrial products and aftermarket services for
diversified industries worldwide. hamilton sundstrand's principal aerospace products
include aircraft power generation management and distribution systems; environmental,
flight, fuel and engine control systems; fuel and special fluid pumps; auxiliary power
units; propeller systems; electronic controls and components; and specialized instruments
and chemical detection and monitoring equipment. hamilton sundstrand is also the prime
contractor for nasa's space suit/life support system and produces environmental control,
life support, mechanical systems and thermal control systems for international space
programs. hamilton sundstrand's principal industrial products include air compressors,
metering devices, fluid handling equipment and gear drives.
hamilton
sundstrand's aerospace businesses serve commercial, military, regional, business and
general aviation, as well as space and undersea applications. aftermarket services include
spare parts, overhaul and repair, engineering and technical support and fleet maintenance
programs. hamilton sundstrand aerospace products are sold directly to airframe
manufacturers, the u.s. government, aircraft operators and independent distributors.
hamilton sundstrand sales of aerospace products to boeing, pratt & whitney and airbus,
collectively, including sales where the u.s. government was the ultimate customer, were
12.1 percent of flight systems segment sales in 2002.
hamilton
sundstrand's industrial products serve industries involved with raw material processing,
bulk material handling and construction (including mining; metal and other material
processing; hydrocarbon and chemical processing; and water and waste water treatment).
these industrial products are sold directly to end-users, through manufacturer
representatives and distributors and through engineering contractors. demand for hamilton
sundstrand's industrial products is tied closely to the level of general economic
activity. hamilton sundstrand believes that its research and development, proprietary
technology, and product and service reputations have been significant in maintaining its
competitive standing.
sikorsky is one
of the world's largest manufacturers of military and commercial helicopters and is the
primary supplier of transport helicopters to the u.s. army and navy. sikorsky also
supplies helicopters to foreign governments and the worldwide commercial market.
sikorsky's aftermarket business, which includes spare parts sales, overhaul and repair and
service contracts for helicopters and other aircraft, has become a more significant part
of sikorsky's business in recent years. during 2002, sikorsky acquired derco holding, a
supplier of military aircraft logistics and component distribution, component repairs, and
aftermarket program management.
current
production programs at sikorsky include the black hawk medium-transport helicopter for the
u.s. and foreign governments; the mh-60 fleet combat support helicopter for the u.s. navy;
the international naval hawk for multiple naval missions; and the s-76 intermediate-sized
helicopter for commercial operations. under a multi-year contract with the u.s.
government, sikorsky has delivered 249 black hawk helicopters, with the remaining three
helicopters scheduled for delivery in 2003. a new multi-year contract was signed in 2002
that provides for additional deliveries of 80 army and 82 navy helicopters over the next
five years. under a $238 million research, development and test contract, sikorsky is
performing work to evaluate the potential for upgrading the u.s. army fleet of black
hawks.
after receiving
type certification from the federal aviation administration in december 2002, sikorsky is
entering into the final stages of development of the s-92 helicopter for the commercial
market. an h-92 variant of the helicopter for the military market is also in development.
a portion of the development work is being carried out in collaboration with companies in
brazil, the people's republic of china, japan, spain and taiwan. marketing efforts for the
s-92 and h-92 are in process and several non-binding deposit agreements have been received
for s-92 helicopters. deliveries of the first s-92 helicopters are planned for 2004.
management cannot predict with certainty whether, when, and in what quantities s-92 and
h-92 helicopters will be produced.
sikorsky has a
50 percent interest in a joint venture with boeing for the development of the rah-66
comanche light attack and reconnaissance helicopter. the sikorsky-boeing joint venture is
performing under a cost reimbursement contract awarded by the u.s. army in 1991. during
november 2002, the u.s. army awarded the joint venture a revised engineering and
manufacturing development contract that increased the contract value by $3.4 billion to
$6.6 billion. under the revised contract, the joint venture is required to deliver nine
comanche helicopters in 2005 and 2006 for test and evaluation purposes and to provide
aircraft capability improvements to these helicopters through 2011. management cannot
predict with certainty whether, when, and in what quantities comanche helicopters will be
produced.
revenues
generated by the flight systems segment's international operations, including export
sales, were 25 percent and 39 percent of total flight systems segment revenues in 2002 and
2001, respectively. at december 31, 2002, flight systems' business backlog was $3,642
million, including $1,839 million under funded contracts and subcontracts with the u.s.
government, as compared to $3,784 million and $1,743 million, respectively, at december
31, 2001. of the total flight systems segment backlog at december 31, 2002, approximately
$2,664 million is expected to be realized as sales in 2003.
pratt & whitney and flight systems aerospace and
defense products
the corporation's aerospace and defense
businesses are subject to substantial competition from domestic manufacturers, foreign
manufacturers (whose governments sometimes provide research and development assistance,
marketing subsidies and other assistance for their commercial products) and companies that
obtain regulatory agency approval to manufacture spare parts. in particular, pratt &
whitney experiences intense competition for new commercial airframe/engine combinations.
engine suppliers may offer substantial discounts and other financial incentives,
performance and operating cost guarantees, participation in financing arrangements and
maintenance agreements. customer selections of engines and components can also have a
significant impact on later sales of parts and services. pratt & whitney's major
competitors in the sale of engines are general electric company and rolls royce plc. (for
information regarding customer financing commitments, participation in guarantees of
customer financing arrangements and performance and operating cost guarantees, see notes 4
and 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 22 through 23 and 30 through
31 of the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners.)
other factors
that can affect the results of the corporation's aerospace and defense businesses include
lengthy and costly development cycles and heavy dependence on a small number of products
and programs. sales of military products are affected by defense budgets in the u.s. and
other countries, u.s. foreign policy and the level of activity in military flight
operations. military spare parts sales are affected by policies of the u.s. and other
governments of purchasing parts from suppliers other than the original equipment
manufacturer. pratt & whitney's and flight systems' operations can also be affected by
a variety of economic and other factors including those described in management's
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations included in the
corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners and those described in the
"business" section of this form 10-k under the heading "other matters
relating to the corporation's business as a whole".
significant
elements of pratt & whitney's and flight systems' business, such as spare parts sales
for engines and aircraft in service, have short lead times. therefore, backlog information
may not be indicative of future demand. also, since a substantial portion of the backlog
for commercial customers is scheduled for delivery beyond 2003, changes in economic
conditions may cause customers to request that firm orders be rescheduled or canceled.
other
utc power develops and markets distributed
power generation equipment producing up to one megawatt, including fuel cells and
microturbines, for use in commercial transportation and light industrial businesses,
institutions and office buildings. utc fuel cells, llc ("utc fuel cells"), a
part of utc power, is a world leader in fuel cell production and development for
commercial, transportation, residential and space applications. utc fuel cells is the sole
supplier of fuel cells for u.s. space missions and also offers a commercially available
fuel cell power plant, known as the pc25. over 250 pc25 units have been delivered
around the world. fuel cell power plants using proton exchange membrane technology
("pem") are currently in development for transportation, commercial stationary,
and residential applications. utc fuel cells is working with automakers and bus
manufacturers, as well as the u.s. department of energy, on development and demonstration
programs for vehicles. in december 2002, utc fuel cells signed an agreement to license its
pem technology on a non-exclusive basis to nissan motor company ltd. ("nissan")
and to engage in joint development of this technology for automotive applications. in that
same month nissan unveiled its zero-emission x-trail vehicle powered by a utc fuel cells
power plant. in 2001, utc fuel cells and shell hydrogen us formed a joint venture to
develop, manufacture and sell fuel processors and hydrogen generation systems.
although fuel
cells are believed to be superior to conventional power generators in terms of efficiency
and environmental characteristics, current production rates remain low across the
industry. continued technology advancement and wider market acceptance are required to
reduce the production cost of fuel cell components and power plants. government support
for fuel cells could also impact the advancement of the technology. there is still
significant uncertainty as to whether and when commercially viable pem fuel cells will be
produced. utc fuel cells continues to seek strategic partners to develop sources of
supply, as well as marketing and distribution channels. toshiba corporation owns a 10
percent equity interest in utc fuel cells.
the results of
utc power are included in the "eliminations and other" category in the segment
financial data in note 17 of notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 31
through 33 of the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners.
other matters relating to the corporation's
business as a whole
research and development
since changes in technology can have a
significant impact on the corporation's operations and competitive position, the
corporation spends substantial amounts of its own funds on research and development. such
expenditures, which are charged to expense as incurred, were $1,191 million, or 4.3
percent of total sales in 2002, as compared with $1,254 million or 4.6 percent of total
sales in 2001 and $1,302 million or 5.0 percent of total sales in 2000. the corporation
also performs research and development work under contracts funded by the u.s. government
and other customers. such contract research and development, which is performed
principally in the pratt & whitney segment and to a lesser extent in the flight
systems segment, amounted to $1,189 million in 2002, as compared with $846 million in 2001
and $865 million in 2000.
contracts, other risk factors, environmental and other
matters
u.s. government contracts are subject to termination at the
convenience of the u.s. government, in which event the corporation normally would be
entitled to reimbursement for its allowable costs incurred plus a reasonable profit. most
of the corporation's government sales are made under fixed-price type contracts;
approximately $1.6 billion of the corporation's total sales for 2002 were made under
cost-reimbursement type contracts.
like many
defense contractors, the corporation has received allegations from the u.s. government
that some contract prices should be reduced because cost or pricing data submitted in
negotiation of the contract prices may not have been in conformance with government
regulations. the corporation has made voluntary refunds in those cases it believes
appropriate, has settled some allegations, and does not believe that any further price
reductions that may be required will have a material effect upon its financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
the corporation
is now, and believes that in light of the current government contracting environment it
will be, the subject of one or more government investigations. see item 3 - legal
proceedings on pages 8 through 9 of this form 10-k and note 16 of notes to consolidated
financial statements on page 31 of the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners for
further discussion. if the corporation or one of its business units were charged with
wrongdoing as a result of any of these investigations, it could be suspended from bidding
on or receiving awards of new government contracts pending the completion of legal
proceedings. if convicted or found liable, the corporation could be fined and debarred
from new government contracting for a period generally not to exceed three years. any
contracts found to be tainted by fraud could be voided by the government.
the corporation
conducts its businesses through subsidiaries and affiliates worldwide, some of which have
significant minority interests. changes in legislation or government policies can have an
impact on the corporation's worldwide operations. for example, governmental regulation of
refrigerants is important to carrier's businesses, while government safety regulations,
restrictions on aircraft engine noise and emissions and government procurement practices
can impact the corporation's aerospace and defense businesses. the corporation's
international operations are also subject to changes in local government regulations and
policies, including those related to investments, exchange controls and repatriation of
earnings. some foreign customers in the corporation's aerospace and defense businesses may
require counter-purchase or offset arrangements as a condition to a sale, such as
requiring the corporation to purchase supplies in the customer's country or to participate
in manufacturing and financial support projects.
the
corporation's operations are subject to environmental regulation by federal, state and
local authorities in the united states and regulatory authorities with jurisdiction over
its foreign operations. the corporation has incurred and will likely continue to incur
liabilities under various state and federal statutes for the cleanup of pollutants
previously released into the environment. the corporation does not anticipate that
compliance with current provisions relating to the protection of the environment or that
any payments it may be required to make for these cleanup liabilities will have a material
adverse effect upon its cash flows, competitive position, financial condition or results
of operations. (environmental matters are further addressed in management's discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations on page 11 and notes 1 and 16 of
notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 21 and 31 of the corporation's 2002
annual report to shareowners.)
most of the laws
governing environmental matters include criminal provisions. if the corporation were
convicted of a violation of the federal clean air act or the clean water act, the facility
or facilities involved in the violation would be ineligible to be used in performing any
u.s. government contract awarded to the corporation until the environmental protection
agency certified that the condition giving rise to the violation had been corrected.
while the
corporation's patents, trademarks, licenses and franchises are cumulatively important to
its business, the corporation does not believe that the loss of any one or group of
related patents, trademarks, licenses or franchises would have a material adverse effect
on the overall business of the corporation or on any of its operating segments.
the corporation
has sought cost reductions in its purchases of materials, components and supplies. these
cost reductions may be achieved through a number of mechanisms, including consolidating
its purchases, reducing the number of suppliers, strategic global sourcing and using
online bidding competitions among potential suppliers. in some instances, the corporation
is reliant upon a single source of supply. greater dependence on global sources of supply
requires reliable transportation and import and export processes. a disruption in
deliveries from its suppliers, therefore, could have an adverse effect on the
corporation's ability to meet its commitments to customers. like other users in the u.s.,
the corporation is largely dependent upon foreign sources for certain of its raw materials
requirements such as cobalt (africa, australia and russia), tantalum (australia and asia),
chromium (africa and kazakhstan) and rhenium (chile and kazakhstan). to alleviate this
dependence and accompanying risk associated with these particular raw materials, the
corporation has a number of ongoing programs which include the increased use of more
readily available materials through material substitutions and the development of new
alloys and the conservation of materials through scrap reclamation and new manufacturing
processes such as near net shape forging. the corporation believes that its supply
management practices in general are based on an appropriate balancing of the associated
risks and the additional cost of other practices. the corporation does not foresee any
unavailability of materials, components, or supplies that will have any material adverse
effect on its overall business, or on any of its business segments, in the near term.
for a discussion
of other risks to which the corporation's financial condition, results of operations or
cash flows may be subject, including the risks of the corporation's international
operations, see the "business" section of this form 10-k under the headings
"general" and "description of business by segment" and management's
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations appearing on
pages 2 through 13 of the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners.
cautionary note concerning factors that may affect future
results
this form 10-k contains statements which, to the extent they are
not statements of historical or present fact, constitute "forward-looking
statements" under the securities laws. from time to time, oral or written
forward-looking statements may also be included in other materials released to the public.
these forward-looking statements are intended to provide management's current expectations
or plans for the future operating and financial performance of the corporation, based on
assumptions currently believed to be valid. forward-looking statements can be identified
by the use of words such as "believe," "expect," "plans,"
"strategy," "prospects," "estimate," "project,"
"anticipate" and other words of similar meaning in connection with a discussion
of future operating or financial performance. these include, among others, statements
relating to:
future earnings and other measurements of financial
performance
future cash flow and uses of cash
the effect of economic downturns or growth in particular
regions
the effect of changes in the level of activity in particular
industries or markets
the scope, nature or impact of acquisition activity and
integration into the corporation's businesses
product developments and new business opportunities
restructuring costs and savings
the outcome of contingencies
future repurchases of common stock
future levels of indebtedness and capital spending
pension plan assumptions and future contributions.
all
forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results
to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements.
this annual report on form 10-k for 2002 includes important information as to risk factors
in the "business" section under the headings "general",
"description of business by segment" and "other matters relating to the
corporation's business as a whole" and in the "legal proceedings" section.
additional important information as to risk factors is included in the corporation's 2002
annual report to shareowners in the section titled "management's discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations", which is incorporated by
reference in this form 10-k. for additional information identifying factors that may cause
actual results to vary materially from those stated in the forward-looking statements, see
the corporation's reports on forms 10-q and 8-k filed with the securities and exchange
commission from time to time.
employees
at december 31, 2002, the corporation's total employment was
approximately 155,000. for discussion of the effects of the corporation's restructuring
actions on employment, see management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations on page 7 and note 12 of notes to consolidated financial statements
on page 29 of the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners.
item 2. properties
the corporation's fixed assets as of december 31, 2002 include
the plants and warehouses described below and a substantial quantity of machinery and
equipment, most of which is general purpose machinery and equipment using special jigs,
tools and fixtures and in many instances having automatic control features and special
adaptations. the plants, warehouses, machinery and equipment in use as of december 31,
2002 are in good operating condition, are well maintained, and substantially all are in
regular use.
the following
square footage numbers are approximations. at december 31, 2002, the corporation operated
(a) plants in the u.s. which had 32.5 million square feet, of which 4.4 million square
feet were leased; (b) plants outside the u.s. which had 24.7 million square feet, of which
2.4 million square feet were leased; (c) warehouses in the u.s. which had 10.9 million
square feet, of which 7.7 million square feet were leased; and (d) warehouses outside the
u.s. which had 4.8 million square feet, of which 3.5 million square feet were leased.
for discussion
of the effect of the corporation's restructuring actions on production facilities, see
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations on
page 7 and note 12 of notes to the consolidated financial statements on page 29 of the
corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners.
management
believes that the fixed assets capitalized and the facilities in operation at december 31,
2002 for the production of the corporation's products are suitable and adequate for the
business conducted therein in the current business environment, are being appropriately
utilized consistent with experience and have sufficient production capacity for their
present intended purposes. utilization of the facilities varies based on demand for the
products. the corporation continuously reviews its anticipated requirements for facilities
and, based on that review, may from time to time adjust its facilities needs.
item 3. legal proceedings
as previously reported, the department of defense (dod) and the
corporation are litigating whether pratt & whitney's government cost accounting
practices for certain engine parts are acceptable. the litigation, filed in 1994 with the
armed services board of contract appeals ("asbca"), no. 47416 et al., relates to
the accounting for engine parts produced by foreign companies under commercial engine
collaboration programs from 1984 through 1995. on july 31, 2001, the asbca issued a
decision in favor of the corporation. the dod appealed this decision to the court of
appeals for the federal circuit on november 29, 2001. on january 15, 2003, the court of
appeals reversed the asbca and remanded the case to the asbca for further proceedings. the
corporation intends to seek reconsideration of this decision by the court. the dod has
claimed approximately $158 million in damages, and approximately $103 million in interest
through december 31, 1996. should the dod ultimately prevail on liability, damages could
be larger than initially claimed because the dod may amend its claim to include the period
after 1995 to the present, and interest could continue to accrue from january 1, 1997.
as previously
reported, the corporation has pending against it one qui tam complaint under the civil
false claims act in united states district court for the district of connecticut: u.s. ex
rel. drake v. norden systems, inc. and utc, no. 394cv00963 (filed july 1997, and involving
allegations of improper accounting for fixed assets). the civil false claims act provides
for penalties in a civil case of up to $10,000 per false claim submitted. the number of
false claims implicated by this qui tam complaint cannot currently be ascertained;
however, if determined adversely to the corporation, the number could result in
significant penalties. the qui tam relator has claimed unspecified damages (trebled) and
penalties, and the department of justice has declined to take over the litigation. in
august 2000 and august 2001, the court dismissed portions of the complaint. in october
2002, the court ordered the parties to address whether the court should dismiss the case
entirely. additional papers were filed in november 2002, and a decision by the court is
expected in 2003.
in march 1999,
the department of justice filed a civil false claims act complaint against the corporation
in united states district court for the southern district of ohio (western division), no.
c-3-99-093. this lawsuit relates to the "fighter engine competition" between
pratt & whitney's f100 engine and ge's f110 engine, for contracts awarded by the u.s.
air force between fiscal years 1985 and 1990, inclusive. the government alleges that pratt
& whitney inflated its estimated costs for purchased parts and withheld data that
would have revealed the overstatements. in mid-2002, the court denied motions filed by the
corporation that could have resulted in dismissal of all or part of the government's
claims. the corporation has requested that the court reconsider this denial. the
government's most recent quantification of its claimed damages in august 2001 includes
false claims act damages of approximately $76 million (subject to trebling, plus penalties
of up to $10,000 per false claim), and damages under the truth in negotiations act of
approximately $65 million plus interest of approximately $81 million. interest could
continue to accrue on this portion of the government's claim.
like many other
companies in recent years, the corporation or its subsidiaries have been named as a
defendant in lawsuits alleging personal injury as a result of exposure to asbestos
integrated into certain of the corporation's products or premises. while the corporation
has never manufactured asbestos and no longer incorporates it in any
currently-manufactured products, certain of its historical products, like those of many
other manufacturers, have contained components incorporating asbestos. the corporation has
made no payment in a substantial majority of the cases closed to date. the remainder of
the resolved cases have settled for amounts that are not material to the corporation, and
have been supported in part by insurance. at present, the corporation is named in
approximately 850 lawsuits involving approximately 16,000 individual claimants. more than
13,000 of these claimants are joined in seven lawsuits in circuit court in various
counties in mississippi that were filed or amended during 2002 to include the corporation
or certain of its subsidiaries. each of these mississippi lawsuits names from 200 to more
than 400 other companies as defendants along with the corporation or its subsidiaries. the
complaints do not identify any products of the corporation or its named subsidiaries, or
specify the amount of damages claimed. nor do they allege which claimants, if any, were
exposed to asbestos attributable to the corporation's products or premises, or the extent,
if any, to which such claimants have been harmed. no discovery or other pretrial
proceedings to develop such information have yet occurred.
the corporation
does not believe that resolution of any of the foregoing or any other legal matters will
have a material adverse effect upon the corporation's competitive position, results of
operations, cash flows, or financial condition. a further discussion of government
contracts and related investigations, as well as a discussion of the corporation's
environmental liabilities, can be found under the heading "other matters relating to
the corporation's business as a whole  contracts, other risk factors, environmental
and other matters" in item 1  business on pages 6 through 7 of this form 10-k.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
no matters were submitted to security holders for a vote during
the fourth quarter ended december 31, 2002.
----- executive officers of the registrant
the following persons are executive officers of united
technologies corporation:
name
title
other business experience
since 1/1/98
age
2/1/03
tesfaye aklilu
vice president, quality (since
1999)
vice president, quality, pratt
& whitney
dean c. borgman
president, sikorsky aircraft
(since 1998)
senior vice president, the boeing
company
ari bousbib
president, otis elevator (since
april 2002)
executive vice president and
chief operating officer, otis elevator; vice president, corporate strategy and
development, united technologies corporation
kent l. brittan
vice president, supply management
(since 1997)
-------
william l. bucknall, jr.
senior vice president, human
resources and organization
(since 1992)
-------
john f. cassidy, jr.
senior vice president
science and technology (since november 1998) and vice president, united technologies
research center (since 1993)
vice president, united
technologies research center
louis chenevert
president, pratt & whitney
(since 1999)
executive vice
president-operations, pratt & whitney
geraud darnis
president, carrier corporation
(since 2001)
president, ut power solutions;
president, carrier asia pacific operations; president, carrier europe-middle east-africa
george david
chairman (since 1997), president
(since february 2002), and chief executive officer (since 1994)
president, united technologies
corporation (1992-1999)
john j. doucette
vice president, chief information
officer (since 2000)
vice president & chief
information officer, otis elevator; vice president & chief information officer, ge
lighting; chief information officer, ge silicones
ruth r. harkin
senior vice president,
international affairs and government relations, united technologies corporation and chair,
united technologies international (since 1997)
-------
george h. jamison iii
vice president, communications
(since january 2003)
vice president, communications
general motors' hughes electronic corporation; manager, international communications,
general electric company
robert f. leduc
executive vice president and
chief operating officer, pratt & whitney (since 2000) and president, large commercial
engines (since 2001)
executive vice president, pratt
& whitney
ronald f. mckenna
president, hamilton sundstrand
corporation (since 1999)
executive vice president,
sundstrand corporation and chief operating officer, sundstrand aerospace
david g. nord
vice president, controller
(since 2000)
acting controller; assistant
controller, financial reporting and accounting, united technologies corporation
stephen f. page
vice chairman (since april 2002)
and chief financial officer (since september 2002)
president and chief executive
officer, otis elevator; executive vice president and chief financial officer, united
technologies corporation
thomas i. rogan
vice president, treasurer
(since 2001)
vice president-finance, hamilton
sundstrand
william h. trachsel
senior vice president, general
counsel and secretary (since 1998)
vice president, secretary and
deputy general counsel, united technologies corporation
all of the officers serve at the pleasure of the board of
directors of united technologies corporation or the subsidiary designated.
item 5. market for registrant's common equity and related
stockholder matters
the comparative stock data appearing on page 34 of the
corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners containing the following data relating to
the corporation's common stock: principal market, quarterly high and low sales prices,
approximate number of shareowners and frequency and amount of dividends is hereby
incorporated by reference.
item 6. selected financial data
the five year summary appearing inside the front cover of the
corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners containing the following data: revenues,
net income, basic and diluted earnings per share, cash dividends per common share, total
assets and long-term debt is hereby incorporated by reference. see notes to consolidated
financial statements appearing on pages 20 to 33 of the corporation's 2002 annual report
to shareowners for a description of any accounting changes and acquisitions or
dispositions of businesses materially affecting the comparability of the information
reflected in such five year summary.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations appearing on pages 2 through 13 of the corporation's 2002 annual
report to shareowners is hereby incorporated by reference.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
for information concerning market risk sensitive instruments,
see discussion under the headings "market risk and risk management" in
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations on
page 11 of the corporation's annual report to shareowners and "hedging activity"
in note 1, "summary of accounting principles", note 13, "foreign
exchange" and note 14, "financial instruments" of notes to consolidated
financial statements on pages 21 and 29 through 30 of the corporation's 2002 annual report
to shareowners.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
the 2002 and 2001 consolidated balance sheet, and other
financial statements for the years 2002, 2001, and 2000, together with the report thereon
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp dated january 16, 2003 appearing on pages 15 through 19 in
the corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners are incorporated by reference in this
form 10-k. the 2002 and 2001 selected quarterly financial data appearing on page 34 in the
corporation's 2002 annual report to shareowners are incorporated by reference in this form
10-k.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
none.
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
the information required by item 10 with
respect to directors is incorporated herein by reference to the section of the
corporation's proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareowners entitled
"general information concerning the board of directorsnominees."
information regarding executive officers is contained in part i of this form 10-k under
the heading "--executive officers of the registrant." information concerning
section 16(a) compliance is incorporated by reference to the section of the corporation's
proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting of shareowners entitled "section 16(a)
beneficial ownership reporting compliance."
item 11. executive compensation
the information required by item 11 is incorporated herein by
reference to the sections of the corporation's proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting
of shareowners entitled "report of the committee on compensation and executive
development" and "compensation of named executive officers." such
incorporation by reference shall not be deemed to specifically incorporate by reference
the information referred to in item 402(a)(8) of regulation s-k.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
the information required by item 12 is incorporated herein by
reference to the sections of the corporation's proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting
of shareowners entitled "security ownership of directors and executive officers"
and "equity compensation plan information."
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
the information required by item 13 is incorporated herein by
reference to the section of the corporation's proxy statement for the 2003 annual meeting
of shareowners entitled "certain transactions and business relationships."
item 14. controls and procedures
during the 90-day period prior to the filing date of this
report, management, including the corporation's chief executive officer and chief
financial officer, evaluated the effectiveness of the design and operation of the
corporation's disclosure controls and procedures. based upon, and as of the date of that
evaluation, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that the
disclosure controls and procedures were effective, in all material respects, to ensure
that information required to be disclosed in the reports the corporation files and submits
under the exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported as and when
required.
there have been
no significant changes in the corporation's internal controls or in other factors which
could significantly affect internal controls subsequent to the date the corporation
carried out its evaluation. there were no significant deficiencies or material weaknesses
identified in the evaluation and, therefore, no corrective actions were taken.
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form 8-k
(a) financial statements, financial statement schedules and exhibits
(1) financial statements (incorporated by reference from the 2002 annual
report to shareowners):
page number in annual report
report of independent auditors
consolidated statement of operations for the
three years
ended december 31, 2002
consolidated balance sheetdecember 31, 2002 and 2001
consolidated statement of cash flows for the
three years ended december 31, 2002
notes to consolidated financial statements
selected quarterly financial data (unaudited)
(2)
financial statement schedule for the three years ended december 31, 2002:
page number
in form 10-k
report of independent auditors on financial statement
schedule
s-i
schedule ii - valuation and qualifying
accounts
s-ii
consent of independent auditors
f-i
all other schedules are omitted because they are not
applicable or the required information is shown in the financial statements or the notes
thereto.
(3) exhibits:
the following list of exhibits includes exhibits submitted
with this form 10-k as filed with the sec and those incorporated by reference to other
filings.
exhibit
number
3(i)
restated
certificate of incorporation, incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(i) to the
corporation's quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly
period ended june 30, 2000.
3(ii)
bylaws
as amended and restated effective march 21, 2001, incorporated by reference to exhibit
3(ii) to the corporation's quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812)
for quarterly period ended march 31, 2001.
4.1
amended
and restated indenture, dated as of may 1, 2001, between the corporation and the bank of
new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(a) to the corporation's
registration statement on form s-3, file no. 333-60276, filed with the sec on may 4,
2001). the corporation hereby agrees to furnish to the commission upon request a copy of
each other instrument defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the corporation
and its consolidated subsidiaries and any unconsolidated subsidiaries.
10.1
united
technologies corporation annual executive incentive compensation plan, as amended.*
10.2
united
technologies corporation executive estate preservation program, incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(iv) to the corporation's annual report on form 10-k (commission file number
1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.3
united
technologies corporation pension preservation plan, as amended.**
10.4
united
technologies corporation senior executive severance plan, incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(vi) to the corporation's annual report on form 10-k (commission file number
1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.5
united
technologies corporation deferred compensation plan, as amended.**
10.6
united
technologies corporation long term incentive plan, as amended.*
10.7
united
technologies corporation executive disability, income protection and standard separation
agreement plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(xii) to the corporation's annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31,
1992.
10.8
united
technologies corporation directors' restricted stock/unit program, incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10(xiii) to the corporation's annual report on form 10-k (commission
file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.9
united
technologies corporation board of directors deferred stock unit plan*, and amendment 1
thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10)(iii)(a)(1) to the corporation's report
on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june 30, 2000).
10.10
united
technologies corporation pension replacement plan, as amended and restated effective
january 1, 1996.**
10.11
united
technologies corporation special retention and stock appreciation program, incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10(xvi) to the corporation's report on form 10-q (commission file
number 1-812) for quarterly period ended september 30, 1995.
10.12
united
technologies corporation nonemployee director stock option plan*, amendment 1 thereto
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10)(iii)(a)(2) to the corporation's report on form
10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june 30, 2000), amendment 2
thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(iii)(a)(1) to the corporation's report on
form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june 30, 2001),
amendment 3 thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.17 to the corporation's
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ending december
31, 2001 and amendment 4 thereto.**
10.13
united
technologies corporation employee stock option plan.**
10.14
united
technologies corporation employee scholar program.**
statement
re: computation of per share earnings.**
statements
re: computation of ratios.**
annual
report to shareowners for the year ended december 31, 2002 (except for the pages and
information thereof expressly incorporated by reference in this form 10-k, the annual
report to shareowners is provided solely for the information of the securities and
exchange commission and is not to be deemed "filed" as part of this form
10-k).**
subsidiaries
of the registrant.**
consent
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp, included as page f-i of this form 10-k.
powers
of attorney of jean-pierre garnier, jamie s. gorelick, charles r. lee, richard d.
mccormick, frank p. popoff, h. patrick swygert, andre villeneuve, h. a. wagner and sanford
i. weill.**
notes to
exhibits list:
*
incorporated by reference to exhibit of the same number to the corporation's annual report
on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1995.** submitted electronically herewith.
exhibits 10.1 through 10.14 are contracts, arrangements or
compensatory plans filed as exhibits pursuant to item 15(c) of the requirements for form
10-k reports.
(b) no reports on form 8-k were filed by the corporation during the quarter ended
december 31, 2002.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
united technologies corporation
(registrant)
by: stephen f. page
vice chairman and chief financial officer
date: february 10, 2003
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities indicated, on the date set forth below.
signature
title
date
george david
chairman, director,
president and chief executive officer
february 10, 2003
stephen f. page
vice chairman,
director and chief financial officer
february 10, 2003
david g. nord
vice president,
controller
february 10, 2003
jean-pierre garnier *
director )
*by: william h.
trachsel
attorney-in-fact
jamie s. gorelick *
director )
date: february 10,
charles r. lee *
director )
richard d. mccormick
*
director )
frank p. popoff *
director )
h. patrick swygert *
director )
andre villeneuve *
director )
h. a. wagner *
director )
sanford i. weill *
director )
certification
i, george david, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form
10-k of united technologies corporation;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does
not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual
report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial
statements, and other financial information included in this annual report, fairly present
in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of
the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual report;
4.
the registrant's other certifying officers and
i are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules 13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and we have:
a) designed such disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b) evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrant's disclosure controls and procedures as of a date within 90 days prior to the
filing date of this annual report (the "evaluation date"); and
c) presented in this annual report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrant's other certifying officers and
i have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation, to the registrant's auditors and
the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent function):
a) all significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal controls which could adversely affect the registrant's
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data and have identified for
the registrant's auditors any material weaknesses in internal controls; and
b) any fraud, whether or not material, that
involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's
internal controls; and
6.
the registrant's other certifying officers and
i have indicated in this annual report whether or not there were significant changes in
internal controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal controls
subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including any corrective actions
with regard to significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date: february 10, 2003
george david
chairman and chief executive officer
certification
i, stephen f. page, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed this annual report on form
10-k of united technologies corporation;
2.
based on my knowledge, this annual report does
not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual
report;
3.
based on my knowledge, the financial
statements, and other financial information included in this annual report, fairly present
in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of
the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual report;
4.
the registrant's other certifying officers and
i are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in exchange act rules 13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and we have:
a) designed such disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities,
particularly during the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b) evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrant's disclosure controls and procedures as of a date within 90 days prior to the
filing date of this annual report (the "evaluation date"); and
c) presented in this annual report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrant's other certifying officers and
i have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation, to the registrant's auditors and
the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent function):
a) all significant deficiencies in the
design or operation of internal controls which could adversely affect the registrant's
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data and have identified for
the registrant's auditors any material weaknesses in internal controls; and
b) any fraud, whether or not material, that
involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's
internal controls; and
6.
the registrant's other certifying officers and
i have indicated in this annual report whether or not there were significant changes in
internal controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal controls
subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including any corrective actions
with regard to significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date: february
10, 2003
stephen f. page
vice chairman and chief financial officer
report of independent auditors on
financial statement schedule
to the board of directors
of united technologies corporation
our audits of the consolidated financial statements
referred to in our report dated january 16, 2003, appearing in the 2002 annual report to
shareowners of united technologies corporation (which report and consolidated financial
statements are incorporated by reference in this annual report on form 10-k) also included
an audit of the financial statement schedule listed in item 15(a)(2) of this form 10-k. in
our opinion, the financial statement schedule presents fairly, in all material respects,
the information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated
financial statements.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
hartford, connecticut
january 16, 2003
s-i
united technologies corporation and subsidiaries
schedule ii - valuation and qualifying accounts
three years ended december 31, 2002
(millions of dollars)
allowances for doubtful accounts and other customer
financing activity:
balance december 31, 1999
$
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off (net)
(27)
other adjustments
(6)
balance december 31, 2000
provision
charged to income
doubtful
accounts written off (net)
(59)
other
adjustments
(33)
balance december 31, 2001
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off (net)
(118)
other adjustments
(41)
balance december 31,
$
future income tax benefits - valuation
allowance:
balance december 31, 1999
$
additions charged to income tax expense
reductions credited to income tax expense
(49)
balance december 31, 2000
additions charged to income tax expense
reductions credited to income tax expense
(94)
balance december 31, 2001
additions charged to income tax expense
reductions credited to income tax expense
(26)
balance december 31,
$
s-ii
consent of independent auditors
we hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the
registration statement on form s-3 (no. 333-60276), in the registration statement on form
s-4 (no. 333-77991) as amended by post-effective amendment no. 1 on form s-8 (no.
333-77991-01), and in the registration statements on form s-8 (nos. 333-100724,
333-100723, 333-100718, 333-21853, 333-18743, 333-21851, 33-57769, 33-11255, 33-26580,
33-26627, 33-51385, 33-58937, 333-77817 and 333-82911) of united technologies corporation
of our report dated january 16, 2003 relating to the financial statements, which appears
in the 2002 annual report to shareowners, which is incorporated by reference in this
annual report on form 10-k. we also consent to the incorporation by reference of our
report dated january 16, 2003 on the financial statement schedule, which appears on page
s-i of this form 10-k.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
hartford, connecticut
february 10, 2003
f-i
