10-k
d10k.htm
10-k
10-k
table of contents
united states  securities and exchange commission  washington, d.c. 20549    form 10-k
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934  for the fiscal year ended december31, 2008  commission file number
1-812    united technologies corporation  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
06 0570975
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
one financial plaza, hartford, connecticut
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (860)728-7000    securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock ($1 par value)
new york stock exchange
(cusip 913017 10 9)
indicate by check mark if the
registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.yesx.no.
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the
act.yes.nox.  indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter
period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.yesx.no.  indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k (229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated
filer and smaller reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfiler
x
acceleratedfiler
non-acceleratedfiler
(donotcheckifasmallerreportingcompany)
smallerreportingcompany
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the
act).yesnox.  the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates at june30, 2008 was approximately $59,346,468,617, based on the new york stock exchange closing price for such shares
on that date. for purposes of this calculation, the registrant has assumed that its directors and executive officers are affiliates.  at
january31, 2009, there were 942,294,242 shares of common stock outstanding.  list hereunder documents incorporated by
reference and the part of the form 10-k into which the document is incorporated: (1)portions of the united technologies corporation 2008 annual report to shareowners for the fiscal year ended december31, 2008 are incorporated by
reference in parts i, ii and iv hereof; and (2)portions of the united technologies corporation proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting of shareowners are incorporated by reference in part iii hereof.
table of contents
united technologies corporation  index to annual report  on form 10-k
for  year ended december31, 2008
page
parti
item1.
business
cautionary note concerning factors that may affect future results
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
partiii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
table of contents
united technologies corporation  annual report on form 10-k for year ended december31, 2008  whenever
reference is made in this form 10-k to specific sections of utcs 2008 annual report to shareowners (2008 annual report), those sections are incorporated herein by reference. united technologies corporation and its subsidiaries names,
abbreviations thereof, logos, and product and service designators are all either the registered or unregistered trademarks or tradenames of united technologies corporation and its subsidiaries. as used herein, the terms we,
us, our or utc, unless the context requires otherwise, mean united technologies corporation and its subsidiaries.
part i
item1.
business  general  united technologies corporation was incorporated in delaware in 1934. utc provides high technology products and services to the building systems and
aerospace industries worldwide. growth is attributable to acquisitions and the internal development of our existing businesses. the following description of our business should be read in conjunction with managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations in our 2008 annual report, especially the information contained therein under the heading business overview.  our operating units include businesses with operations throughout the world. otis, carrier and utc fire& security (collectively referred to as
the commercial businesses) serve customers in the commercial and residential property industries worldwide. carrier also serves commercial, industrial, transport refrigeration and food service equipment customers. pratt& whitney, hamilton
sundstrand and sikorsky (collectively referred to as the aerospace businesses) primarily serve commercial and government customers in both the original equipment and aftermarket parts and services markets of the aerospace industry. hamilton
sundstrand and pratt& whitney also serve customers in certain industrial markets. for 2008, our commercial and industrial revenues (generated principally by our commercial businesses) were approximately 62 percent of our consolidated
revenues, and commercial aerospace and military aerospace revenues were approximately 21 percent and 17 percent, respectively, of our consolidated revenues. revenues for 2008 from outside the united states, including u.s. export sales, were 64
percent of our total segment revenues.  this form 10-k and our quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k and all
amendments to those reports are available free of charge through the investor relations section of our internet website (http://www.utc.com) under the heading sec filings as soon as reasonably practicable after these reports are
electronically filed with, or furnished to, the securities and exchange commission (sec). our sec filings are also available for reading and copying at the secs public reference room at 100 f street, ne, washington, d.c. 20549. information on
the operation of the public reference room may be obtained by calling the sec at 1-800-sec-0330. in addition, the sec maintains an internet site (http://www.sec.gov) containing reports, proxy and information statements, and other information
regarding issuers that file electronically with the sec.
table of contents
description of business by segment  we conduct our business through six principal segments: otis, carrier, utc fire& security, pratt& whitney, hamilton sundstrand and
sikorsky. each segment groups similar operating companies and the management organization of each segment has general operating autonomy over a range of products and services. the principal products and services of each segment are as follows:
otis
elevators, escalators, moving walkways and service.
carrier
residential, commercial and industrial heating, ventilating, air conditioning (hvac) and refrigeration systems and equipment, food service equipment, building automation and controls,
hvac and refrigeration components and installation, retrofit and aftermarket services.
utcfire&security
fire and special hazard detection and suppression systems and fire fighting equipment, electronic security, monitoring and rapid response systems and service and security personnel
services.
pratt& whitney
commercial, military, business jet and general aviation aircraft engines, parts and services, industrial gas turbines and space propulsion.
hamiltonsundstrand
aerospace products and aftermarket services, including power generation, management and distribution systems, flight systems, engine control systems, environmental control systems, fire
protection and detection systems, auxiliary power units, propeller systems and industrial products, including air compressors, metering pumps and fluid handling equipment.
sikorsky
military and commercial helicopters, aftermarket helicopter and aircraft parts and services.
utc is in the process of incorporating utc powers combined cooling, heating and power
systems business within carriers businesses, its geothermal power systems business within pratt& whitneys power systems business, and its space and defense fuel cell power plant business within hamilton sundstrands
energy, space and defense business. these transitions are expected to be completed during the first half of 2009.  segment financial data
for the years 2006 through 2008, including financial information about foreign and domestic operations and export sales, appears in note 16 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.  otis  otis is the worlds largest elevator and
escalator manufacturing, installation and service company. otis designs, manufactures, sells and installs a wide range of passenger and freight elevators for low-, medium- and high-speed applications, as well as a broad line of escalators and moving
walkways. in addition to new equipment, otis provides modernization products to upgrade elevators and escalators as well as maintenance services for both its products and those of other manufacturers. otis serves customers in the commercial and
residential property industries around the world. otis sells directly to the end customer and, to a limited extent, through sales representatives and distributors.  revenues generated by otis international operations were 80 percent and 81 percent of total otis segment revenues in 2008 and 2007, respectively. at december31, 2008, otis backlog was $15,025 million
as compared to $14,146 million at december31, 2007. of the total otis backlog at december31, 2008, approximately $8,476 million is expected to be realized as sales in 2009.  carrier  carrier is the worlds largest manufacturer and distributor of hvac and refrigeration
systems. it also produces food service equipment and hvac and refrigeration-related controls for residential, commercial, industrial and transportation applications. carrier also provides installation, retrofit and aftermarket services and
components for the products it sells and those of other manufacturers in the hvac and refrigeration industries. carriers products and services are sold under carrier and other brand names to building contractors and owners, homeowners,
transportation companies, retail stores and food service companies. carrier sells directly to the end customer and through manufacturers representatives, distributors, wholesalers, dealers and retail outlets. certain of carriers hvac
businesses are seasonal and can be impacted by weather. carrier customarily offers its customers incentives to purchase products to ensure an adequate supply of its products in the distribution channels.
table of contents
revenues generated by carriers international operations, including u.s. export sales, were 60
percent and 59 percent of total carrier segment revenues in 2008 and 2007, respectively. at december31, 2008, carriers business backlog was $1,996 million as compared to $2,097 million at december31, 2007. substantially all the
business backlog at december31, 2008 is expected to be realized as sales in 2009.  utc fire& security  utc fire& security is a global provider of security and fire safety products and services. we created the utc fire& security segment
in the second quarter of 2005 upon acquiring kidde and adding the kidde industrial, retail and commercial fire safety businesses to the former chubb segment. in the electronic security industry, utc fire& security provides system
integration, installation and service of intruder alarms, access control systems and video surveillance systems under several brand names including chubb. in the fire safety industry, utc fire& security designs, manufactures, integrates,
installs, sells and services a wide range of specialty hazard detection and fixed suppression products and systems and manufactures, sells and services portable fire extinguishers and other fire fighting equipment under several brand names,
including kidde. utc fire& security also provides monitoring, response and security personnel services, including cash-in-transit security, to complement its electronic security and fire safety businesses. its products and services are
used by governments, financial institutions, architects, building owners and developers, security and fire consultants and other end-users requiring a high level of security and fire protection for their businesses and residences.  utc fire& security provides its products and services under chubb, kidde and other brand names and sells directly to the customer as well as
through manufacturer representatives, distributors, dealers and u.s. retail distribution. revenues generated by utc fire& securitys international operations were 83 percent and 82 percent of total utc fire& security segment
revenues in 2008 and 2007, respectively. at december31, 2008, utc fire& securitys business backlog was $1,064 million as compared to $1,084 million at december31, 2007. substantially all the business backlog at
december31, 2008 is expected to be realized as sales in 2009.  pratt& whitney  pratt& whitney is among the worlds leading suppliers of aircraft engines for the
commercial, military, business jet and general aviation markets. pratt& whitneys global services provides maintenance, repair and overhaul services, including the sale of spare parts, as well as fleet management services for large
commercial engines. pratt& whitney produces families of engines for wide and narrow body aircraft in the commercial and military markets. pratt& whitney also sells engines for industrial applications and space propulsion systems.
pratt& whitney canada (p&wc) is a world leader in the production of engines powering business, regional, light jet, utility and military aircraft and helicopters. pratt& whitney rocketdyne (pwr) is a leader in the design,
development and manufacture of sophisticated aerospace propulsion systems for military and commercial applications, including the u.s. space shuttle. pratt& whitneys global material solutions (gms) is in the process of engineering,
certifying, manufacturing and selling new parts, including life limited parts, for cfm56-3 engines.  in view of the risks and costs associated with developing new engines, pratt& whitney
has entered into collaboration arrangements in which revenues, costs and risks are shared. at december31, 2008, the interests of participants in new and existing pratt& whitney-directed commercial jet engine production programs
ranged from 14 percent to 29 percent. in addition, pratt& whitney has interests in other engine programs, including a 33 percent interest in the international aero engines (iae) collaboration that sells and supports v2500 engines for the airbus a320 family of aircraft. at december31, 2008, a portion of pratt& whitneys interests in iae (equivalent to 4 percent of the overall iae
collaboration) were held by pratt& whitney sub-partners. pratt& whitney also has a 50 percent interest in the engine alliance (ea), a joint venture with ge aviation, undertaken to develop, market and manufacture the gp7000 engine for the airbus a380 aircraft. this engine entered into service with its first revenue service flight in august 2008. at december31, 2008, 40 percent of pratt&
whitneys 50 percent interest in the ea was held by other participants. pratt& whitney is also pursuing additional collaboration partners.  in terms of engine development programs, pratt& whitney is under contract with the u.s. air force to develop the f135 engine, a derivative of pratt& whitneys f119 engine, to power the
single-engine f-35 lightning ii aircraft being developed by lockheed martin. in addition, pratt& whitney is currently developing technology intended to enable it to power proposed and future aircraft, including testing of the purepower
pw1000g geared turbofan engine. the technology demonstrator of the purepower pw1000g engine completed flight testing in 2008. pratt& whitney has also received federal aviation authority (faa) certification for the advantage 70 upgrade to
its pw4000 engine for airbus a330 aircraft. the advantage 70 upgrade is intended to reduce maintenance and fuel costs and increase thrust. certifications for the advantage 70 from the european aviation safety agency (easa) are anticipated in 2009.
pwr is developing a liquid fuel j-2x engine to support nasas vision for space exploration. pwr is also upgrading the performance of the rs68 engine to support u.s. air force launch requirements and nasa requirements. p&wc is developing the
pw600 engine series for the
table of contents
very light jet market. in 2008, p&wc received faa and easa certification for the pw600. pw600 engine models have been selected by engine manufacturers
such as cessna aircraft and embraer. p&wc is also developing the pw210 engine for sikorskys s-76d helicopter and the purepower pw800 for the new generation of long-range business jets. in 2008, iae received easa and faa aircraft
certification for its selectonetm upgrade to the v2500 engine for the airbus a320 family of aircraft. the first of these upgraded engines entered
into revenue service in october 2008. the selectone upgrade is part of iaes v2500selectsm program of product and service enhancements launched
in november 2005. in 2008, gms received supplemental type certifications from the faa and easa for all of the cfm56-3 engine life limited parts being developed by gms. pratt& whitney continues to enhance its programs through performance
improvement measures and product base expansion.  pratt& whitneys products are sold principally to aircraft manufacturers,
airlines and other aircraft operators, aircraft leasing companies, space launch vehicle providers and the u.s. and foreign governments. pratt& whitneys products and services must adhere to strict regulatory and market-driven safety
and performance standards. the frequently changing nature of these standards, along with the long duration of aircraft engine programs, create uncertainty regarding engine program profitability. the vast majority of sales are made directly to the
end customer and, to a limited extent, through independent distributors and foreign sales representatives. sales to airbus and boeing were 11.7 and 6.5 percent, respectively, of total pratt& whitney revenues in 2008, before taking into
account discounts or financial incentives offered to customers. sales to the u.s. government were 27.4 percent of total pratt& whitney segment revenues in 2008.  revenues from pratt& whitneys international operations, including u.s. exports, were 60 percent and 56 percent of total pratt& whitney segment revenues in 2008 and 2007, respectively. at
december31, 2008, pratt& whitneys business backlog was $23,570 million, including $5,871 million of u.s. government-funded contracts and subcontracts, as compared to $23,607 million and $5,334 million, respectively, at
december31, 2007. of the total pratt& whitney backlog at december31, 2008, approximately $8,975 million is expected to be realized as sales in 2009. pratt& whitneys backlog includes certain contracts for which
actual costs may ultimately exceed total revenues from these contracts. see note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report for a description of our accounting for long-term contracts.  hamilton sundstrand  hamilton sundstrand is among the
worlds leading suppliers of technologically advanced aerospace and industrial products and aftermarket services for diversified industries worldwide. hamilton sundstrands aerospace products, such as power generation, management and
distribution systems, flight systems, engine control systems, environmental control systems, fire protection and detection systems, auxiliary power units and propeller systems, serve commercial, military, regional, business and general aviation, as
well as space and undersea applications. aftermarket services include spare parts, overhaul and repair, engineering and technical support and fleet maintenance programs. hamilton sundstrand sells aerospace products to airframe manufacturers, the
u.s. and foreign governments, aircraft operators and independent distributors. hamilton sundstrand sales of aerospace products to boeing, airbus and pratt& whitney, collectively, including sales where the u.s. government was the ultimate
customer, were 17.3 percent of hamilton sundstrand segment sales in 2008.  hamilton sundstrand is engaged in development programs for the
boeing 787 aircraft, the lockheed martin f-35 lightning ii military aircraft and the airbus a400m military aircraft, and has developed and delivered systems for the airbus a380 aircraft. hamilton sundstrand is also the prime contractor for
nasas space suit/life support system and produces environmental monitoring and control, life support, mechanical systems and thermal control systems for the u.s. space shuttle program, the international space station and the orion crew
exploration vehicle.  hamilton sundstrands principal industrial products, such as air compressors, metering pumps and fluid handling
equipment, serve industries involved with raw material processing, bulk material handling, construction, hydrocarbon and chemical processing, and water and wastewater treatment. hamilton sundstrand sells these products under the sullair, sundyne,
milton roy and other brand names directly to end-users, and through manufacturer representatives and distributors.  revenues generated by
hamilton sundstrands international operations, including u.s. export sales, were 51 percent and 50 percent of total hamilton sundstrand segment revenues in 2008 and 2007, respectively. at december31, 2008, hamilton sundstrands
business backlog was $5,226 million, including $913 million under u.s. government-funded contracts and subcontracts, as compared to $5,152 million and $823 million, respectively, at december31, 2007. of the total hamilton sundstrand backlog at
december31, 2008, approximately $2,543 million is expected to be realized as sales in 2009.  sikorsky  sikorsky is one of the worlds largest manufacturers of military and commercial helicopters and also provides aftermarket helicopter and aircraft
parts and services.
table of contents
current major production programs at sikorsky include the uh-60m black hawk medium-transport helicopters
and hh-60m medevac helicopters for the u.s. and foreign governments, the s-70 black hawk for foreign governments, the mh-60s and mh-60r helicopters for the u.s. navy, the international naval hawk for multiple naval missions, and the s-76 and s-92
helicopters for commercial operations. the uh-60m helicopter is the latest and most modern in a series of black hawk variants that sikorsky has been delivering to the u.s. army since 1978 and requires significant additional assembly hours relative
to the previous variants. in december 2007, the u.s. government and sikorsky signed a five-year multi-service contract for 537 h-60 helicopters to be delivered to the u.s. army and u.s. navy, which include the uh-60m, hh-60m, mh-60s and mh-60r. the
contract includes options for an additional 263 aircraft, spares, and kits, potentially making it the largest contract in utc and sikorsky history. actual production quantities will be determined year-by-year over the life of the program based on
funding allocations set by congress and pentagon acquisition priorities. the deliveries of the aircraft are scheduled to be made through 2012. sikorsky is also developing the ch-53k next generation heavy lift helicopter for the u.s. marine corps and
the ch-148, a derivative of the h-92, a military variant of the s-92, for the canadian government. the latter is being developed under a fixed-price contract that provides for the development, production, and 20-year logistical support of 28
helicopters. this is the largest and most expansive fixed-price development contract in sikorskys history. in december 2008, sikorsky and the canadian government executed amendments to the contract that revised the delivery schedule and
contract specifications. the first test flight was successfully conducted in november 2008 and delivery of the first helicopter is scheduled for the fourth quarter of 2010.  sikorskys aftermarket business includes spare parts sales, overhaul and repair services, maintenance contracts and logistics support programs for
helicopters and other aircraft. sales are made directly by sikorsky and by its subsidiaries and joint ventures. sikorsky is increasingly engaging in logistics support programs and partnering with its government and commercial customers to manage and
provide maintenance and repair services.  revenues generated by sikorskys international operations, including u.s. export sales, were
36 percent and 34 percent of total sikorsky revenues in 2008 and in 2007, respectively. at december31, 2008, sikorskys business backlog was $13,167 million, including $6,725 million under u.s. government-funded contracts and
subcontracts, as compared to $11,445 million and $5,180 million, respectively, at december31, 2007. of the total sikorsky backlog at december31, 2008, approximately $6,055 million is expected to be realized as sales in 2009.
other  utc power has developed products and
services for commercial buildings using 200kw phosphoric acid fuel cell and microturbine-driven absorption chilling systems. these systems are highly efficient combined cooling, heating and power systems. in addition, utc power has developed a
geothermal power system capable of producing power from the lowest temperature geothermal water used to date to produce electricity. utc power is the world leader in the application of fuel cell technology to transportation applications, including
automobiles, transit buses and the u.s. space shuttle program. utc power is also a provider of energy advisory and consulting services aimed at making commercial buildings more energy efficient.  utc power is the world leader in stationary fuel cell power with more than 260 200kw phosphoric acid fuel cell power plants sold since 1992. utc power
has also developed a 400kw fuel cell which is scheduled to be placed into service in 2009. this new fuel cell is expected to have greater durability than any other large stationary fuel cell currently available in the market. utc powers
automotive and bus transportation fuel cell power plants are based on proton exchange membrane (pem) technology, including its puremotion 120 power plant, which is currently used in revenue service in transit bus applications in connecticut,
california and europe. utc power is currently developing pem fuel cells for submarine applications. in addition, utc power is a maker of alkaline-based fuel cells used to provide electricity and drinking water to the u.s. space
shuttle.  although fuel cells are believed to be superior to conventional power generation technologies in terms of total system efficiency
and environmental characteristics, the technology is still in either early commercialization or development. continued technology advancement and cost reduction are required to achieve wide-scale market acceptance. government support is needed to
fully commercialize fuel cell technology. there is still significant uncertainty as to whether and when commercially viable fuel cells will be produced.  utc power merged with utc fuel cells, effective january1, 2007, with utc power continuing as the surviving entity. utc is in the process of incorporating utc powers combined cooling, heating and power
systems business within carriers businesses, its geothermal power systems business within pratt& whitneys power systems business, and its space and defense fuel cell power plant business within hamilton sundstrands
energy, space and defense business. these transitions are expected to be completed during the first half of 2009. the results of utc power and utc fuel cells are included in the eliminations and other category in the segment financial
data in note 16 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.
table of contents
other matters relating to our business as a whole  competition and other factors affecting our businesses  as worldwide businesses, our operations can be affected by a variety of economic and other factors, including those described in this section, in managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations included in our 2008 annual report, in item1, cautionary note concerning factors that may affect future results, and in item1a, risk factors in this form 10-k. each business unit is subject to
significant competition from a large number of companies in the united states and other countries, and each competes on the basis of price, delivery schedule, product performance and service.  our aerospace businesses are subject to substantial competition from domestic manufacturers, foreign manufacturers (whose governments sometimes provide
research and development assistance, marketing subsidies and other assistance for their national commercial products) and companies that obtain regulatory agency approval to manufacture spare parts. in particular, pratt& whitney
experiences intense competition for new commercial airframe/engine combinations. engine suppliers may offer substantial discounts and other financial incentives, performance and operating cost guarantees, participation in financing arrangements and
maintenance agreements. customer selections of engines and components can also have a significant impact on later sales of parts and services. in addition, the u.s. governments and other governments policies of purchasing parts from
suppliers other than the original equipment manufacturer affect military spare parts sales. significant elements of our aerospace businesses, such as spare parts sales for engines and aircraft in service, have short lead times. therefore, backlog
information may not be indicative of future demand. pratt& whitneys major competitors in the sale of engines are ge aviation, rolls-royce, honeywell and turbomeca. for information regarding customer financing commitments,
participation in guarantees of customer financing arrangements and performance and operating cost guarantees, see notes 4 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.  research and development  since changes in technology
can have a significant impact on our operations and competitive position, we spend substantial amounts of our own funds on research and development. these expenditures, which are charged to expense as incurred, were $1,771 million or 3.1 percent of
total sales in 2008, as compared with $1,678 million or 3.1 percent of total sales in 2007 and $1,529 million or 3.2 percent of total sales in 2006. we also perform research and development work under contracts funded by the u.s. government and
other customers. this contract research and development, which is performed principally in the pratt& whitney segment and to a lesser extent in the hamilton sundstrand and sikorsky segments, amounted to $2,101 million in 2008, as compared
to $2,123 million in 2007 and $1,952 million in 2006. these contract research and development costs include amounts that are expensed as incurred, through cost of products sold, and amounts that are capitalized into inventory to be subsequently
recovered through production aircraft shipments. of the totals, $2,008 million, $1,872 million and $1,621 million were expensed in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. the remaining costs have been capitalized.  u.s. government contracts  u.s. government contracts
are subject to termination by the government, either for the convenience of the government or for default as a result of our failure to perform under the applicable contract. in the case of a termination for convenience, we would normally be
entitled to reimbursement for our allowable costs incurred, plus termination costs and a reasonable profit. if terminated by the government as a result of our default, we could be liable for additional costs the government incurs in acquiring
undelivered goods or services from another source and any other damages it suffers. most of our u.s. government sales are made under fixed-price type contracts, while approximately $2,721 million or 4.6 percent of our total sales for 2008 were made
under cost-reimbursement type contracts.  our contracts with the u.s. government are also subject to audits. like many defense contractors,
we have received audit reports from the u.s. government which recommend that we reduce certain contract prices because cost or pricing data we submitted in negotiation of the contract prices or cost accounting practices may not have conformed to
government regulations. some of these audit reports have involved substantial reductions. we have made voluntary refunds in those cases we believe appropriate, have settled some allegations and continue to litigate certain cases. for further
discussion of risks related to government contracting, see the discussion in item1a, risk factors and item3, legal proceedings, in this form 10-k and note 15 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008
annual report for further discussion.  compliance with environmental and other government regulations  our operations are subject to and affected by environmental regulation by federal, state and local authorities in the united states and regulatory
authorities with jurisdiction over our foreign operations. we have incurred and will likely continue to incur liabilities under various government statutes for the cleanup of pollutants previously released into the
table of contents
environment. we do not anticipate that compliance with current provisions relating to the protection of the environment or that any payments we may be
required to make for cleanup liabilities will have a material adverse effect upon our cash flows, competitive position, financial condition or results of operations. environmental matters are further addressed in managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and notes 1 and 15 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.  most of the u.s. laws governing environmental matters include criminal provisions. if we were convicted of a violation of the federal clean air act or clean water act, the facility or facilities involved in the
violation would be ineligible to be used in performing any u.s. government contract we are awarded until the environmental protection agency certified that the condition giving rise to the violation had been corrected.  we conduct our businesses through subsidiaries and affiliates worldwide. changes in legislation or government policies can affect our worldwide
operations. for example, governmental regulation of refrigerants and energy efficiency standards, elevator safety codes and fire safety regulations are important to the businesses of carrier, otis and utc fire& security respectively, while
government safety and performance regulations, restrictions on aircraft engine noise and emissions and government procurement practices can impact our aerospace businesses.  intellectual property and raw materials  we maintain a portfolio of patents, trademarks, licenses and
franchises related to our businesses. while this portfolio is cumulatively important to our business, we do not believe that the loss of any one or group of related patents, trademarks, licenses or franchises would have a material adverse effect on
our overall business or on any of our operating segments.  we believe we have adequate sources for our purchases of materials, components,
services and supplies used in our manufacturing. we work continuously with our supply base to ensure an adequate source of supply and to reduce costs. we pursue cost reductions through a number of mechanisms, including consolidating our purchases,
reducing the number of suppliers, strategic global sourcing and using online bidding competitions among potential suppliers. in some instances, we depend upon a single source of supply or participate in commodity markets that may be subject to
allocations of limited supplies by suppliers. like other users in the united states, we are largely dependent upon foreign sources for certain raw materials requirements such as cobalt (finland, norway, russia and canada), tantalum (australia and
canada), chromium (south africa, kazakhstan, zimbabwe and russia) and rhenium (chile, kazakhstan and germany). we have a number of ongoing programs to manage this dependence and the accompanying risk, including long-term agreements and the
conservation of materials through scrap reclamation and new manufacturing processes. we believe that our supply management practices are based on an appropriate balancing of the foreseeable risks and the costs of alternative practices. although
recent high prices for some raw materials important to some of our businesses (steel, copper, aluminum, titanium and nickel) have caused margin and cost pressures, we do not foresee any near term unavailability of materials, components or supplies
that would have an adverse effect on our overall business or on any of our business segments. for further discussion of the possible effects of the cost and availability of raw materials on our business, see item1a, risk factors in
this form 10-k.  employees and employee relations  at december31, 2008, our total employment was approximately 223,100, approximately 65 percent of which represents employees based outside the united states. during 2008, we renegotiated thirteen multi-year
collective bargaining agreements, the largest of which covered certain workers at carrier, hamilton sundstrand, and sikorsky. in 2009, numerous collective bargaining agreements are subject to renegotiation, the largest of which cover certain workers
at sikorsky and carrier. we do not anticipate any problems in renegotiating these contracts that would either individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. for discussion of the
effects of our restructuring actions on employment, see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.
for a discussion of other matters which may affect our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows, including the risks of
our international operations, see the further discussion under the headings general and description of business by segment in this section, item1a, risk factors in this form 10-k, and under
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in our 2008 annual report.
cautionary note concerning factors that may affect future results  this form 10-k contains statements which, to the extent they are
not statements of historical or present fact, constitute forward-looking statements under the securities laws. from time to time, oral or written forward-looking statements may also be included in other materials released to the public.
these forward-looking statements are intended to provide managements current expectations or plans for our future operating and financial performance, based on assumptions
table of contents
currently believed to be valid. forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of words such as believe, expect,
plans, strategy, prospects, estimate, project, target, anticipate, guidance and other words of similar meaning in connection with a discussion of future
operating or financial performance. these include, among others, statements relating to:
future revenues, earnings, cash flow, uses of cash and other measures of financial performance;
the effect of economic conditions in the united states and globally, including the financial condition of our customers and suppliers;
new business opportunities;
restructuring costs and savings;
the scope, nature or impact of acquisition activity and integration into our businesses;
the development, production and support of advanced technologies and new products and services;
the anticipated benefits of diversification and balance of operations across product lines, regions and industries;
the impact of the negotiation of collective bargaining agreements;
the outcome of contingencies;
future repurchases of common stock;
future levels of indebtedness and capital spending; and
pension plan assumptions and future contributions.  all forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. this annual report on form 10-k for
2008 includes important information as to these factors that may cause actual results to vary materially from those stated in the forward-looking statements in the business section under the headings general,
description of business by segment and other matters relating to our business as a whole, and in the risk factors and legal proceedings sections. additional important information as to these factors is
included in our 2008 annual report in the section titled managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations under the headings business overview, critical accounting
estimates, environmental matters and restructuring and other costs. for additional information identifying factors that may cause actual results to vary materially from those stated in the forward-looking statements,
see our reports on forms 10-k, 10-q and 8-k filed with the sec from time to time.
item1a.
risk factors  our business, financial condition,
operating results and cash flows can be impacted by a number of factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth below, any one of which could cause our actual results to vary materially from recent results or from our anticipated future
results. for a discussion identifying additional risk factors and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated, see the discussion in the business section under the headings other
matters relating to our business as a whole and cautionary note concerning factors that may affect future results in this form 10-k and in managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations and notes to consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.  our global growth is subject to a number of
economic risks  as widely reported, financial markets in the united states, europe and asia have been experiencing extreme
disruption in recent months, including, among other things, extreme volatility in security prices, severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, rating downgrades of certain investments and declining valuations of others. governments have
taken unprecedented actions intended to address extreme market conditions that include severely restricted credit and declines in real estate values. while currently these conditions have not impaired our ability to access credit markets and finance
our operations, there can be no assurance that there will not be a further deterioration in financial markets and confidence in major economies. these economic developments affect businesses such as ours in a number of ways. the current tightening
of credit in financial markets adversely affects the ability of our customers to obtain financing for significant purchases and operations and could result in a decrease in or cancellation of orders for our products and services as well as impact
the ability of our customers to make payments. similarly, this tightening of credit may adversely affect our supplier base and increase the potential for one or more of our suppliers to experience financial distress or bankruptcy. our global
business is also adversely affected by decreases in the general level of economic activity, such as decreases in business and consumer spending, air travel, construction activity, financial strength of airline customers and government procurement.
strengthening of the rate of exchange for the u.s.dollar against certain major currencies such as the euro, the canadian dollar and other currencies also adversely affects our results. we are unable to predict the likely duration and severity
of the current disruption in financial markets and adverse economic conditions in the u.s. and other countries.
table of contents
our financial performance is dependent on the conditions of the construction and aerospace industries
the results of our commercial and industrial businesses, which generated approximately 62 percent of our revenues in 2008, are
influenced by a number of external factors including fluctuations in residential and commercial construction activity, regulatory changes, interest rates, labor costs, foreign currency exchange rates, customer attrition, raw material and energy
costs, the tightening of the u.s. credit markets and other global and political factors. in addition to these factors, carriers financial performance can also be influenced by production and utilization of transport equipment and, in its
residential business, weather conditions.  the results of our commercial and military aerospace businesses, which generated approximately
38 percent of our consolidated revenues in 2008, are directly tied to the economic conditions in the commercial aviation and defense industries, which are cyclical in nature. the challenging operating environment currently faced by commercial
airlines is expected to continue. as a result, capital spending by commercial airlines and aircraft manufacturers may be influenced by a wide variety of factors, including current and predicted traffic levels, load factors, aircraft fuel pricing,
labor issues, worldwide airline profits, airline consolidation, airline insolvencies, competition, the retirement of older aircraft, regulatory changes, terrorism and related safety concerns, general economic conditions, corporate profitability, and
backlog levels, all of which could reduce both the demand for air travel and the aftermarket sales and margins of our aerospace businesses. future terrorist actions or pandemic health issues could dramatically reduce both the demand for air travel
and our aerospace businesses aftermarket sales and margins. also, since a substantial portion of the backlog for commercial aerospace customers is scheduled for delivery beyond 2009, changes in economic conditions may cause customers to request that
firm orders be rescheduled or canceled. at times, our aerospace businesses also enter into firm fixed-price development contracts, which may require us to bear cost overruns related to unforeseen technical and design challenges that arise during the
development stage of the program. in addition, our aerospace businesses face intense competition from domestic and foreign manufacturers of new equipment and spare parts. the defense industry is also affected by a changing global political
environment, continued pressure on u.s. and global defense spending and u.s. foreign policy and the level of activity in military flight operations. spare parts sales and aftermarket service trends are affected by similar factors, including usage,
pricing, technological improvements, regulatory changes and the retirement of older aircraft. furthermore, because of the lengthy research and development cycle involved in bringing products in these business segments to market, we cannot predict
the economic conditions that will exist when any new product is complete. a reduction in capital spending in the commercial aviation or defense industries could have a significant effect on the demand for our products, which could have an adverse
effect on our financial performance or results of operations.  our business may be affected by government contracting risks  u.s. government contracts are subject to termination by the government, either for the convenience of the government or for default as a result of our
failure to perform under the applicable contract. if terminated by the government as a result of our default, we could be liable for additional costs the government incurs in acquiring undelivered goods or services from another source and any other
damages it suffers. we are now, and believe that in light of the current u.s. government contracting environment we will continue to be, the subject of one or more u.s. government investigations. if we or one of our business units were charged with
wrongdoing as a result of any u.s. government investigation (including violation of certain environmental or export laws), the u.s. government could suspend us from bidding on or receiving awards of new u.s. government contracts pending the
completion of legal proceedings. if convicted or found liable, the u.s. government could subject us to fines, penalties, repayments and treble and other damages. the u.s. government could void any contracts found to be tainted by fraud. the u.s.
government also reserves the right to debar a contractor from receiving new government contracts for fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper conduct. debarment generally does not exceed three years. independently, failure to comply with
u.s. laws and regulations related to the export of goods and technology outside the united states could result in civil or criminal penalties and suspension or termination of our export privileges. in addition, we are also sensitive to u.s. military
budgets, which may fluctuate to reflect the policies of a new administration or congress.  our international operations subject us to economic risk
as our results of operations may be adversely affected by changes in economic conditions, foreign currency fluctuations and changes in local government regulation  we conduct our business on a global basis, with approximately 64 percent of our total 2008 segment revenues derived from operations outside of the united states and from u.s. export sales. changes in local and
regional economic conditions, including fluctuations in exchange rates, may affect product demand and reported profits in our non-u.s. operations (primarily the commercial businesses) where transactions are generally denominated in local currencies.
in addition, currency
table of contents
fluctuations may affect the prices we pay suppliers for materials used in our products. as a result, our operating margins may also be negatively impacted by
worldwide currency fluctuations that result in higher costs for cross border transactions. our financial statements are denominated in u.s. dollars. accordingly, fluctuations in exchange rates may also give rise to translation gains or losses when
financial statements of non-u.s. operating units are translated into u.s. dollars. given that the majority of our revenues are non-u.s. based, a strengthening of the u.s. dollar against other major foreign currencies could adversely affect our
results of operations.  the majority of sales in the aerospace businesses is transacted in u.s. dollars, consistent with established
industry practice, while the majority of costs at locations outside the united states is incurred in the applicable local currency (principally the euro and the canadian dollar). for operating units with u.s. dollar sales and local currency costs,
there is a foreign currency exposure that could impact our results of operations depending on market changes in the exchange rate of the u.s. dollar against the applicable foreign currencies. to manage certain exposures, we employ long-term hedging
strategies associated with u.s. dollar revenues. see note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report for a discussion of our hedging strategies.  our international sales and operations are subject to risks associated with changes in local government laws, regulations and policies, including those related to tariffs and trade barriers, investments, taxation,
exchange controls, employment regulations, and repatriation of earnings. our international sales and operations are also sensitive to changes in foreign national priorities, including government budgets, as well as to political and economic
instability. international transactions may involve increased financial and legal risks due to differing legal systems and customs in foreign countries. for example, as a condition of sale or award of a contract, some international customers require
us to agree to offset arrangements, which may include in-country purchases, manufacturing and financial support arrangements. the contract may provide for penalties in the event we fail to perform in accordance with the offset requirements. in
addition, as part of our globalization strategy, we have invested in certain countries, including argentina, brazil, china, india, russia and south africa that carry high levels of currency, political and economic risk.  while these factors or the impact of these factors are difficult to predict, any one or more of them could adversely affect our business, financial
condition or operating results.  we use a variety of raw materials, supplier-provided parts, components, sub-systems and third party contract
manufacturing services in our businesses, and significant shortages, supplier capacity constraints, supplier production disruptions or price increases could increase our operating costs and adversely impact the competitive positions of our products
our reliance on suppliers, third party contract manufacturing and commodity markets to secure raw materials, parts, components and
sub-systems used in our products exposes us to volatility in the prices and availability of these materials. in some instances, we depend upon a single source of supply, manufacturing or assembly or participate in commodity markets that may be
subject to allocations of limited supplies by suppliers. a disruption in deliveries from our suppliers or third party contract manufacturers, supplier capacity constraints, supplier and third party contract manufacturer production disruptions, price
increases, or decreased availability of raw materials or commodities, could have an adverse effect on our ability to meet our commitments to customers or increase our operating costs. we believe that our supply management and production practices
are based on an appropriate balancing of the foreseeable risks and the costs of alternative practices. nonetheless, price increases, supplier capacity constraints, supplier production disruptions or the unavailability of some raw materials may have
an adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition.  we engage in acquisitions, and may encounter difficulties integrating
acquired businesses with our current operations; therefore, we may not realize the anticipated benefits of the acquisitions  we seek
to grow through strategic acquisitions. in the past several years, we have made various acquisitions and entered into joint venture arrangements intended to complement and expand our businesses, and may continue to do so in the future. the success
of these transactions will depend on our ability to integrate assets and personnel acquired in these transactions, apply our internal controls processes to these acquired businesses, and cooperate with our strategic partners. we may encounter
difficulties in integrating acquisitions with our operations, applying our internal controls processes to these acquisitions, or in managing strategic investments. furthermore, we may not realize the degree or timing of benefits we anticipate when
we first enter into a transaction. any of the foregoing could adversely affect our business and results of operations. in addition, the recent effectiveness of statement of financial accounting standards no.141 (revised 2007), business
combinations, which, among other things, requires companies to expense certain acquisition costs as incurred, may cause us to incur greater earnings volatility and generally lower earnings during periods in which we acquire new businesses.
table of contents
we design, manufacture and service products that incorporate advanced technologies; the introduction of new
products and technologies involves risks and we may not realize the degree or timing of benefits initially anticipated  we seek to
achieve growth through the design, development, production, sale and support of innovative products that incorporate advanced technologies. we regularly invest substantial amounts in research and development efforts that pursue advancements in a
wide range of technologies, products and services. our ability to realize the anticipated benefits of these advancements depends on a variety of factors, including meeting development, production, certification and regulatory approval schedules;
execution of internal and external performance plans; availability of internal and supplier-produced parts and materials; performance of suppliers and subcontractors; achieving cost and production efficiencies, validation of innovative technologies
and the level of customer interest in new technologies and products. these factors involve significant risks and uncertainties. we may encounter difficulties in developing and producing these new products and services, and may not realize the degree
or timing of benefits initially anticipated. in particular, we cannot predict with certainty whether, when and in what quantities pratt& whitney or its affiliates will produce aircraft engines currently in development or pending required
certifications. any of the foregoing could adversely affect our business and results of operations.  we are subject to litigation and legal
compliance risks that could adversely affect our operating results  we are subject to a variety of litigation and legal compliance
risks. these risks include, among other things, litigation concerning product liability matters, personal injuries, intellectual property rights, government contracts, taxes, environmental matters and compliance with u.s. and foreign export laws,
competition laws and sales and trading practices. we or one of our business units could be charged with wrongdoing as a result of such litigation. if convicted or found liable, we could be subject to fines, penalties, repayments, other damages (in
certain cases, treble damages), or suspension or debarment from government contracts. independently, failure of us or one of our business units to comply with applicable export and trade practice laws could result in civil or criminal penalties and
suspension or termination of export privileges. while we believe we have adopted appropriate risk management and compliance programs to address and reduce these risks, the global and diverse nature of our operations means that these risks will
continue to exist and additional legal proceedings and contingencies will arise from time to time. our results may be affected by the outcome of legal proceedings and other contingencies that cannot be predicted with certainty. for non-income tax
risks, we estimate material loss contingencies and establish reserves as required by generally accepted accounting principles based on our assessment of contingencies where liability is deemed probable and reasonably estimable in light of the facts
and circumstances known to us at a particular point in time. subsequent developments in legal proceedings may affect our assessment and estimates of the loss contingency recorded as a liability or as a reserve against assets in our financial
statements and could result in an adverse effect on our results of operations in the period in which a liability would be recognized or cash flows for the period in which damages would be paid. for a description of current legal proceedings, see
part i, item3, legal proceedings, in this form 10-k. for income tax risks, we recognize tax benefits based on our assessment that a tax benefit has a greater than 50% likelihood of being sustained upon ultimate settlement with the
applicable taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant facts. for those income tax positions where we assess that there is not a greater than 50% likelihood that such tax benefit will be sustained, we do not recognize a tax benefit in
our financial statements. subsequent events may cause us to change our assessment of the likelihood of sustaining a previously-recognized benefit which could result in an adverse effect on our results of operations in the period in which such event
occurs or on our cash flows in the period in which the ultimate settlement with the applicable taxing authority occurs.
table of contents
item1b.
unresolved staff comments  none.
item2.
properties
number of facilities - owned
location
otis
carrier
utcfire &security
pratt &whitney
hamiltonsundstrand
sikorsky
other
total
manufacturing:
north america
europe& middle east
asia
emerging markets*
non-manufacturing:
north america
europe& middle east
asia
emerging markets*
number of facilities - leased
location
otis
carrier
utcfire &security
pratt &whitney
hamiltonsundstrand
sikorsky
other
total
manufacturing:
north america
europe & middle east
asia
emerging markets*
number of facilities - leased
location
otis
carrier
utcfire &security
pratt &whitney
hamiltonsundstrand
sikorsky
other
total
non-manufacturing:
north america
europe& middle east
asia
emerging markets*
*
for purposes of this table, emerging markets is based on the countries included in the morgan stanley capital
international emerging markets global indexsm.  our fixed assets as of december31, 2008 include manufacturing facilities and non-manufacturing facilities such as warehouses set forth in the tables above and a substantial quantity of machinery and equipment,
most of which are general purpose machinery and equipment using special jigs, tools and fixtures and in many instances having automatic control features and special adaptations. the facilities, warehouses, machinery and equipment in use as of
december31, 2008 are in good operating condition, are well-maintained and substantially all are in regular use.
table of contents
our management believes that the fixed assets capitalized and the facilities in operation at
december31, 2008 for the production of our products are suitable and adequate for the business conducted therein in the current business environment and have sufficient production capacity for their present intended purposes. utilization of
the facilities varies based on demand for the products. we continuously review our anticipated requirements for facilities and, based on that review, may from time to time adjust our facility needs.  for discussion of the effect of our restructuring actions on manufacturing facilities, see managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations and note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.
item3.
legal proceedings  as previously disclosed, the
department of justice (doj) sued us in 1999 in the u.s. district court for the southern district of ohio, claiming that pratt& whitney violated the civil false claims act and common law. this lawsuit relates to the fighter engine
competition between pratt& whitneys f100 engine and general electrics f110 engine. the doj alleges that the government overpaid for f100 engines under contracts awarded by the u.s. air force in fiscal years 1985 through
1990 because pratt& whitney inflated its estimated costs for some purchased parts and withheld data that would have revealed the overstatements. at trial of this matter, completed in december 2004, the government claimed pratt&
whitneys liability to be $624million.on august1, 2008, the trial court judge held that the air force had not suffered any actual damages because pratt& whitneyhad made significant price
concessions.however, the trial court judge found that pratt& whitney violated the false claims actdue to inaccurate statements contained in the 1983 offer.in the absence of actual damages, the trial court judge awarded
the doj the maximum civil penalty of $7.09 million, or $10,000for each of the709 invoices pratt& whitneysubmittedin 1989 and laterunder the contracts.both the doj and utc have appealed the decision.
should the government ultimately prevail, the outcome of this matter could result in a material effect on our results of operations in the period in which a liability would be recognized or cash flows for the period in which damages would be paid.
as previously disclosed, on february21, 2007, the european commissions competition directorate (eu commission) ruled that
otis subsidiaries in belgium, luxembourg and the netherlands, and a portion of the business of otis german subsidiary, violated european union (eu) competition rules and assessed a 225million (approximately $300 million)
civil fine against otis, its relevant local entities, and utc, which was paid during 2007. in may 2007, we filed an appeal of the decision before the eus european court of first instance. resolution of the matter is not expected within the
next twelve months.  as previously disclosed, during the first quarter of 2007, the austrian federal competition authority (competition
authority) filed a complaint with the cartel court in austria (cartel court) against otis austrian subsidiary in connection with an investigation of unlawful collusive arrangements in the austrian elevator and escalator industry. on
december14, 2007, the cartel court, at the request of the competition authority, assessed civil fines against the participants in the collusive arrangements, including a fine of 18.2million (approximately $26 million) against
otis austrian subsidiary, which fine was fully provided for as of december31, 2007. otis austria appealed this ruling in january 2008. in october 2008, the cartel court denied the appeal and in december 2008, this fine was paid in full.
as previously disclosed, in 2005 the korean fair trade commission (kftc) conducted an inspection at the offices of otis korea and its
korean competitors with respect to collusive activities in the market for new equipment sales, and in may 2007 expanded its investigation to include pricing of subcontracts for elevator installation. in september 2008, the kftc assessed a fine
against otis korea of south korean won 17.3 billion (approximately $15 million) with respect to the new equipment sales investigation, which we previously accrued. in november 2008, this fine was paid in full. in october 2008, the kftc notified us
that the installation subcontractor pricing investigation had been closed without action.  in december 2008, the department of defense
(dod) issued a contract claim against sikorsky to recover overpayments the dod alleges it has incurred since january 2003 in connection with cost accounting changes approved by the dod and implemented by sikorsky in 1999 and 2006. these changes
relate to the calculation of material overhead rates in government contracts. the dod claimed that sikorskys liability is approximately $80 million (including interest). we believe this claim is without merit and intend to appeal.
like many other industrial companies in recent years, we or our subsidiaries are named as a defendant in lawsuits alleging personal injury as a result
of exposure to asbestos integrated into certain of our products or premises. while we have never manufactured asbestos and no longer incorporate it in any currently-manufactured products, certain of our historical products, like those of many other
manufacturers, have contained components incorporating asbestos. a substantial majority of these asbestos-related claims have been covered by insurance or other forms of indemnity or have been dismissed without payment. the remainder of the closed
cases have been resolved for amounts that are not material individually or in the aggregate. based on the information currently available, we do not believe that resolution of these asbestos-related matters will have a material adverse effect upon
our competitive position, results of operations, cash flows or financial condition.
table of contents
except as otherwise noted above, we do not believe that resolution of any of the legal matters discussed
above will have a material adverse effect upon our competitive position, results of operations, cash flows or financial condition. a further discussion of government contracts and related investigations, as well as a discussion of our environmental
liabilities, can be found under the heading other matters relating to our business as a whole  compliance with environmental and other government regulations in item1, business, and in item1a, risk
factors, in this form 10-k.
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders  no matters were submitted to security holders for a vote during the quarter ended december31, 2008.  part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities  the performance graph and comparative stock data appearing in our 2008 annual report containing the following data relating to our common stock:
shareholder return, principal market, quarterly high and low sales prices, approximate number of shareowners and frequency and amount of dividends are hereby incorporated by reference. the information required by item5 with respect to
securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans is incorporated by reference in part iii, item12 of this form 10-k.  issuer purchases of equity securities  the following table provides information about our purchases of equity securities
that are registered by us pursuant to section12 of the exchange act during the quarter ended december31, 2008.
totalnumberofsharespurchased(000s)
averagepricepaidper share
totalnumberofsharespurchasedaspart of a
publiclyannouncedprogram(000s)
maximumnumberof shares that mayyet be purchasedundertheprogram(000s)
october1  october31
2,883
51.22
2,879
39,082
november1  november30
5,185
48.83
5,184
33,898
december1  december31
5,462
48.98
5,460
28,438
total
13,530
49.40
13,523
28,438
we repurchase shares under a program announced on june11, 2008, which authorized the
repurchase of up to 60million shares of our common stock. this new authorization replaced a previous program, approved in december 2006, which was nearing completion. under the current program, shares may be purchased on the open market, in
privately negotiated transactions and under plans complying with rules 10b5-1 and 10b-18 under the exchange act, as amended. these repurchases are included within the scope of our overall repurchase program discussed above. we may also reacquire
shares outside of the program from time to time in connection with the surrender of shares to cover taxes on vesting of restricted stock. approximately 7,000 shares were reacquired in transactions outside the program during the quarter.
item6.
selected financial data  the five year summary
appearing in our 2008 annual report, containing revenues, net income, basic and diluted earnings per share, cash dividends per common share, total assets and long-term debt is hereby incorporated by reference. see notes to consolidated
financial statements in our 2008 annual report for a description of any accounting changes and acquisitions or dispositions of businesses materially affecting the comparability of the information reflected in the five year summary.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations  we hereby incorporate by reference in this form 10-k the section titled managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results
of operations in our 2008 annual report.
table of contents
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk  for information concerning market risk sensitive instruments, see discussion under the heading market risk and risk management in managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations in our 2008 annual report and under the heading foreign exchange and hedging activity in note 1 and note 12 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2008 annual report.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data  the
2008 and 2007 consolidated balance sheet, and other financial statements for the years 2008, 2007 and 2006, together with the report thereon of pricewaterhousecoopers llp dated february11, 2009 in our 2008 annual report are incorporated by
reference in this form 10-k. the 2008 and 2007 unaudited selected quarterly financial data appearing in our 2008 annual report is incorporated by reference in this form 10-k.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure  none.
item9a.
controls and procedures  as required by rule 13a-15
under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, we carried out an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including the president and chief executive officer (ceo), the senior vice president and chief
financial officer (cfo) and the vice president, controller (controller), of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures. there are inherent limitations to the effectiveness of any system of disclosure
controls and procedures, including the possibility of human error and the circumvention or overriding of the controls and procedures. accordingly, even effective disclosure controls and procedures can only provide reasonable assurance of achieving
their control objectives. based upon our evaluation, our ceo, our cfo and our controller concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by us in the
reports that we file or submit under the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the applicable rules and forms, and that it is accumulated and communicated to
our management, including our ceo, our cfo and our controller, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external reporting purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. our management has assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2008. in making its assessment, management has utilized the criteria
set forth by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission in internal controlintegrated framework. our management concluded that based on its assessment, our internal control over financial reporting was
effective as of december31, 2008. the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2008 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in
their report which appears in our 2008 annual report.  there has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting during the
quarter ended december31, 2008 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.  part iii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance  the information required by item10 with respect to directors, the audit committee of the board of directors and audit committee financial experts is incorporated herein by reference to the section of our proxy statement for the 2009
annual meeting of shareowners titled general information concerning the board of directors, under the headings nominees, the audit committee, and the committee on nominations and governance.
table of contents
executive officers of the registrant  the following persons are executive officers of united technologies corporation:
name
title
other business experience since 1/1/2004
age2/11/09
alain bellemare
president, hamilton sundstrand corporation (since january 2009)
president, pratt & whitney canada
aribousbib
president, commercial companies and executive vice president (since may 2008)
president, otis elevator
j.thomasbowler,jr.
senior vice president, human resources and organization (since 2007)
vice president, human resources, united technologies corporation; vice president, human resources and organization, pratt & whitney
william m. brown
president, utc fire & security (since 2006)
president, asia pacific, carrier corporation
louis r. chnevert
director (since april 2008), president (since 2006) and chief executive officer (since april 2008)
president and chief operating officer, united technologies corporation; president, pratt & whitney
geraud darnis
president, carrier corporation (since
2001)
george david
director (since 1992) and chairman (since 1997)
director, chairman and chief executive officer, united technologies corporation; director, chairman, president and chief executive officer, united technologies corporation
james e. geisler
vice president, corporate strategy & planning (since september 2008)
vice president, finance, united technologies corporation; director, financial planning and analysis, united technologies corporation
charles d. gill
senior vice president and general counsel (since 2007)
vice president and general counsel, and secretary, carrier corporation; executive assistant to chairman and chief executive officer, united technologies corporation
gregory j. hayes
senior vice president and chief financial officer (since september 2008)
vice president, accounting and finance, united technologies corporation; vice president, accounting and control, united technologies corporation; vice president, controller, united technologies
corporation
david p. hess
president, pratt & whitney (since january 2009)
president, hamilton sundstrand corporation; president, hamilton sundstrand aerospace power systems
didier michaud-daniel
president, otis elevator (since may 2008)
president, otis united kingdom and central europe area, otis elevator
table of contents
name
title
other business experience since 1/1/2004
age2/11/09
jeffrey p. pino
president, sikorsky aircraft (since 2006)
senior vice president, corporate strategy, marketing & commercial programs, sikorsky aircraft
thomas i. rogan
vice president, treasurer (since 2001)
margaret m. smyth
vice president, controller (since 2007)
vice president and chief accounting officer, 3m co.; managing partner, deloitte & touche
all of the officers serve at the pleasure of the board of directors of united technologies
corporation or the subsidiary designated.  information concerning section16(a) compliance is incorporated herein by reference to the
section of our proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting of shareowners titled section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance. we have adopted a code of ethics that applies to all our directors, officers, employees and
representatives. this code is publicly available on our website at http://www.investors.utc.com/utc/static%20files/governance/coe_english.pdf. amendments to the code of ethics and any grant of a waiver from a provision of the code requiring
disclosure under applicable sec rules will be disclosed on our website. our corporate governance guidelines and the charters of our board of directors audit committee, finance committee, committee on nominations and governance, public issues
review committee and committee on compensation and executive development are available on our website at http://www.investors.utc.com/utc/governance/board_committee_charters.html. these materials may also be requested in print free of charge by
writing to our investor relations department at united technologies corporation, united technologies building, investor relations, hartford, ct 06101.
item11.
executive compensation  the information required by
item11 is incorporated herein by reference to the sections of our proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting of shareowners titled executive compensation and director compensation.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters  the information relating to security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management required by item12 is incorporated herein by reference to
the sections of our proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting titled security ownership of directors, executive officers and certain beneficial owners. the equity compensation plan information required by item12 is set forth in
the table below.  equity compensation plan information  the following table provides information as of december31, 2008 concerning common stock issuable under equity compensation plans.
(a)numberofsecuritiestobeissueduponexerciseofoutstandingoptions,warrantsand
rights
(b)weighted-averageexercisepriceofoutstandingoptions,warrantsandrights
(c)
plan category
numberofsecuritiesremainingavailableforfutureissuanceunderequitycompensationplans(excludingsecuritiesreflectedincolumn(a))(1)
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
65,318,000
(2)
$
48.72
43,300,000
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
9,539,000
(4)
$
39.40
total
74,857,000
$
47.53
(5)
43,300,000
table of contents
(1)
consists of shares of utc common stock or units equal in value to a share of utc common stock (e.g., restricted stock,
restricted stock units, performance share units) (full share award) available for future issuance under the terms of the 2005 long-term incentive plan, as amended (2005 ltip). full share awards will result in a reduction in the number of shares of
utc common stock available for delivery under the 2005 ltip in an amount equal to 3.1 times the number of shares to which the award corresponds. stock options and stock appreciation rights do not constitute full share awards and will result in a
reduction in the number of shares of utc common stock available for delivery under the 2005 ltip on a one-for-one basis.
(2)
consists of options awarded under the 1989 long term incentive plan (1989 ltip), the 2005 ltip and the non-employee
director stock option plan (non-employee director plan). options issued under the 1989 ltip include options that resulted from the conversion of awards granted under equity compensation plans of sundstrand corporation at the time it was merged into
hamilton sundstrand. this amount includes 281,000 restricted shares and restricted share units and 2,991,000 performance share units at the target level. up to an additional 2,991,000 could be issued if performance goals are achieved above target.
(3)
represents the maximum number of shares of common stock available to be awarded as of december31, 2008.
(4)
consists of options awarded under the utc employee stock option plan. this plan authorized the award of non-qualified
stock options to employees below the executive level considered to have the potential to contribute to the long-term success of utc. these options consisted of rights to purchase a specified number of shares of utc common stock at a fixed option
price equal to the fair market value of utc common stock on the date the stock option was granted. options vested three years after the grant date and have a ten-year term. effective april14, 2005, all equity compensation awards are now
provided under the shareowner-approved 2005 ltip.
(5)
weighted-average calculation does not include restricted shares and performance share units because they have no
exercise price.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence  the information required by item13 is incorporated herein by reference to the sections of our proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting titled transactions with related persons and general
information concerning the board of directors.
item14.
principal accounting fees and services  the
information required by item14 is incorporated by reference to the section of our proxy statement for the 2009 annual meeting titled appointment of a firm of independent registered public accountants to serve as independent auditors for
2009, including information provided with audit fees, audit related fees, tax fees and all other fees.  part iv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
(a)
financial statements, financial statement schedules and exhibits
(1)
financial statements (incorporated by reference from the 2008 annual report):
pagenumberinannual report
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated statement of operations for the three years ended december31, 2008
consolidated balance sheetdecember 31, 2008 and 2007
consolidated statement of cash flows for the three years ended december31, 2008
notes to consolidated financial statements
selected quarterly financial data (unaudited)
(2)
financial statement schedule for the three years ended december31, 2008:
pagenumberinform 10-k
schedule ireport of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement
schedule
s-i
schedule iivaluation and qualifying accounts
s-ii
table of contents
all other schedules are omitted because they are not applicable or the required information is shown in
the financial statements or the notes thereto.
(3)
exhibits:  the following list of exhibits includes
exhibits submitted with this form 10-k as filed with the sec and those incorporated by reference to other filings.
exhibit number
3(i)
restated certificate of incorporation, restated as of may 8, 2006, incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(i) to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal
year ended december 31, 2006.
3(ii)
bylaws as amended and restated effective december 10, 2008, incorporated by reference to exhibit 3(ii) to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec
on december 12, 2008.
4.1
amended and restated indenture, dated as of may 1, 2001, between utc and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(a) to utcs registration statement on form
s-3 (commission file number 333-60276) filed with the sec on may 4, 2001). utc hereby agrees to furnish to the commission upon request a copy of each other instrument defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of utc and its consolidated
subsidiaries and any unconsolidated subsidiaries.
10.1
united technologies corporation annual executive incentive compensation plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812)
for fiscal year ended december 31, 1995 as amended january 1, 2009.*
10.2
united technologies corporation executive estate preservation program, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(iv) to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for
fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.3
united technologies corporation pension preservation plan, as amended and restated, effective january 1, 2005.*
10.4
united technologies corporation senior executive severance plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(vi) to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal
year ended december 31, 1992, and amendment thereto, effective december 10, 2003, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 of utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003 and amendment
thereto, effective june 11, 2008, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 of utcs report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended june 30, 2008.
10.5
united technologies corporation deferred compensation plan, as amended and restated, effective january 1, 2005.*
10.6
united technologies corporation long term incentive plan, as amended, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.11 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for
fiscal year ended december 31, 1989, as amended by amendment no. 1 filed as exhibit 10.6 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1995 and amendment no. 2 filed as exhibit 10.6 to
utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003.
10.7
united technologies corporation executive leadership program, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.7 to utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the
quarterly period ended september 30, 2004, as amended.
10.8
united technologies corporation directors restricted stock/unit program, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(xiii) to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number
1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1992.
10.9
united technologies corporation board of directors deferred stock unit plan, as amended and restated october 8, 2008, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.9 to utcs report on form 10-q
(commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended september 30, 2008.
table of contents
10.10
united technologies corporation special retention and stock appreciation program, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(xvi) to utcs report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812)
for the quarterly period ended september30, 1995.
10.11
united technologies corporation nonemployee director stock option plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.12 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for
fiscal year ended december 31, 1995, amendment 1 thereto, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(iii)(a)(2) to utcs report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended june 30, 2000, amendment 2 thereto, incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(iii)(a)(1) to utcs report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended june 30, 2001, amendment 3 thereto, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.17 to utcs annual report on form 10-k for fiscal year ending december 31, 2001,
amendment 4 thereto, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.12 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ending december 31, 2002 and amendment 5 thereto, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.12 to
utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003.
10.12
united technologies corporation employee stock option plan, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.13 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year
ended december 31, 2002, and amendment 1 thereto, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.13 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003.
10.13
united technologies corporation employee scholar program, as amended and restated on june27, 2003, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.14 of utcs annual report on form 10-k
(commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december31, 2003.
10.14
nonqualified stock option and dividend equivalent award schedule of terms relating to the united technologies corporation long term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.11 to
utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1989, as amended by amendment no. 1 filed as exhibit 10.6 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812 ) for fiscal
year ended december 31, 1995 and amendment no. 2 filed as exhibit 10.6 to utcs annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.15 to utcs annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2004.
10.15
restricted stock award schedule of terms and form of award relating to the united technologies corporation long term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.11 to the corporations
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1989, as amended by amendment no. 1 filed as exhibit 10.6 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal
year ended december 31, 1995 and amendment no. 2 filed as exhibit 10.6 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to
utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended september 30, 2004.
10.16
nonqualified stock option award schedule of terms and form of award relating to the united technologies corporation long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.11 to the
corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1989, as amended by amendment no. 1 filed as exhibit 10.6 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number
1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1995 and amendment no. 2 filed as exhibit 10.6 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003), incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.2 to utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended september 30, 2004.
10.17
restricted stock unit award relating to the united technologies corporation directors restricted stock/unit program (previously filed as exhibit 10(xiii) to the corporations annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1992), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended
september 30, 2004.
table of contents
10.18
form of award relating to the united technologies corporation nonemployee director stock option plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.17 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k
(commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december31, 1995, as amended by amendment 1 thereto (previously filed as exhibit 10(iii)(a)(2) to the corporations report on form 10-q for quarterly period ended june30, 2000),
amendment 2 thereto (previously filed as exhibit 10(iii)(a)(1) to the corporations report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for quarterly period ended june30, 2001), amendment 3 thereto (previously filed as exhibit 10.17 to the
corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ending december31, 2001), amendment 4 thereto (previously filed as exhibit 10.12 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k for fiscal year
ending december31, 2002) and amendment 5 thereto (previously filed as exhibit 10.12 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ending december31, 2003)), incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.4 to utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended september30, 2004.
10.19
recognition stock option program prospectus and statement of award relating to the united technologies corporation employee stock option plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.13 to the
corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2002, as amended by amendment 1, filed as exhibit 10.13 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number
1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 2003), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.5 to utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended september 30, 2004.
10.20
continuous improvement incentive program non-qualified stock option and dividend equivalent award schedule of terms and forms of award relating to the united technologies corporation long term
incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.11 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december 31, 1989, as amended by amendment no. 1 filed as exhibit 10.6 to the
corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended december31, 1995 and amendment no. 2 filed as exhibit 10.6 to the corporations annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812)
for fiscal year ended december31, 2003), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.6 to utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended september30, 2004.
10.21
retainer payment election form relating to the united technologies corporation board of directors deferred stock unit plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.14 to the corporations annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-812) for fiscal year ended 1995, as amended by amendment no. 1 thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(iii)(a)(1) to the corporations report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for
quarterly period ended june 30, 2000)), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.8 to utcs quarterly report on form 10-q (commission file number 1-812) for the quarterly period ended september 30, 2004.
10.22
united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan, as amended and restated effective april 9, 2008, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form 8-k
(commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008.
10.23
schedule of terms for restricted stock awards relating to the united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form
8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on september 20, 2005.
10.24
form of award agreement for restricted stock awards relating to the united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report
on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on september 20,
2005.
10.25
schedule of terms for non-qualified stock option awards relating to the united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs current
report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on september 20,
2005.
10.26
form of award agreement for non-qualified stock option awards relating to the united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs
current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.4 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on september 20,
2005.
table of contents
10.27
form of award agreement for performance share unit and stock appreciation rights awards relating to the united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit
10.1 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april11, 2008), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the
sec on december20, 2005.
10.28
schedule of terms for performance share unit awards relating to the united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report
on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008).*
10.29
schedule of terms for stock appreciation rights awards relating to the united technologies corporation 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs current
report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008).*
10.30
united technologies corporation executive leadership group agreement, as amended, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number
1-812) filed with the sec on march 24, 2006.
10.31
form of agreement for executive leadership group restricted share unit retention awards, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file
number 1-812) filed with the sec on march 24, 2006.
10.32
schedule of terms for executive leadership restricted share unit awards, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed
with the sec on march 24, 2006.
10.33
united technologies corporation board of directors 2006 retainer payment election form, incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form 8-k (commission file number
1-812) filed with the sec on april 18, 2006.
10.34
form of award agreement for performance share units and stock appreciation rights awards relating to the 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs current
report on form 8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008), incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form 8-k filed with the sec on october16, 2006.
10.35
united technologies corporation international deferred compensation replacement plan, effective january 1, 2005.*
10.36
united technologies corporation ltip performance share unit deferral plan, relating to the 2005 long-term incentive plan (previously filed as exhibit 10.1 to utcs current report on form
8-k (commission file number 1-812) filed with the sec on april 11, 2008).*
statement re: computations of per share earnings.*
statement re: computation of ratios.*
annual report for the year ended december 31, 2008 (except for the information therein expressly incorporated by reference in this form 10-k, the annual report is provided solely for the
information of the sec and is not to be deemed filed as part of this form 10-k).*
code of ethics. the utc code of ethics may be accessed via utcs website athttp://www.investors.utc.com/utc/static%20files/governance/coe_english.pdf.
subsidiaries of the registrant.*
table of contents
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp.*
powers of attorney of john v. faraci, jean-pierre garnier, jamie s. gorelick, edward a. kangas, charles r. lee, richard d. mccormick, harold w. mcgraw iii, richard b. myers, h. patrick swygert,
andr villeneuve and christine todd whitman.*
rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certifications.*
section 1350 certifications.*
100.ins
xbrl instance document.* (file name: utx-20081231.xml)
100.sch
xbrl taxonomy extension schema document.* (file name:
utx-20081231.xsd)
100.pre
xbrl taxonomy presentation linkbase document.* (file
name: utx-20081231_pre.xml)
100.lab
xbrl taxonomy label linkbase document.* (file name:
utx-20081231_lab.xml)
100.cal
xbrl taxonomy calculation linkbase document.* (file
name: utx-20081231_cal.xml)
100.def
xbrl taxonomy definition linkbase document.* file name:
utx-20081231_def.xml)
notes to exhibits list:
*
submitted electronically herewith.  exhibits 10.1 through 10.36 are
contracts, arrangements or compensatory plans filed as exhibits pursuant to item15(b) of the requirements for form 10-k reports.  attached as exhibit
100 to this report are the following formatted in xbrl (extensible business reporting language) for the year ended december 31, 2008: (i) consolidated statement of operations, (ii) consolidated balance sheet, (iii) consolidated statement of cash
flows, (iv) consolidated statement of changes in shareowners equity, and (v) notes to consolidated financial statements tagged in block text format. users of this data are advised pursuant to rule 401 of regulation s-t that the information
contained in the xbrl documents is unaudited and these are not the official publicly filed financial statements of united technologies corporation. the purpose of submitting these xbrl formatted documents is to test the related format and technology
and, as a result, investors should continue to rely on the official filed version of the furnished documents and not rely on this information in making investment decisions.  in accordance with rule 402 of regulation s-t, the xbrl related information in exhibit 100 to this annual report on form 10-k shall not be deemed to be filed for purposes of section18 of the exchange
act, or otherwise subject to the liability of that section, and shall not be incorporated by reference into any registration statement or other document filed under the securities act or the exchange act, except as shall be expressly set forth by
specific reference in such filing.
table of contents
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
united technologies corporation
(registrant)
by:
/s/ gregory j. hayes
gregory j. hayes
senior vice president and chief financial officer
by:
/s/ margaret m. smyth
margaret m. smyth
vice president, controller
date: february11, 2009  pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ george david
director, chairman
february11,2009
(george david)
/s/ louis r. chnevert
director, president and chief executive officer
february 11, 2009
(louis r. chnevert)
/s/ gregory j. hayes
senior vice president and chief financial officer
february 11, 2009
(gregory j. hayes)
/s/ margaret m. smyth
vice president, controller
february 11, 2009
(margaret m. smyth)
/s/ john v. faraci*
director)
(john v. faraci)
/s/ jean-pierre garnier*
director)
(jean-pierre garnier)
/s/ jamie s. gorelick *
director)
(jamie s. gorelick)
/s/ edward a. kangas *
director)
(edward a. kangas )
/s/ charles r. lee*
director)
(charles r. lee)
/s/ richard d. mccormick*
director)
(richard d. mccormick)
table of contents
/s/ harold w. mcgraw iii*
director)
(harold w. mcgraw iii)
/s/ richard b. myers*
director)
(richard b. myers)
/s/ h. patrick swygert*
director)
(h. patrick swygert)
/s/ andr villeneuve*
director)
(andr villeneuve)
/s/ christine todd whitman*
director)
(christine todd whitman)
*by:
/s/ charles d. gill
charles d. gill
senior vice president and general counsel, as attorney-in-fact
date: february11, 2009
table of contents
schedule i  report of independent registered public accounting firm on  financial statement schedule  to the board of directors  of united technologies corporation:  our audits of the consolidated financial
statements and of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting referred to in our report dated february11, 2009 appearing in the 2008 annual report to shareowners of united technologies corporation (which report and
consolidated financial statements are incorporated by reference in this annual report on form 10-k) also included an audit of the financial statement schedule listed in item15(a)(2) of this form 10-k. in our opinion, this financial statement
schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
hartford, connecticut
february11, 2009
s-i
table of contents
schedule ii  united technologies corporation and subsidiaries  valuation and qualifying accounts  three years ended december31, 2008  (millions of dollars)  allowances for doubtful
accounts and other customer financing activity:
balance december31, 2005
$
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off (net)
(89
)
other adjustments
balance december31, 2006
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off (net)
(101
)
other adjustments
balance december31, 2007
provision charged to income
doubtful accounts written off (net)
(129
)
other adjustments
(12
)
balance december31, 2008
$
future income tax benefitsvaluation allowance:
balance december31, 2005
$
additions charged to income tax expense
additions charged to goodwill, due to acquisitions
reductions credited to income tax expense
(92
)
other adjustments
balance december31, 2006
additions charged to income tax expense
additions charged to goodwill, due to acquisitions
reductions credited to income tax expense
(36
)
other adjustments
(94
)
balance december31, 2007
additions charged to income tax expense
reductions charged to goodwill, due to acquisitions
(152
)
reductions credited to income tax expense
(11
)
other adjustments
balance december31, 2008
$
s-ii
