10-k
a2152314z10-k.htm
10-k
quicklinks
-- click here to rapidly navigate through this document
united states
securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k annual report
pursuant to section13 or 15 (d)of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the year ended december 31, 2004
1-2360 (commission file number)
international business machines corporation (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
new york (state of incorporation)
13-0871985 (irs employer identification number)
armonk, new york (address of principal executive offices)
10504 (zip code)
914-499-1900 (registrant's telephone number)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
voting shares outstanding
at february 10, 2005
name of each exchange
on which registered
capital stock, par value $.20 per share
1,632,628,968
new york stock exchange
chicago stock exchange
pacific stock exchange
6.45% notes due 2007
new york stock exchange
5.375% notes due 2009
new york stock exchange
7.50% debentures due 2013
new york stock exchange
8.375% debentures due 2019
new york stock exchange
7.00% debentures due 2025
new york stock exchange
6.22% debentures due 2027
new york stock exchange
6.50% debentures due 2028
new york stock exchange
7.00% debentures due 2045
new york stock exchange
7.125% debentures due 2096
new york stock exchange
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days. yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be
contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to
this form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in exchange act rule12b-2).
yesnoo
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of the last business day of the registrant's most recently
completed second fiscal quarter was $147.6billion.
documents
incorporated by reference:
portions
of ibm's annual report to stockholders for the year ended december31, 2004 into parts i, ii and iv of form10-k.
portions
of ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders
to be held april26, 2005 are incorporated by reference into partiii of form10-k.
part i
item 1. business:
international business machines corporation (ibm) was incorporated in the state of new york on june16, 1911, as the computing-tabulating-recording co.
(c-t-r), a consolidation of the computing scale co. of america, the tabulating machine co., and the international time recording co. of new york. since that time, ibm has focused on the intersection
of business insight and technological invention, and its operations and aims have been international in nature. this was signaled 80years ago, in 1924, when c-t-r changed its name to
international business machines corporation. and it continues today: ibm is the largest information technology company in the world, the world's largest business and technology services company, the
world's largest consulting services organization, the world's largest information technology research organization, and the world's largest financier of information technology.
*
* *
ibm
is an innovation-based business serving the needs of enterprises and institutions worldwide. it defines innovation as the intersection of business insight and technological
invention. ibm seeks to deliver client successin whatever ways its clients define successby giving them differentiating capabilities that provide unique competitive
advantage.
by
helping its clients redesign their business processes and organizational structure, enabled by new operating environments, ibm helps them to become on demand businesses. ibm defines
an on demand business as an enterprise whose business processes are responsive to any demand, opportunity or threat; integrated end-to-end across the company; and capable of
integrating fluidly across extended business ecosystems of partners, suppliers and clients.
ibm
first described this new model and set of capabilities in 2002, believing they represent the current evolution of information technology architectures and of business and
institutional models. ibm calls this architecture the on demand operating environment: an infrastructure based on industry-wide standards (commonly referred to as "open standards"), rather
than proprietary technologies. in ibm's view, an enterprise's investment in such an infrastructure provides both superior returns and maximum freedom of interoperability and action. standards have
become a core element of ibm's overall strategy and impact all of our unit strategies.
the
shift to standards-based technologies has been bolstered significantly in recent years by the rapid growth of the "open source" software movement, a result of large-scale
collaboration among members of the worldwide developer and business communities. examples include the linux operating system, the eclipse computing platform and the java programming language.
ibm's
clients include many different kinds of enterprises, from sole proprietorships to the world's largest organizations, governments and companies representing every major industry and
endeavor. over the last decade, ibm has exited or greatly de-emphasized its involvement in consumer markets and divested itself of other noncore businesses to concentrate on the enterprise
market. in ibm's view, opportunities in the enterprise market are superiorrepresenting approximately two-thirds of the it industry's revenue. as a result, ibm has made
acquisitions and invested in emerging business opportunities important to its enterprise clients. many of these investments have grown into multibillion dollar businesses in their own right, and are
now contributing to ibm's growth.
the
majority of the company's enterprise business, which excludes the company's original equipment manufacturer (oem) technology business, occurs in industries that are broadly grouped
into six sectors around which the company's go-to-market strategies, and sales and distribution activities are organized:
financial
services: banking, financial markets, insurance
public:
education, government, healthcare, life sciences
industrial:
aerospace, automotive, defense, chemical and petroleum, electronics
distribution:
consumer products, retail, travel, transportation
communications:
telecommunications, media and entertainment, energy and utilities
small
and medium business: mainly companies with less than 1,000 employees
the it industry and ibm's strategy
ibm operates in the it industry, which comprises three principal categories:
business
value
infrastructure
value
component
value
ibm
has realized and continues to see a shift in revenue and profit growth from component value to infrastructure value and business value, where revenue and profit potential are thought
to be greatest in the years ahead.
business value
the company helps its clients transform their businesses and gain competitive advantage by applying its skills and experience to business performance challenges
specific to the client's industry or across industries and processes. the company enters into long-term relationships and creates solutions for clients, driving on demand business
innovation, on its own or in partnership with other companies. the company draws upon its broad product and service offerings, including business consulting services, ibm research, industry-leading
middleware, and its deep experience in systems and technology design.
capabilities
business consulting services (bcs). delivery of value to clients through consulting services for client relationship management, financial management,
human capital, business strategy and change, and supply chain management as well as application innovation and the transformation of business processes and operations. (global services)
business performance management (bpm). enables companies to visualize end-to-end processes across business and it systems,
analyze execution in real time against goals, and make adjustments as needed. ibm offers consulting, services and middleware to simulate and monitor business processes, and provides customers with
real-time analysis of the underlying it systems carrying out those processes. (software)
business transformation outsourcing (bto). delivers improved business results to clients through the continual strategic change and the operation and
transformation of the client's business processes, applications and infrastructure. (global services)
center for business optimization (cbo). helps clients continuously optimize their business performance by drawing upon massive amounts of
real-time data, advanced analytical methods, business expertise, and deep computing power. (global services)
customer financing. lease and loan financing to external clients and internal clients for terms generally between two and five years. (global financing)
engineering& technology services (e&ts). system and component design services, strategic outsourcing of clients' design teams, and technology
and manufacturing consulting services. (systems and technology group)
on demand innovation services (odis). ibm research scientists work with bcs consultants to analyze and solve clients' most intractable business
challenges. odis offers a number of cross-industry micropractices with deep expertise including mobile enablement and information mining. (global services and ibm research)
software and services to meet industry-specific needs. solutions and applications built on an on demand, standards-based infrastructure to transform a
process that is unique to specific industries. (multiple ibm segments)
business performance transformation services (bpts). helps clients transform their spending on business processes, namely selling, general and
administrative and research and development. bpts requires advanced technology and deep expertise in industry and or specific functions like human resources (hr), logistics, payroll, sales, customer
services and procurement, to result in holistic improvement for the performance and success of a business, including efficiency of individual processes and their combined effort. bpts solutions are
delivered to clients by several of the company's business areas: bto, e&ts, strategy and change consulting and bpm. (multiple ibm segments)
infrastructure value
infrastructure value includes systems, such as high-volume servers; middleware software that can interconnect disparate operating systems and
applications with data; storage networks; and devices. it also refers to such services as infrastructure managementwhether on the client's premises or managed remotely at ibm's own
facilitiesand consulting about how to improve and strengthen the infrastructure and realize greater return on investment in it. central to ibm's approach for building value in the
infrastructure category is its support of open standards and its active promotion of linux and other open source platforms, which help ibm's clients control costs and allow them to benefit from the
latest advances created by development communities around the world. ibm's strategic objective is to deliver open and integrated offerings and expand partnerships.
capabilities
application management services. application development, management, maintenance and support services for packaged software, as well as custom and
legacy applications. (global services)
commercial financing. short-term inventory and accounts receivable financing to dealers and remarketers of it products. (global financing)
db2 information management software. advanced database and content management software solutions that enable clients to leverage information on demand.
(software)
e-business hosting services. solutions for the management of clients' web-based infrastructure and business applications, as
well as a growing portfolio of industry-specific independent software vendor (isv) solutions that are delivered as a service. (global services)
integrated technology services (its). design, implementation and maintenance of clients' technology infrastructures. (global services)
lotus software. collaboration and messaging software that allows a company's employees, clients, vendors and partners to engage in real-time
and asynchronous communication and knowledge management. (software)
personal computers. notebook and desktop computers featuring thinkvantage technologies that provide enterprises and end users with increased
productivity and cost effectiveness. (personal systems group)
printing systems. production print solutions, on demand print-related solutions, enterprise workgroup print technologies, and print management software
and services. (personal systems group)
rational software. integrated tools designed to improve an organization's software development processes and capabilities. (software)
remarketing. the sale and lease of used equipment (primarily sourced from the conclusion of lease transactions) to new or existing clients. (global
financing)
retail store solutions. point-of-sale retail checkout equipment, software and solutions. (personal systems group)
servers. ibm eserver systems using ibm operating systems (zseries and iseries), as well as aix, the ibm unix operating system (pseries) and the
microsoft windows operating system (xseries). all servers can also run linux, a key open source operating system. (systems and technology group and software)
storage. data storage products, including disk, tape and storage area networks. (systems and technology group)
strategic outsourcing services (so). competitive cost advantages through the outsourcing of processes and operations. (global services)
tivoli software. software for infrastructure management, including security, change, configuration, job scheduling, storage capability, performance and
availability. (software)
websphere software. management of a wide variety of business processes using open standards to interconnect applications, data and operating systems.
(software)
component value
component value includes advanced semiconductor development and manufacturing for ibm's server and storage offerings, and services, technology and licenses
provided to oemsthat create and market products requiring advanced chips and other core technology elements. ibm leverages components for infrastructure value, while continuing to participate
in selected markets, focusing on key industry partners.
capabilities
application specific integrated circuit (asics). manufacturing of customized semiconductor products for clients. (systems and technology group)
advanced foundry. integrated supply chain services and a full suite of semiconductor manufacturing services using either a client's or ibm's design.
(systems and technology group)
standard products and custom microprocessors. semiconductors designed and manufactured primarily based upon ibm's powerpc architecture. (systems and
technology group)
business segments
organizationally, the company's major operations comprise a global services segment; a systems and technology group; a personal systems group; a software segment;
a global financing segment; and an enterprise investments segment.
global services is a critical component of the company's strategy of providing insight and solutions to clients. while solutions often
include industry-leading ibm software and hardware, other suppliers' products are also used if a client solution requires it. global services outsourcing contracts as well as bcs contracts range from
less than one year to ten years.
systems and technology group provides ibm's clients with business solutions requiring advanced computing power and storage capabilities.
more than half of the systems and technology group's eserver and storage systems sales transactions are through business partners and approximately 40percent are direct to end-user
clients and more than half are through the web at ibm.com. in addition, the group provides leading semiconductor technology and products, packaging solutions and engineering technology services to oem
clients (approximately 14percent of systems and technology group revenue) and for ibm's own advanced technology needs. while appropriately not reported as external revenue, hardware is also
deployed to support global services solutions.
personal systems group includes sales of personal computers, business and computing solutions for retail stores and advanced printing
capabilities for large enterprise clients and small and medium-sized businesses. in december2004, it was announced that lenovo group limited, the largest information technology company in
china, will acquire ibm's personal computing division. this transaction is expected to close in the second quarter of 2005.
software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems software. middleware software enables clients to integrate systems,
processes and applications across their enterprises. middleware is designed
to be the underlying support for applications provided by independent software vendors (isvs), who build industry- or process-specific applications according to open industry standards. operating
systems are the engines that run computers. approximately 40percent of external software revenue relates to one-time charge (otc) arrangements, whereby the client pays one up-front
payment for a lifetime license. the remaining annuity revenue consists of both maintenance revenue sold with otc arrangements, as well as software sold on a monthly license charge (mlc) arrangement.
typically, arrangements for the sale of otc software include one year of maintenance. the client can also purchase ongoing maintenance after the first year, which includes product upgrades and
technical support.
global financing is described on pages 35 to 39 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which is hereby incorporated by reference.
enterprise investments develops and provides industry-specific it solutions supporting the hardware, software and global services segments
of the company. primary product lines include product life cycle management software and document processing technologies. product life cycle management software primarily serves the industrial sector
and helps clients manage the development and manufacturing of their products. document processor products service the financial services sector and include products that enable electronic banking.
ibm worldwide organizations
the following three company-wide organizations play key roles in ibm's delivery of value to its clients:
sales&
distribution organization and related sales channels
research,
development and intellectual property
integrated
supply chain
sales& distribution organization
with comprehensive knowledge of ibm's business and infrastructure solutions, as well as the individual products, technologies and services offered by ibm and its
network of business partners, the company's global team of account representatives and solutions professionals gain a deep understanding of each client's organizational, infrastructure and
industry-specific needs to determine the best approach for addressing the client's critical business and it challenges. these professionals work in integrated teams with ibm consultants and technology
representatives, combining their deep skills and expertise to deliver high-value solutions.
internal routes-to-market
global services consultants focused on selling end-to-end solutions for large, complex business challenges.
hardware
and software brand specialists selling ibm products as parts of discrete technology decisions, typically to "self-integrating" it departments.
ibm.com
online and telephone sales and assistance operations handle basic commodity transactions for large enterprises and small-to-medium businesses.
business partners routes-to-market
global/major independent software vendors (isvs). isvs deliver business process or industry-specific applications and, in doing so, often influence the sale of
ibm hardware, middleware and services.
global/major
systems integrators (sis). sis identify business problems and design solutions when global services is not the preferred systems integrator; they also sell computing
infrastructures from ibm and its competitors.
regional
isvs and sis. sis identify the business problems, and isvs deliver business process or industry-specific applications to medium-sized and large businesses requiring ibm
computing infrastructure offerings.
solutions
providers, resellers and distributors. resellers sell ibm platforms and value-added services as part of a discrete technology platform decision to clients wanting third-party
assistance.
research, development and intellectual property
ibm's research and development (r&d) operations differentiate ibm from its competitors. ibm annually spends approximately $5-6billion for r&d,
including capitalized software costs, focusing its investments in high-growth opportunities. as a result of innovations in these and other areas, ibm was once again awarded more u.s.
patents in 2004 than any other company. this marks the 12th year in a row that ibm achieved this distinction.
in
addition to producing world-class hardware and software products, ibm innovations are a major differentiator in providing solutions for the company's clients through its growing
services activities. the company's investments in r&d also result in intellectual property (ip) income. some of ibm's technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in ibm products, while others are
used by the company's licensees for their products when that new technology is not strategic to ibm's business goals. a third group is both used internally and licensed externally.
in
addition to these ip income sources, the company also generates value from its patent portfolio through cross-licensing arrangements and ip licensed in divestiture transactions. the
value of these other two sources is not readily apparent in the financial results and consolidated statement of earnings, because income on cross-licensing arrangements is recorded only to the extent
cash is received. the value received by ibm for ip involving the sale of a business is included in the overall gain or loss from the divestiture, not in the separately displayed ip income amounts in
financial results and consolidated statement of earnings.
in
january2005, ibm announced that it would pledge 500 of its patents for use by the open computing community, representing a major shift in the way ibm manages and deploys its
intellectual property portfolio. ibm's intent is to help form an industry-wide "patent commons," in which patents are used to establish a platform for further innovation in areas of broad
interest to information technology developers and users. the pledge is applicable to any individual, community, or company working on or using software that meets the open source initiative (osi)
definition of open source software.
integrated supply chain
just as ibm works to transform its clients' supply chains for greater efficiency and responsiveness to market conditions, ibm has undertaken a large-scale
initiative to recast its own integrated supply chain as an on demand business operation, turning what had previously been an expense to be managed into a strategic advantage for the company and,
ultimately, improved delivery and outcomes for its clients. ibm spends approximately $41billion annually through its supply chain, procuring materials and services around the world. the
company's supply, manufacturing and distribution operations are integrated in one operating unit that has reduced inventories, improved response to marketplace opportunities and external risks and
converted fixed to variable costs. simplifying and streamlining internal operations has improved sales force productivity and processes and thereby the experiences of the company's clients when
working with ibm. because some of the cost savings this unit generates are passed along to clients, they will not always result in a visible gross margin improvement in the company's consolidated
statement of earnings. while these efforts are largely concerned with product manufacturing and delivery, ibm is also applying supply chain principles to service delivery across its solutions and
services lines of business. to accomplish this, ibm is creating a new labor resource management systembased on a uniform taxonomy of skillsthat will enable the organization
to more efficiently match its labor resources to the needs of ibm clients, deploy the right expertise quickly, and create a better short-term and long-term balance of labor
supply and demand by comparing the demands of the market against the database of available skills.
in
addition to its own manufacturing operations, the company uses a number of contract manufacturing (cm) companies around the world to manufacture ibm-designed products. the
use of cm companies is intended to generate cost efficiencies and reduce time-to-market for certain ibm products. some of the company's relationships with cm companies are
exclusive. the company has key relationships with sanmina-sci for the manufacture of some intel-based products and with solectron for a significant portion of the manufacturing operations
of global asset recovery servicesan operation of global financing that restores end-of-lease personal computers and other it equipment for resale.
significant factors affecting ibm's business
forward-looking and cautionary statements:certain statements contained in this annual report may constitute "forward-looking
statements" within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995 ("reform act"). the company may also make forward-looking statements in other reports filed with the securities
and exchange commission, in materials delivered to stockholders and in press releases. in addition, the company's representatives may from time to time make oral forward-looking statements.
forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. words
such as "anticipates," "believes," "expects," "estimates," "intends," "plans," "projects," and similar expressions, may identify such forward-looking statements. the company assumes no obligation to
update or revise any forward-looking statements. in accordance with the reform act, set forth below are cautionary statements that accompany those forward-looking statements. readers should carefully
review these cautionary statements as they identify certain important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements and from historical
trends. the following cautionary statements are not exclusive and are in addition to other factors discussed elsewhere in this annual report, in the company's filing with the securities and exchange
commission or in materials incorporated therein by reference.
economic environment and corporate it spending budgets:if overall demand for hardware, software and services changes,
whether due to general economic conditions or a shift in corporate buying patterns, sales performance could be impacted. ibm's diverse portfolio of products and offerings is designed to gain market
share in strong and weak economic climates. the company accomplishes this by not only having a mix of offerings with long-term cash and income streams as well as cyclical transaction-based
sales, but also by continually developing competitive products and solutions and effectively managing a skilled resource base. ibm continues to transform itself to take advantage of shifting demand
trends, focusing on client or industry-specific solutions, business performance and open standards.
internal business transformation and efficiency initiatives:ibm continues to drive greater productivity and cost savings as
it transforms itself into an on demand enterprise. this includes the internal supply chain initiatives discussed above, as well as driving collaboration across the ibm enterprise to stimulate
innovation and drive growth. transformation efforts are improving the company's management of its costs worldwide: the rebalancing of skills, optimizing its workforce to drive growth, keeping the
company's compensation programs competitive, and creating a cost efficient and cutting-edge it infrastructure to support its transformation. ibm is extending its supply chain initiatives to labor
costs and other internal processes. continued success in this area will impact the company's cost structure
improvements, as well as the amount of competitive leverage it can apply by passing savings along to clients.
innovation initiatives:ibm invests for new and innovative capabilities, products and services. ibm has been moving away from
commoditized categories of the it industry and into areas in which it can differentiate itself through innovation and by leveraging its investments in r&d. examples include ibm's leadership position
in the design and fabrication of asics; the design of smaller, faster and energy-efficient semiconductor devices; the design of "grid" computing networks that allow computers to share processing
power; the transformation and integration of business processes; and the company's efforts to advance open technology standards and to engage with governments, academia, think tanks and
nongovernmental organizations on emerging trends in technology, society and culture. in the highly competitive it industry, with large diversified competitors as well as smaller and nimble single-
technology competitors, ibm's ability to continue its cutting-edge innovation is critical to maintaining and increasing market share. ibm is managing this risk by more closely linking its
r&d organization to industry-specific and client-specific needs, as discussed in description of businessibm worldwide organizations.
open standards:the broad adoption of open standards is essential to the computing model for on demand business and is a
significant driver of collaborative innovation across all industries. without interoperability among all manner of computing platforms, the integration of any client's internal systems, applications
and processes remains a monumental and expensive task. the broad-based acceptance of open standardsrather than closed, proprietary architecturesalso allows the computing
infrastructure to more easily absorb (and thus benefit from) new technical innovations. ibm is committed to fostering open standards because they are vital to the on demand operating environment, and
because their acceptance will expand growth opportunities across the entire business services and it industry. there are a number of competitors in the it industry with significant resources and
investments who are committed to closed and proprietary platforms as a way to lock customers into a particular architecture. this competition will result in increased pricing pressure and/or ip claims
and proceedings. ibm's support of open standards is evidenced by the enabling of its products to support open standards such as linux, and the development of rational software development tools, which
can be used to develop and upgrade any other company's software products.
emerging business opportunities:the company is continuing to refocus its business on the higher value segments of enterprise
computingproviding technology and transformation services to clients' businesses. consistent with that focus, the company continues to significantly invest in emerging business
opportunities, as a way to drive revenue growth and market share gain. areas of investment
include
strategic acquisitions, primarily in software and services, information-based medicine, on demand retail, sensor and actuator solutions, business performance transformation services, key
technologies (power5 and powerblade) and emerging growth countries such as china, russia, india and brazil.
protection of intellectual property:while the company's various proprietary intellectual property rights are important to
its success, ibm believes its business as a whole is not materially dependent on any particular patent or license, or any particular group of patents or licenses. ibm owns or is licensed under a
number of patents, which vary in duration, relating to its products. licenses under patents owned by ibm have been and are being granted to others under reasonable terms and conditions. these
protections may not prevent competitors from independently developing products and services similar to or duplicative to the company's nor can there be any assurance that these protections will
adequately deter misappropriation or improper use of the company's technology. also, there can be no assurances that ibm will be able to obtain from third parties the licenses it needs in the future.
relationships with critical suppliers:ibm's business employs a wide variety of components, supplies, services and raw
materials from a substantial number of suppliers around the world. certain of the company's businesses rely on single or limited number of suppliers, although the company makes every effort to assure
that alternative sources are available if the need arises. the failure of the company's suppliers to deliver components, supplies, services and raw materials in sufficient quantities and in a timely
manner could adversely affect the company's business.
seasonality of revenues:ibm's revenues are affected by such factors as the introduction of new products, the length of the
sales cycles and the seasonality of technology purchases. as a result, the company's results are difficult to predict. these factors historically have resulted in lower revenue in the first quarter
than in the immediately preceding fourth quarter.
local legal and economic conditions:the company operates in more than 160 countries worldwide and derives more than half of
its revenues from sales outside the united states. changes in the laws or policies of the countries in which the company operates could affect the company's business in that country and the company's
results of operations. the company's results of operations also could be affected by economic and political changes in those countries and by macroeconomic changes, including recessions and inflation.
environmental matters.the company is subject to various federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations concerning
the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise related to environmental protection, including the u.s. superfund law. the company could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs,
fines and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if it were to violate or become liable under environmental laws and regulations. compliance
with environmental laws and regulations is not expected to have a material adverse effect on the company's capital expenditures, earnings and competitive position.
internal controls.effective internal controls are necessary for the company to provide reasonable assurance with respect to
its financial reports and to effectively prevent fraud. if the company cannot provide reasonable assurance with respect to its financial reports and effectively prevent fraud, the company's brand and
operating results could be harmed. pursuant to the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, the company is required to furnish a report by management on internal control over financial reporting, including
management's assessment of the effectiveness of such control. internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements because of its inherent limitations, including the
possibility of human error, the circumvention or overriding of controls, or fraud. therefore, even effective internal controls can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to the preparation and
fair presentation of financial statements. in addition, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the
control may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. if the company fails to maintain the adequacy of its
internal
controls, including any failure to implement required new or improved controls, or if the company experiences difficulties in their implementation, the company's business and operating
results could be harmed, the company could fail to meet its reporting obligations, and there could be a material adverse effect on the company's stock price.
competitive conditions:the company operates in businesses that are subject to intense competitive pressures. the company's
businesses face a significant number of competitors, ranging from fortune 50 companies to an increasing number of relatively small, rapidly growing and highly specialized organizations. the company
believes that its combination of technology, performance, quality, reliability, price and the breadth of products and service offerings are important competitive factors.
intense
competitive pressures could affect prices or demand for the company's products and services, resulting in reduced profit margins and/or loss of market opportunity. unlike many of
its competitors, the company has a portfolio of businesses and must allocate resources across these businesses while competing with companies that specialize in one or more of these product lines. as
a result, the company may not fund or invest in certain of its businesses to the same degree that its competitors do, and these competitors may have greater financial, technical and marketing
resources available to them than the businesses against which they compete.
volatility of stock prices:the company's stock price is affected by a number of factors, including quarterly variations in
results, the competitive landscape, general economic and market conditions and estimates and projections by the investment community. as a result, like other technology companies, the company's stock
price is subject to significant volatility.
dependence on and compensation of key personnel:much of the future success of the company depends on the continued service
and availability of skilled personnel, including technical, marketing and staff positions. experienced personnel in the information technology industry are in high demand and competition for their
talents is intense. there can be no assurance that the company will be able to
successfully retain and attract the key personnel it needs. many of the company's key personnel receive a total compensation package that includes equity awards. new regulations, volatility in the
stock market and other factors could diminish the company's use, and the value, of the company's equity awards, putting the company at a competitive disadvantage or forcing the company to use more
cash compensation.
currency and customer financing risks:the company derives a significant percentage of its non-u.s. revenues from
its affiliates operating in local currency environments and its results are affected by changes in the relative values of non-u.s. currencies and the u.s. dollar. further, inherent in the
company's customer financing business are risks related to the concentration of credit risk and the creditworthiness of the client, interest rate and currency fluctuations on the associated debt and
liabilities and the determination of residual values. the company employs a number of strategies to manage these risks, including the use of derivative financial instruments. derivatives involve the
risk of non-performance by the counterparty. in addition, there can be no assurance that the company's efforts to manage these risks will be successful.
distribution channels:the company offers its products directly and through a variety of third party distributors and
resellers. changes in the financial or business condition of these distributors and resellers could subject the company to losses and affect its ability to bring its products to market.
acquisitions and alliances:the company has made and expects to continue to make acquisitions or enter into alliances from
time to time. acquisitions and alliances present significant challenges and risks relating to the integration of the business into the company, and there can be no assurances that the company will
manage acquisitions and alliances successfully.
backlog:the value of unfilled orders is not a meaningful indicator of future revenues from the company's product offerings
due to the significant proportion of revenue from services, the volume of products delivered from shelf inventories, and the shortening of product delivery schedules. with respect to the company's
global services segment, in 2004 the company signed contracts totaling $43 billion, which contributed to a services backlog at december31, 2004 of $111 billion, compared with
$120billion at the end of 2003.
the following information is included in ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference:
segment
information and revenue by classes of similar products or servicespages 87 through 91.
financial
information by geographic areaspage 91.
amount
spent during each of the last three years on r&d activitiespage 73.
financial
information regarding environmental activitiespage 68.
the
number of persons employed by the registrantpages 34 and 35.
the
management discussion overviewpages 11 to 12.
available
informationpage 96.
item 2. properties:
at december31, 2004, ibm's manufacturing and development facilities in the united states had aggregate floor space of 27million square feet, of
which 20million was owned and7million was leased. of these amounts,3million square feet was vacant and1million square feet was being leased to
non-ibm businesses. similar facilities in 9other countries totaled 9million square feet, of which6million was owned and3million was leased.
of these amounts,1million square feet was being leased to non-ibm businesses.
although
improved production techniques, productivity gains and infrastructure reduction actions have resulted in reduced manufacturing floor space, continuous upgrading of facilities is
essential to maintain technological leadership, improve productivity, and meet customer demand.
executive officers of the registrant (at february24, 2005):
age
officer since
chairman of the board, president and chief executive officer
samuel j. palmisano(1)
senior vice presidents:
nicholas m. donofrio, corporate technology and manufacturing
douglas t. elix, group executive
j. bruce harreld, strategy
paul m. horn, research
jon c. iwata, communications
john r. joyce, group executive
john e. kelly, iii, technology and intellectual property
abby f. kohnstamm, marketing
edward m. lineen, general counsel
mark loughridge, chief financial officer
j. randall macdonald, human resources
steven a. mills, group executive
robert w. moffat, jr., integrated supply chain
linda s. sanford, enterprise on demand transformation
stephen m. ward, jr., general manager
william m. zeitler, group executive
vice presidents:
jesse j. greene, jr., treasurer
daniel e. o'donnell, secretary
timothy s. shaughnessy, controller
(1)member
of the board of directors.
all
executive officers are elected by the board of directors and serve until the next election of officers in conjunction with the annual meeting of the stockholders as
provided in the by-laws. each executive officer named above, with the exception of j. randall macdonald and jesse j. greene, jr. has been an executive of ibm or its subsidiaries during the
past five years.
mr.macdonald
was with gte (now verizon communications), a telecommunications company, as executive vice president of human resources and administration until joining ibm in 2000.
he was with gte for 17years holding positions of increasing responsibility. before joining gte, mr.macdonald held human resources positions at ingersoll-rand corporation
and sterling drug,inc.
mr.greene
was with compaq computer corporation (now a part of hewlettpackard company), a computer company, as senior vice president and chief financial officer until joining ibm
in 2002. he was with compaq for two years. before joining compaq, mr.greene served as corporate senior vice president and director of business strategy and information technology at eastman
kodak company. during six years at kodak, mr.greene held a number of financial positions including vice president of finance and treasurer. before joining kodak, mr.greene spent
23years at ibm in a variety of financial positions including assistant treasurer.
item 3. legal proceedings:
refer to noteo "contingencies and commitments" on pages 69 through 71 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which is incorporated herein by
reference.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders:
not applicable.
part ii
item 5. market for the registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities:
refer
to page 93 and 96 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which are incorporated herein by reference solely as they relate to this item.
ibm
common stock is listed on the new york stock exchange, chicago stock exchange and pacific stock exchange. there were 662,465 common stockholders of record at february10,
2005.
the
following table provides information relating to the company's repurchase of common stock for the fourth quarter of 2004.
period
total number
of shares
purchased
average
price paid
per share
total number
of shares purchased
as part of publicly
announced program
approximate
dollar value
of shares that
may yet be
purchased under
the program(1)
october 1, 2004october 31, 2004
2,751,200
$
88.24
2,751,200
$
6,376,066,005
november 1, 2004november 30, 2004
12,163,700
$
94.60
12,163,700
$
5,225,396,989
december 1, 2004december 31, 2004
15,812,500
$
97.32
15,812,500
$
3,686,484,737
total
30,727,400
$
95.43
30,727,400
(1)on
february24, 2004, the ibm board of directors authorized up to $4.0billion in additional funds for use in the company's common stock repurchase program. this
authorization was completely utilized before december31, 2004. on october26, 2004 the board of directors authorized up to $4.0billion in additional funds for use in its
repurchase program. ibm has announced that under its repurchase program, it will repurchase shares on the open market or in private transactions from time to time, depending on market conditions. the
repurchase program does not have an expiration date.
item 6. selected financial data:
refer to pages 92 and 93 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which are incorporated herein by reference.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations:
refer to pages 11 through 39 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which are incorporated herein by reference.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risks:
refer to the section titled "market risk" on page 33 and 34 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which is incorporated herein by reference.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data:
refer to pages 9, 10, and 40 through 91 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which are incorporated herein by reference. also refer to the financial
statement schedule on page s-1 of this form.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure:
not
applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures:
evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures
the company's management evaluated, with the participation of the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, the effectiveness of the company's
disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this report. based on that evaluation, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that the
company's disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this report.
internal control over financial reporting
refer to "report of management" and "report of independent registered public accounting firm" on pages9 and 10 of ibm's 2004 annual report to
stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference. there has been no change in the company's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth fiscal quarter that has
materially affected, or is reasonably likely to material affect, the company's internal control over financial reporting.
item 9b. other information
not applicable.
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant:
refer to the information under the captions "election of directors for a term of one year," "committees of the board," "audit committee" and "section16(a)
beneficial ownership reporting compliance" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference. also refer to item2 entitled "executive officers of the registrant" in
parti of this form.
item 11. executive compensation:
refer to the information under the captions "summary compensation table," "stock option/sar grants in last fiscal year," "aggregated option/sar exercises in last
fiscal year and fiscal year-end options/sar values," "long-term incentive plansawards in last fiscal year," "retirement plans," "other deferred compensation plans," "directors'
compensation," "employment agreements and change-in-control arrangements," "report on executive compensation," and "performance graph" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the
securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005, all of which information is incorporated herein
by reference.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters:
refer to the information under the captions "ownership of securities," "security ownership of certain beneficial owners," "common stock and total stock-based
holdings of management," and "equity compensation plan information" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in
connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions:
refer to the information under the caption "other relationships" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and
delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
item 14. principal accountant fees and services:
refer to the information under the captions "report of the audit committee of the board of directors" and "audit and non-audit fees" in ibm's
definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005,
all of which information is incorporated herein by reference.
part iv
item 15. exhibits and financial statement schedules:
(a)the
following documents are filed as part of this report:
1.financial
statements from ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders which are incorporated herein by reference:
report
of independent registered public accounting firm (page 10).
consolidated
statement of earnings for the years ended december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002 (pages 40 and 41).
consolidated
statement of financial position at december31, 2004 and 2003 (pages 42 and 43).
consolidated
statement of cash flows for the years ended december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002 (pages 44 and 45).
consolidated
statement of stockholders' equity at december31, 2004, 2003 and 2002 (pages 46 through 48).
notes
to consolidated financial statements (pages 49 through 91).
2.financial
statement schedules required to be filed by item 8 of this form:
page
schedule
number
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement schedule.
report of independent registered public accounting firm.
report of independent registered public accounting firm.
s1
ii
valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves.
all
other schedules are omitted as the required matter is not present, the amounts are not significant or the information is shown in the consolidated financial
statements or the notes thereto.
3.exhibits:
included
in this form10-k:
by-laws of ibm as amended through february22, 2005.
10.1
form of ltpp buy-first stock option award agreement.
computation of ratio of earnings from continuing operations to fixed charges and earnings from continuing operations to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends.
ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders, certain sections of which have been incorporated herein by reference.
parents and subsidiaries.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
23.2
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1
powers of attorney.
24.2
resolutions of the ibm board of directors authorizing execution of this report by powers of attorney.
31.1
certification by ceo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
31.2
certification by cfo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.1
certification by ceo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
certification by cfo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
not included in this form 10-k:
the certificate of incorporation of ibm is exhibit (3)(i) to form 8-k filed april28, 1999, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm 1999 long term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-30424 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.1 to form10-q
for the quarter ended september30, 2004, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm 2001 long term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-87708 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.2 to form10-q
for the quarter ended september30, 2004, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm pwcc acquisition long term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-102872 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.3 to
form 10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2004, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
forms of ltpp stock option award agreement, long-term incentive program award agreement, and restricted stock unit and stock option award agreement, filed as exhibit10.4 to form10-q for the
quarter ended september30, 2004, and are hereby incorporated by reference.
board of directors compensatory plans, as described under the caption "directors' compensation" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to
stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005, and are hereby incorporated by reference.
ibm board of directors deferred compensation and equity award plan is exhibit x to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 1996, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm non-employee directors stock option plan is appendix b to ibm's definitive proxy statement dated march14, 1995, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm executive deferred compensation plan is contained in registration statement no. 333-33692 as exhibit 4 on form s8, filed march31, 2000, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm supplemental executive retention plan is exhibit vii to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 1999, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm extended tax deferred savings plan is exhibit x to form 10-k for the year ended december31, 1994, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm 2003 employees stock purchase plan, as set forth in appendix a of ibm's definitive proxy statement dated march10, 2003, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the $10,000,000,000 5-year credit agreement dated as of may27, 2004, among international business machines corporation, each subsidiary borrower, the lenders, from time to time parties to the
agreement, jpmorgan chase bank, as administrative agent for the lenders, and citibank, n.a. as syndication agent was filed as exhibit10 to form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2004 and is hereby incorporated by
reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 7.50% debentures due 2013 are exhibits 4(a) through 4(l) to registration statement no.3349475(1) on form s-3, filed may24, 1993, and
are hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of holders of the 8.375% debentures due 2019 are exhibits 4(a)(b)(c) and (d) to registration statement 3331732 on form s-3, filed on october24, 1989, and are
hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of holders of the 7.00% debentures due 2025 and the 7.00% debentures due 2045 are exhibit 2 and 3 to form 8-k, filed on october30, 1995, and are hereby
incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of holders of the 7.125% debentures due 2096 is exhibit 2 to form 8k/a, filed on december6, 1996, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 6.45% notes due 2007 and the 6.22% debentures due 2027 are exhibits 2 and 3 to form 8-k, filed on august1, 1997, and is hereby incorporated
by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 6.50% debentures due 2028 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k, filed on january8, 1998, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 5.375% notes due 2009 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k, filed on january29, 1999, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005,
certain sections of which have been incorporated herein by reference.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
international business machines corporation (registrant)
by:
/s/samuel j. palmisano (samuel j. palmisano) chairman of the board,
president and chief executive officer
date: february24, 2005
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/mark loughridge (mark loughridge)
senior vice president, chief financial officer
february24, 2005
/s/timothy s. shaughnessy (timothy s. shaughnessy)
vice president and controller
february24, 2005
cathleen black
kenneth i. chenault
juergen dormann
michael l. eskew
nannerl o. keohane
charles f. knight
minoru makihara
lucio a. noto
john b. slaughter
joan e. spero
sidney taurel
charles m. vest
lorenzo h. zambrano
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
by:
/s/ daniel e. o'donnell daniel e. o'donnell attorney-in-fact
february24, 2005
report of independent registered public accounting firm  on financial statement schedule
to
the stockholders and board of directors of
international business machines corporation:
our
audits of the consolidated financial statements, of management's assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting and of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting referred to in our report dated february22, 2005 appearing in the 2004 annual report to shareholders of international business machines corporation (which
report, consolidated financial statements and assessment are incorporated by reference in this annual report on form10-k) also included an audit of the financial statement schedule
listed in item 15(a)(2) of this form10-k. in our opinion, this financial statement schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein when read
in conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february22, 2005
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to
the board of directors of
international business machines corporation:
we
have audited the statements of assets and liabilities of the business consulting services reporting unit (the "reporting unit") (a reporting unit as defined in statement of financial
accounting standards no.142), of international business machines corporation (the "company") as of december31, 2004 and 2003 and the related statements of revenues and expenses
(collectively, the "statements") for the years ended december31, 2004 and 2003 and the three months ended december31, 2002 (not separately presented herein). these statements are the
responsibility of the company's management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these statements based on our audits.
we
conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards of the public companyaccounting oversight board (unitedstates). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the
statements. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
the
statements were prepared for the purpose of complying with the rules and regulations of the securities and exchange commission (for use by the company in connection with its various
filings with the commission). certain corporate assets, liabilities and corporate expenses, that are not the responsibility of the reporting unit, and which have not been allocated, have been excluded
from the statements. accordingly, these statements are not intended to be a complete presentation of the financial position or results of operations of the reporting unit.
in
our opinion, the statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit as of december31, 2004 and 2003 and
its revenues and expenses for the years ended december31, 2004 and 2003 and for the three months ended december31, 2002, in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting
principles.
/s/ ernst& young llp
ernst& young llp
new york, new york
february22, 2005
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to
the board of directors of
international business machines corporation
we
have examined management's assertion that the controls over the initiation and recording of revenue transactions and the recording of direct costs of the business consulting services
reporting unit ("the reporting unit") (a reporting unit as defined in statement of financial accounting standards no.142), of international business machines corporation ("ibm") are effective,
as of december31, 2004. management is responsible for its controls over the initiation and recording of revenue transactions and the recording of direct costs of the reporting unit. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on management's assertion based on our examination.
the
control objectives that formed the basis for management's assertion included (1)credit checks, contract pricing, contract terms and conditions, and a valid signed contract
are obtained, reviewed and approved, and non-standard contract terms and conditions are identified for review prior to revenue recognition; (2)invoices are generated based on
contract terms and conditions and reviewed prior to issuance; (3)revenues and accounts receivable are monitored and appropriate adjustments are made timely; (4)costs are appropriately
and timely captured by contract and business unit and reconciled with related revenues; and (5)losses on contracts are identified and appropriate provisions made based on established
accounting policies.
our
examination was conducted in accordance with attestation standards adopted by the public company accounting oversight board (united states) and, accordingly, included obtaining an
understanding of the controls over the initiation and recording of revenue transactions and the recording of direct costs of the reporting unit, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of those controls, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our examination provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
our
examination was limited to those controls that are applied to individual revenue transactions that are initiated within the reporting unit, and to those controls that are applied to
the direct costs by reporting unit personnel. our examination did not extend to ibm's internal control over financial reporting as it relates to applications and controls that are common to all
reporting units within ibm, or to ibm entity-level controls, including those that also affect the recording of the reporting unit's revenues and direct costs.
because
of inherent limitations in any internal control, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected. also, projections of any evaluation of the controls over the
initiation and recording of revenue transactions and the recording of direct costs of the reporting unit to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of
changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the controls may deteriorate.
in
our opinion, management's assertion that the controls over the initiation and recording of revenue transactions and the recording of direct costs of the reporting unit are effective
as of december31, 2004, is fairly stated in all material respects, based on the control objectives described above.
/s/ ernst & young llp
ernst& young llp
new york, new york
february22, 2005
schedule ii
international business machines corporation and subsidiary companies  valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves  for the years ended december31:  (dollars in millions)
description
balance at
beginning
of period
additions
charged
to costs
and expenses
writeoffs
other (a)
balance at
end
of period
allowance for doubtful accounts
current
$
1,100
$
$
$
$
noncurrent
$
$
$
$
$
current
$
1,312
$
$
$
$
1,100
noncurrent
$
$
$
$
$
current
$
$
$
$
$
1,312
noncurrent
$
$
$
$
$
allowance for inventory losses
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
(20
)
$
revenue based provisions
$
1,088
$
5,184
$
5,247
$
$
1,048
$
$
4,905
$
4,853
$
$
1,088
$
1,056
$
4,281
$
4,342
$
$
(a)primarily
comprises currency translation adjustments.
s-1
exhibit index
reference number per item 601 of regulation sk
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
(2)
plan of acquisition, reorganization, arrangement, liquidation or succession
not applicable
(3)
certificate of incorporation and bylaws
the certificate of incorporation of ibm is exhibit (3)(i) to form 8-k filed april 28, 1999, and is hereby incorporated by reference
the bylaws of ibm as amended through february 22, 2005
(4)
instruments defining the rights of security holders
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 7.50% debentures due 2013 are exhibits 4(a) through 4(l) to registration statement no. 3349475(1) on form s-3, filed may 24, 1993, and are hereby incorporated by reference
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 8.375% debentures due 2019 are exhibits 4(a)(b)(c) and (d) to registration statement no. 3331732 on form s-3, filed on october 24, 1989, and are hereby incorporated by reference
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 7.00% debentures due 2025 and the 7.00% debentures due 2045 are exhibits 2 and 3 to form 8-k, filed on october 30, 1995, and are hereby incorporated by reference
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 7.125% debentures due 2096 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k/a, filed on december 6, 1996, and is hereby incorporated by reference
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 6.45% notes due 2007 and the 6.22% debentures due 2027 are exhibit 2 and 3 to form 8k, filed on august 1, 1997, and is hereby incorporated by reference
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 6.50% debentures due 2028 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k, filed on january 8, 1998, and is hereby incorporated by reference
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 5.375% notes due 2009 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k, filed on january 29, 1999, and is hereby incorporated by reference
(9)
voting trust agreement
not applicable
(10)
material contracts
the ibm 1999 long term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-30424 on form s-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.1 to form 10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2004, and is
hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm 2001 long term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-87708 on form s-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.2 to form 10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2004, and is
hereby incorporated by reference.
the ibm pwcc acquisition long term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-102872 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.3 to form10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2004, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
forms of ltpp stock option award agreement, long-term incentive program award agreement, and restricted stock unit and stock option award agreement, filed as exhibit10.4 to form10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2004, and are
hereby incorporated by reference.*
form of ltpp buy-first stock option award agreement*
10.1
board of directors compensatory plans as described under the caption "directors' compensation" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual
meeting of stockholders to be held april26, 2005, and are hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm supplemental executive retention plan is exhibit vii to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1999, and is hereby incorporated by reference*
the ibm executive deferred compensation plan is contained in registration statement no. 333-33692 as exhibit 4 on form s-8, filed march 31, 2000, and is hereby incorporated by reference*
the ibm board of directors deferred compensation and equity award plan is exhibit x to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1996, and is hereby incorporated by reference*
the ibm non-employee directors stock option plan is appendix b to ibm's definitive proxy statement dated march 14, 1995, and is hereby incorporated by reference*
the ibm extended tax deferred savings plan is exhibit x to form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1994, and is hereby incorporated by reference*
the ibm 2003 employees stock purchase plan, set forth in appendixa of ibm's definitive proxy statement dated march 10, 2003, and is hereby incorporated by reference*
the $10,000,000,000 5-year credit agreement dated as of may24, 2004, among international business machines corporation, each subsidiary borrower, the lenders from time to time parties to the agreement, jpmorgan chase bank, as administrative
agent for the lenders, and citibank, n.a., as syndication agent was filed as exhibit10 to form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2004, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
(11)
statement re computation of per share earnings
the statement re computation of per share earnings is note t, "earnings per share of common stock" on page 77 of ibm's 2004 annual report to stockholders, and is hereby incorporated by reference
(12)
statement re computation of ratios
(13)
annual report to security holders
(18)
letter re change in accounting principles
not applicable
(19)
previously unfiled documents
not applicable
(21)
subsidiaries of the registrant
(22)
published report regarding matters submitted to vote of security holders
not applicable
(23.1)
consent of experts
23.1
(23.2)
consent of experts
23.2
(24.1)
powers of attorney
24.1
(24.2)
resolutions of the ibm board of directors authorizing execution of this report by powers of attorney
24.2
(28)
information from reports furnished to state insurance regulatory authorities
not applicable
(31.1)
certification by ceo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
31.1
(31.2)
certification by cfo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
31.2
(32.1)
certification by ceo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.1
(32.2)
certification by cfo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
*management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
quicklinks
part i
part ii
part iii
part iv
signatures
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement schedule
report of independent registered public accounting firm
report of independent registered public accounting firm
international business machines corporation and subsidiary companies valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves for the years ended december 31: (dollars in millions)
exhibit index
