10-k
a2189817z10-k.htm
10-k
quicklinks
-- click here to rapidly navigate through this document
united states
securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k annual report
pursuant to section13 or 15 (d)of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the year ended december 31, 2008
1-2360 (commission file number)
international business machines corporation (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
new york (state of incorporation)
13-0871985 (irs employer identification number)
armonk, new york (address of principal executive offices)
10504 (zip code)
914-499-1900 (registrant's telephone number)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
voting shares outstanding
at february10, 2009
name of each exchange
on which registered
capital stock, par value $.20 per share
1,341,677,786
newyorkstockexchange
chicagostockexchange
4.00% notes due 2011
newyorkstockexchange
4.95% notes due 2011
newyorkstockexchange
6.625% notes due 2014
newyorkstockexchange
7.50% debentures due 2013
newyorkstockexchange
8.375% debentures due 2019
newyorkstockexchange
7.00% debentures due 2025
newyorkstockexchange
6.22% debentures due 2027
newyorkstockexchange
6.50% debentures due 2028
newyorkstockexchange
7.00% debentures due 2045
newyorkstockexchange
7.125% debentures due 2096
newyorkstockexchange
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer as defined in
rule405 of the securities act. yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or
section15(d) of the act. yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see definition of "accelerated filer," "large accelerated filer" and "smaller reporting company" in rule12b-2 of
the exchange act.
large accelerated filer
acceleratedfilero
non-accelerated filero
smaller reporting companyo
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in exchange act
rule12b-2). yesono
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of
the last business day of the registrant's most recently completed second fiscal quarter was $160.6billion.
documents incorporated by reference:
portions of ibm's annual report to stockholders for the year ended december31, 2008 into parts i, ii
and iv of form10-k.
portions of ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and
delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009 are incorporated by reference into partiii of form10-k.
part i
item 1. business:
international business machines corporation (ibm or the company) was incorporated in the state of new york on june16, 1911, as
the computing-tabulating-recording co. (c-t-r), a consolidation of the computing scale co. of america, the tabulating machine co. and the international time recording co. of
new york. since that time, ibm has focused on the intersection of business insight and technological invention, and its operations and aims have been international in nature. this was signaled over 80
years ago, in 1924, when c-t-r changed its name to international business machines corporation. and it continues today: the company creates business value for clients and solves business problems
through integrated solutions that leverage information technology and deep knowledge of business processes. ibm solutions typically create value by reducing a client's operational costs or by enabling
new capabilities that generate revenue. these solutions draw from an industry leading portfolio of consulting, delivery and implementation services, enterprise software, systems and financing.
strategy
in ibm's view, today's networked economy has created a global business landscape and a mandate for business change. it also opens the
opportunity to upgrade the efficiency and effectiveness of the global infrastructure through embedded information technologywhat ibm calls a "smarter planet." smart airports, smart
highways, smart supply chains are all possible. ibm is working with clients and governments around the world to explore these opportunities and implement new ideas.
integrated
global economies have opened markets of new opportunity and new sources of skills. the internet has enabled communication and collaboration across the world and brought with
it a new computing model premised on continuous global connection. in that landscape, companies can distribute work and technology anywhere in the world. ibm continues to adjust its footprint toward
emerging geographies, tapping their higher growth, providing the technology infrastructure they need and taking advantage of the talent pools they provide to better service the company's clients.
at
the same time, the current economic crisis increases the pressure on both businesses and governments around the world to adapt. the needs for additional transparency, security and
efficiencies are clear.
given
these opportunities and economic challenges, ibm is working with its clients to develop new business designs and technical architectures that allow their businesses the flexibility
required to compete in this new landscape. ibm's strategy addresses this new era and delivers value to its clients through three strategic priorities:
focus on open technologies and high-value solutions
a new computing model has emerged, replacing the pc-based, client/server approach. this new model is networked, modular, open and
represents a fundamental shift in the technology requirements of the company's clients. ibm is well positioned to provide its enterprise clients the open technologies and high-value
solutions they will need to compete.
ibm is leveraging its leadership position in the convergence of software and services, in service oriented architecture
(soa), in virtualization, business intelligence and analytics, in open and modular information technology (it)continuing its shift from commoditizing segments to higher value segments
with better profit opportunity.
the company continues to be a leading force in open source solutions to enable its clients to achieve higher levels of
interoperability, cost efficiency and quality.
deliver integration and innovation to clients
changes in the market have caused ibm's clients to seek flexibility and innovation in everything from technical architecture to their
business model. in response, ibm is focused on delivering integration and innovation to its clientsoffering them technologies and services that support real value creation.
ibm has a long heritage of transforming the business operations of large enterprises and has earned the trust to be their
innovation partner and global integrator.
the company has an extensive set of global assets and capabilities it is applying to improve services profitability, both
for its clients and for itself.
become the premier globally integrated enterprise
as global networks and technology capabilities change business economics, legacy business designs can quickly become noncompetitive.
ibm believes a globally-integrated enterprise, designed for this new landscape, can compete effectively and will benefit from the opportunities offered.
to reshape its business for the global economy, ibm has replaced vertical hierarchies with horizontally integrated teams.
across the business, the company has made significant investments in emerging markets, taking core processes and functions
that were once managed regionally and shifting them to a globally integrated model.
looking
forward, ibm is confident it understands the economic shift of globalization, the evolution of the new computing model and the powerful role of innovation in this new landscape.
its unique capabilities are well adapted to help the company's clients innovate and compete effectively in this new environment.
business model
the company's business model is built to support two principal goals: helping clients succeed in delivering business value by becoming
more innovative, efficient and competitive through the use of business insight and it solutions; and, providing long-term value to shareholders. the business model has been developed over
time through strategic investments in capabilities and technologies that have the best long-term growth and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients.
the
company's global capabilities include services, software, hardware, fundamental research and related financing. the broad mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide
business insight and solutions for the company's clients.
the
business model is flexible, adapting to the continuously changing market and economic environment. the company has divested commoditizing businesses like personal computers and hard
disk drives, and strengthened its position through strategic investments and acquisitions in higher value segments like business intelligence and analytics, virtualization and green solutions. in
addition, the company has transformed itself into a globally integrated enterprise which has improved overall productivity and is driving investment and participation in the world's fastest growing
markets. as a result, the company is a higher performing enterprise today than it was several years ago.
the
business model, supported by the company's long-term financial model, has enabled the company to deliver consistently strong earnings, cash flows and returns on invested
capital in changing economic environments.
business segments and capabilities
the company's major operations are comprised of: a global technology services segment; a global business services segment; a software
segment; a systems and technology segment; and a global financing segment.
global services is a critical component of the company's strategy of providing it infrastructure and business insight and solutions to clients. while
solutions often include industry-leading ibm software and hardware, other suppliers' products are also used if a client solution requires it. within global services there are two reportable segments:
global technology services and global business services.
global technology services (gts) primarily provides it infrastructure services and business process services, delivering business value through the
company's global scale, standardization and automation.
gts capabilities
strategic outsourcing services. comprehensive it services integrated with business insight working with clients to reduce costs and
improve productivity through the outsourcing of processes and operations.
integrated technology services. services offerings that help clients access, manage and support their technology infrastructures, through
a combination of skilled resources, software and ibm's knowledge of business processes. the portfolio includes service product lines which complement hardware from systems and technology and software
offerings from the software business.
business transformation outsourcing. a range of offerings from standardized processing platforms and business process outsourcing through
transformational offerings that deliver improved business results to clients through the strategic change and/or operation of the client's business processes, applications and infrastructure.
maintenance. a number of support services from product maintenance through solution support to maintain and improve the availability of
clients' it infrastructure.
global business services (gbs) primarily provides professional services and application outsourcing services, delivering business value and innovation
to clients through solutions which leverage industry-and business-process expertise.
gbs capabilities
consulting and systems integration. delivery of value to clients through consulting services for client relationship management, financial
management, human-capital management, business strategy and change, and supply-chain management.
application management services. application development, management, maintenance and support services for packaged software, as well as
custom and legacy applications. value is delivered through the company's global resource capabilities, industry knowledge and the standardization and automation of application development.
software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems software. middleware software enables clients to integrate systems, processes and
applications across a standard software platform. ibm middleware is designed to open standards which allows the efficient integration of disparate client applications that may have been built
internally, or provided by packaged software vendors or system integrators. operating systems are the software engines that run computers. approximately two-thirds of external software
segment revenue is annuity-based, coming from recurring license charges and ongoing subscription and support from one-time charge (otc) arrangements. the remaining one-third of
external revenue relates to otc arrangements, in which the client pays one up-front payment for a perpetual license. typically, arrangements for the sale of otc software include one year
of maintenance. the client can also purchase ongoing maintenance after the first year, which includes product upgrades and technical support.
software capabilities
websphere software. management of a wide variety of business processes using open standards to interconnect applications, data and
operating systems. provides the foundation for web-enabled applications and is a key product set in deploying a soa.
information management software. advanced database, content management, information integration and business intelligence software that
helps companies integrate, manage and gain value from their business information.
tivoli software. software for infrastructure management, including security and storage management that will help organizations better
manage their it infrastructure to more effectively deliver it services.
lotus software. collaboration, messaging and social networking software that enables businesses to communicate, collaborate and increase
productivity.
rational software. software tools that help clients manage their software development processes and capabilities. with the acquisition of
telelogic in 2008, rational software supports software development for both it solutions and embedded system solutions.
operating systems. software that manages the fundamental processes that make computers run.
systems and technology provides clients with business solutions requiring advanced computing power and storage capabilities. approximately
55percent of systems and technology's server and storage sales transactions are through the company's business partners; approximately 45percent are direct to end-user
clients. in addition, systems and technology provides leading semiconductor technology and products, packaging solutions and engineering technology services to clients and for ibm's own advanced
technology needs.
systems and technology capabilities
servers. ibm systems, which are typically connected to a network and provide the required infrastructure for business. these systems use
both ibm and non-ibm operating systems, and all ibm servers can also run linux, a key open source operating system. (system z, legacy system i, converged systemp and system x).
storage. information infrastructure products and solutions, which address critical client requirements for information retention and
archiving, availability and virtualization, and security and compliance. the portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and tape storage systems and software.
microelectronics. semiconductor design and manufacturing primarily for use in ibm systems and for sale to external clients (oem).
retail store solutions. point-of-sale retail systems (network connected cash registers) as well as solutions which
connect them to other store systems.
global financing is described on pages53 through 57 in ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders.
global financing capabilities
client financing. lease and loan financing to end user and internal clients for terms generally between two and seven years.
commercial financing. short-term inventory and accounts receivable financing to dealers and remarketers of it products.
remarketing. the sale and lease of used equipment (primarily sourced from the conclusion of lease transactions) to new or existing
clients.
ibm worldwide organizations
the following worldwide organizations play key roles in ibm's delivery of value to its clients:
sales and distribution
research, development and intellectual property
integrated supply chain
integrated technology delivery
business process delivery
sales and distribution
ibm has a significant global presence, operating in over 170 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribution of
revenue. the company's sales and distribution organization manages a strong global footprint, with dedicated country based operating units focused on delivering client value. within these units,
client relationship professionals work with integrated teams of consultants, product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to improve clients'
business performance. these teams deliver value by understanding the clients' business and needs, and then bring together capabilities from across ibm and an extensive network of business partners to
develop and implement solutions.
by
combining global expertise with local experience, ibm's geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and
timely investments in emerging opportunities. the geographic units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients' agendas. ibm extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by
leveraging industry skills with marketing, ibm.com and local business partner resources.
in
2008, the company implemented a new growth markets organization to increase its focus on the emerging markets of brazil, russia, india and china and the additional opportunities
around the world that have market growth rates greater than the global averagecountries within southeast asia, eastern europe, the middle east and latin america. the company's major
markets include the united states, canada, the u.k., france, germany, italy, japan, denmark, sweden, switzerland, austria, belgium, finland, greece, ireland, the netherlands, portugal, cyprus, norway,
israel, spain, the bahamas and the caribbean region.
the
majority of ibm's revenue, excluding the company's original equipment manufacturer (oem) technology business, occurs in industries that are broadly grouped into six
sectors:
financial services: banking, financial markets, insurance
public: education, government, healthcare, life sciences
industrial: aerospace and defense, automotive, chemical and petroleum, electronics
distribution: consumer products, retail, travel and transportation
communications: telecommunications, media and entertainment, energy and utilities
small and medium business: mainly companies with less than 1,000 employees
research, development and intellectual property
ibm's research and development (r&d) operations differentiate the company from its competitors. ibm annually spends approximately
$6billion for r&d, focusing its investments on high-growth, high-value opportunities. as a result of innovations in these and other areas, ibm was once again awarded
more u.s. patents in 2008 than any other company, the first company to achieve over 4,000 patents in a year. the company will continue to actively seek intellectual property protection for its
innovations, while increasing emphasis on other initiatives designed to leverage its intellectual property leadership and promote innovation.
in
addition to producing world-class hardware and software products, ibm innovations are also a major differentiator in providing solutions for the company's clients through its services
businesses. the company's investments in r&d also result in intellectual property (ip) income of approximately $1billion annually. some of ibm's technological breakthroughs are used
exclusively in ibm products, while others are licensed and may be used in either/both ibm products and/or the products of the licensee. while the company's various proprietary intellectual property
rights are important to its success, ibm believes its business as a whole is not materially dependent on any particular patent or license, or any particular group of patents or licenses. ibm owns or
is licensed under a number of patents, which vary in duration, relating to its products. licenses under patents owned by ibm have been and are being granted to others under reasonable terms and
conditions.
integrated supply chain
consistent with the company's work with clients to transform their supply chains for greater efficiency and responsiveness to global
market conditions, the company continues to derive business value from its own globally integrated supply chain, which provides a strategic advantage for the company to create value for clients. ibm
leverages its supply chain expertise for clients through its supply-chain business transformation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate clients' end-to-end
supply-chain processes, from procurement to logistics.
ibm
spends approximately $38billion annually through its supply chain, procuring materials and services globally. the supply, manufacturing and logistics and customer fulfillment
operations are integrated in one operating unit that has optimized inventories over time, improved response to marketplace opportunities and external risks and converted fixed costs to variable costs.
simplifying and streamlining internal processes has improved operations, sales force productivity and processes, and these actions have improved client satisfaction.
integrated technology delivery
integrated technology delivery (itd) combines all of the worldwide service delivery capabilities for strategic outsourcing with strong
local and regional management teams supported by a set of global competencies. itd leverages the company's global scale and advanced technology to deliver standardized solutions that are automated,
repeatable and globally integrated. clients gain cost advantages, access to industry-leading skills and ibm's scale and overall flexibility. itd manages the world's largest privately-owned it
infrastructure with employees in over 40 countries supporting over 450 data centers.
business process delivery
business process delivery (bpd) provides highly efficient, world-class delivery capabilities in ibm's business process delivery
operations, which include business transformation outsourcing, business process outsourcing and business process services. bpd has employees and delivery centers in over 40 countries worldwide.
competition
the company is a globally-integrated enterprise, doing business in over 170 countries. the company participates in the highly
competitive information technology (it) industry, where its competitors vary by industry segment, and range from large multinational enterprises to smaller, more narrowly focused entities. overall,
across its business segments, the company recognizes hundreds of competitors worldwide.
the
markets for each of the company's business segments is characterized by aggressive competition among all types of competitors. across its business, the company's principal methods of
competition
are: technology innovation; performance; price; quality; brand; its broad range of capabilities, products and services; client relationships; the ability to deliver business value to
clients; and, service and support. in order to maintain leadership in the it industry, a corporation must continue to invest, innovate and integrate. over the past several years, the company has been
executing a strategy to transform its business, including shifting to higher value market segments and offerings and increasing its capabilities through internal investments and strategic
acquisitions. overall, the company is the leader or among the leaders in each of its business segments.
a
summary of the competitive environment for each business segment is included below:
global services:
the company's services segments, gts and gbs, operate in a highly competitive and continually evolving global market. gts competes in
strategic outsourcing, business transformation outsourcing, integrated technology services and it support services. gbs competes in consulting, system integration and application management services.
the principal competitive factors in these business segments include: technical skills and capabilities, innovative service and product offerings, the ability to add value and the
time-to-value, price, client relationships, quality of sales and delivery, reliability, security and the availability of resources. the company's competitive advantages in the
services business include its global reach and scale, best-of-breed process and industry skills, extensive technology expertise and infrastructure management, an ability to
deliver integrated solutions that can address clients' needs in any environment and a strong set of relationships with clients and strategic business partners worldwide. gts competes with a variety of
competitors worldwide across its principal market segments: the global, broad based competitors are hewlett-packard company (hp), accenture and computer
sciences corporation. indian service providers, including satyam computer services ltd. and wipro technologies (wipro), are moving to offer managed infrastructure services, targeting similar customer
segments to gts. the principal competitors for gbs are accenture, infosys consulting and wipro.
software:
the enterprise management software market is highly competitive and the key competitive factors in this segment include: functionality,
ease of use, scalability, compliance with open standards and total cost of ownership. the company's leadership in these areas provides it with competitive advantages. the company's software business
includes middleware, operating systems and related software provided to all industry segments worldwide. the middleware portfolio is the broadest in the industry and it also covers both mainframe and
distributed computing environments. the depth and breadth of the company's software offerings, coupled with its global sales and technical support infrastructure differentiate the company's software
business from its competitors. in addition, the company's research and development capabilities and intellectual property patent portfolio contribute to this segment's leadership. the company's
principal competitors in this segment include oracle corporation, microsoft corporation, emc and ca,inc. in addition, the company competes with smaller, niche competitors in specific
geographic or product markets worldwide.
systems and technology:
the enterprise server and storage market is highly competitive and is characterized by ongoing technology innovation, with competition
focused on value, function and reliability, and new entrants leveraging technology to compete against traditional offerings. the company's principal competitors include hp, dell,inc. (dell),
sun microsystems and emc corporation. the company's leadership in virtualization, power management, security, multi-operating system capabilities and the ability of its systems platforms to leverage
the entire system, from the company's custom semiconductors through the software stack to increase efficiency and lower cost, provide the company with competitive
advantages
in this segment. in addition, the company's research and development capabilities and intellectual property patent portfolio contribute significantly to this segment's leadership.
global financing:
the company's global financing business provides client financing, commercial financing and participates in the remarketing of used
equipment. in 2008, the global financial credit crisis impacted both the client and commercial financing markets. the supply of credit diminished and financial institutions faced increases in loan
losses, higher borrowing costs and liquidity challenges. global financing's access to capital and its ability to manage increased exposures provide a competitive advantage for the company. the key
competitive factors include price, client service, contract flexibility, ease of doing business and residual values. in client and commercial financing, global financing competes with three types of
companies: other captive financing companies such as hp and dell, non-captive companies such as general electric company and cit group,inc. and banks or financial institutions. in
the remarketing segment, the company competes with local and regional brokers plus original manufacturers the fragmented worldwide used it equipment market.
forward-looking and cautionary statements
certain statements contained in this form10-k may constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995 ("reform act"). the company may also make forward-looking statements in other reports filed with the securities and exchange commission, in materials delivered
to stockholders and in press releases. in addition, the company's representatives may from time to time make oral forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements provide current expectations of
future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. words such as "anticipates," "believes," "expects," "estimates,"
"intends," "plans," "projects," and similar expressions, may identify such forward-looking statements. the company assumes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements. in
accordance with the reform act, set forth under item1a. "risk factors" on pages10 through 13 are cautionary statements that accompany those forward-looking statements. readers should
carefully review such cautionary statements as they identify certain important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements and from
historical trends. those cautionary statements are not exclusive and are in addition to other factors discussed elsewhere in this form10-k, in the company's filings with the securities and
exchange commission or in materials incorporated therein by reference.
the
following information is included in ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference:
segment
information and revenue by classes of similar products or servicespages116 to 119.
financial
information by geographic areaspage119.
amount
spent during each of the last three years on r&d activitiespage101.
financial
information regarding environmental activitiespages94 and95.
the
number of persons employed by the registrantpages52 and 53.
the
management discussion overviewpages19 and 20.
available
informationpage125.
also
refer to item1a. entitled "risk factors" in part i of this form.
executive officers of the registrant (at february24, 2009):
age
officer since
chairman of the board, president and chief executive officer:
samuel j. palmisano(1)
senior vice presidents:
rodney c. adkins, development and manufacturing, systems and technology group
michael e. daniels, global technology services
jon c. iwata, marketing and communications
john e. kelly, iii, research and intellectual property
r. franklin kern, global business services
mark loughridge, chief financial officer
j. randall macdonald, human resources
steven a. mills, software group
robert w. moffat, jr., systems and technology group
virginia m. rometty, global sales and distribution
linda s. sanford, enterprise on demand transformation
timothy s. shaughnessy, services delivery
robert c. weber, legal and regulatory affairs, and general counsel
vice president:
james j. kavanaugh, controller
(1)member
of the board of directors.
all
executive officers are elected by the board of directors and serve until the next election of officers in conjunction with the annual meeting of the stockholders as provided in the
by-laws. each executive officer named above, with the exception of robertc. weber, has been an executive of ibm or its subsidiaries during the past five years.
mr.weber
was a partner at jones day, an international law firm, until joining ibm in 2006. he was with jones day for almost 30years, and his career included counseling
corporations, individuals and boards of directors, as well as extensive experience in corporate derivative litigation, federal and state enforcement actions and commercial litigation.
item1a. risk factors:
downturn in economic environment and corporate it spending budgets could impact the company's business: if overall demand for systems,
software and services decreases, whether due to general economic conditions or a shift in corporate buying patterns, the company's revenue and profit could be impacted.
the company may not meet its growth and productivity objectives under its internal business transformation and global integration
initiatives: on an ongoing basis, ibm seeks to drive greater productivity, flexibility and cost savings by transforming and globally integrating its own business processes and
functions to remain competitive and to enable scaling of resources in both emerging and
more established geographical markets. these efforts may not yield their intended gains in overall efficiency and enablement of rapid scaling, which may impact the company's ability to meet its growth
and productivity objectives.
failure of innovation initiatives could impact the long-term success of the company: ibm has been moving away from
commoditized categories of the it industry and into areas in which it can differentiate itself through innovation and by leveraging its investments in r&d. if ibm is unable to continue its
cutting-edge innovation in the highly competitive it industry, the company could fail in its ongoing efforts to maintain and increase its market share and its profit margins. in addition,
ibm has one of the strongest brand names in the world, and its brand and overall reputation could be negatively impacted by many factors, including if the company does not continue to be recognized
for its industry-leading technology and solutions. if the company's brand image is tarnished by negative perceptions, our ability to attract and retain customers could be impacted.
risks from investing in growth opportunities could impact the company's business: the company continues to invest significantly in growth
opportunities, including higher-value segments of enterprise computing and dozens of emerging countries, including brazil, russia, india and china, to drive revenue growth and market share gains.
client adoption rates and viable economic models are uncertain in the high-value and rapidly-growing segments. in addition, as the company expands to capture emerging growth opportunities,
it needs to rapidly secure the appropriate mix of trained, skilled and experienced personnel. in emerging growth countries, the developing nature presents potential political, social and economic
risks from inadequate infrastructure, creditworthiness of customers and business partners, labor disruption and corruption, which could impact the company's ability to meet its growth objectives and
to deliver to its clients around the world.
ibm's intellectual property portfolio may not prevent competitive offerings, and ibm may not be able to obtain necessary licenses: the
company's patents and other intellectual property may not prevent competitors from independently developing products and services similar to or duplicative to the company's, nor can there be any
assurance that the resources invested by the company to protect its intellectual property will be sufficient or that the company's intellectual property portfolio will adequately deter
misappropriation or improper use of the company's technology. in addition, the company may be the target of aggressive and opportunistic enforcement of patents by third parties, including
non-practicing entities. also, there can be no assurances that ibm will be able to obtain from third parties the licenses it needs in the future.
breaches of data protection could impact the company's business: the company's products and services, as well as its internal systems and
processes, involve the storage and transmission of proprietary information and sensitive or confidential data, including personal information of employees, customers and others. breaches in security
could expose the company, its customers or the individuals affected to a risk of loss or misuse of this information, resulting in litigation and potential liability for the company, as well as the
loss of existing or potential customers and damage to the company's brand and reputation. in addition, the cost and operational consequences of implementing further data protection measures could be
significant.
the company's revenues for particular periods are difficult to predict: ibm's revenues are affected by such factors as the introduction of
new products and services, the length of the sales cycles, the structure of products and services contracts and the seasonality of technology purchases. as a result, the company's results are
difficult to predict. these factors historically have resulted in lower revenue in the first quarter than in the immediately preceding fourth quarter. in addition, the high volume of products ordered
at the end of each quarter, especially at the end of the fourth quarter, may affect ibm's ability to successfully ship all orders before the end of the quarter.
due to the company's global presence, its business and operations could be impacted by local legal, economic, political and health
conditions: the company is a globally integrated entity, operating in over 170 countries worldwide and deriving more than sixty percent of its revenues from sales outside the
united states. changes in the laws or policies of the countries in which the company operates, or inadequate enforcement of such laws or policies, could affect the company's business in that country
and the company's overall results of operations. the company's results of operations also could be affected by economic and political changes in those countries and by macroeconomic changes, including
recessions, inflation and currency fluctuations between the u.s. dollar and local currency. in addition, any widespread outbreak of an illness, pandemic or other local or global health issue, or any
terrorist activities, could adversely affect customer demand and the company's operations and its ability to source and deliver products and services to its customers.
the company could incur substantial costs for environmental matters: the company is subject to various federal, state, local and foreign
laws and regulations concerning the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise related to environmental protection, including the u.s. superfund law. the company could incur substantial
costs, including cleanup costs, fines and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if it were to violate or become liable under environmental
laws and regulations. compliance with environmental laws and regulations is not expected to have a material adverse effect on the company's financial position, results of operations and competitive
position.
tax matters could impact the company's results of operations and financial condition: the company is subject to income taxes in both the
united states and numerous foreign jurisdictions. ibm's provision for income taxes and cash tax liability in the future could be adversely affected by numerous factors including, but not limited to,
income before taxes being lower than anticipated in countries with lower statutory tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries with higher statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of
deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles or interpretations thereof, which could adversely impact the company's results of operations and
financial condition in future periods. in addition, ibm is subject to the continuous examination of its income tax returns by the internal revenue service and other tax authorities. the company
regularly assesses the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of its provision for income taxes. there can be no assurance that the outcomes from
these continuous examinations will not have an adverse effect on the company's provision for income taxes and cash tax liability.
the company's results of operations and financial condition could be negatively impacted by its u.s. and non-u.s. pension
plans: adverse equity market conditions and volatility in the credit markets may have an unfavorable impact on the value of the company's pension trust assets and its future
estimated pension liabilities. as a result, the company's financial results in any period could be negatively impacted. in addition, in a period of an extended financial market downturn, the company
could be required to provide incremental pension plan funding with resulting liquidity risk which could negatively impact the company's financial flexibility. ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders
includes information about potential impacts from pension funding and the use of certain assumptions regarding pension matters.
ineffective internal controls could impact the company's business and operating results: the company's internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements because of its inherent limitations, including the possibility of human error, the circumvention or overriding of controls, or fraud. even effective
internal controls can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements. if the company fails to maintain the adequacy of its internal
controls, including any failure to implement required new or improved controls, or if the company experiences difficulties in their implementation, the company's business and operating results could
be harmed and the company could fail to meet its financial reporting obligations.
the company's use of accounting estimates involves judgment and could impact the company's financial results: the company's most critical
accounting estimates are described in the management discussion in ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, under "critical accounting estimates." in addition, as discussed in noteo,
"contingencies and commitments" in ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, the company makes certain estimates under the provisions of sfas no.5, "accounting for contingencies," including
decisions related to legal proceedings and reserves. because by definition these estimates and assumptions involve the use of judgment, actual financial results may differ.
competitive conditions: the company operates in businesses that are subject to intense competitive pressures (see discussion about
competition in item1. business above).
the company depends on skilled personnel and could be impacted by the loss of critical skills: much of the future success of the company
depends on the continued service, availability and integrity of skilled personnel, including technical, marketing and staff resources. experienced personnel in the information
technology industry are in high demand, and competition for their talents is intense. changing demographics and labor work force trends may result in a loss of knowledge and skills as experienced
workers retire. further, many of ibm's key personnel receive a total compensation package that includes equity awards. new regulations, volatility in the stock market and other factors could diminish
the company's use, and the value, of the company's equity awards, putting the company at a competitive disadvantage or forcing the company to use more cash compensation.
the company's business could be impacted by its relationships with critical suppliers: ibm's business employs a wide variety of
components, supplies, services and raw materials from a substantial number of suppliers around the world. certain of the company's businesses rely on single or a limited number of suppliers. changes
in the financial or business condition of these suppliers could subject the company to losses and affect its ability to bring products to market. further, the failure of the company's suppliers to
deliver components, supplies, services and raw materials in sufficient quantities and in a timely manner could adversely affect the company's business. in addition, any defective components, supplies
or materials, or inadequate services, received from suppliers could reduce the reliability of the company's products and services and harm the company's reputation.
the company is exposed to currency and customer financing risks that could impact its revenue and business: the company derives a
significant percentage of its revenues from its affiliates operating in local currency environments, and those results are affected by changes in the relative values of non-u.s. currencies
and the u.s. dollar. further, inherent in the company's customer financing business are risks related to the concentration of credit, client creditworthiness, interest rate and currency fluctuations
on the associated debt and liabilities, the determination of residual values and the financing of other than traditional it assets. the company employs a number of strategies to manage these risks,
including the use of derivative financial instruments; derivatives involve the risk of non-performance by the counterparty. in addition, there can be no assurance that the company's
efforts to manage its currency and customer financing risks will be successful.
the company's financial performance could be impacted by changes in market liquidity conditions and by customer credit risk on
receivables: the company's financial performance is exposed to a wide
variety
of industry sector dynamics worldwide. the company's earnings and cash flows, as well as its access to funding, could be negatively impacted by changes in market liquidity conditions. ibm's
2008 annual report to stockholders includes information about the company's liquidity position. the company's client base includes many worldwide enterprises, from small and medium businesses to the
world's largest organizations and governments, with a significant portion of the company's revenue coming from global clients across many sectors. most of the company's sales are on an open credit
basis and the company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its clients' financial conditions. if the company becomes aware of information related to the credit worthiness of a major customer, or, if
future actual default rates on receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the company may have to adjust its reserves for uncollectible receivables, which could affect the
company's consolidated net income in the period the adjustments are made.
the company's reliance on third party distribution channels could impact its business: the company offers its products directly and
through a variety of third party distributors and resellers. changes in the financial or business condition of these distributors and resellers could subject the company to losses and affect its
ability to bring its products to market.
risks to the company from acquisitions and alliances include integration challenges, failure to achieve objectives, and the assumption of
liabilities: the company has made and expects to continue to make acquisitions or enter into alliances from time to time. acquisitions and alliances present significant
challenges and risks relating to the integration of the business into the company, and there can be no assurances that the company will manage acquisitions and alliances successfully. the related
risks include the company failing to achieve strategic objectives and anticipated revenue improvements and cost savings, as well as the failure to retain key personnel of the acquired business and the
assumption of liabilities related to litigation or other legal proceedings involving the acquired business.
risk factors related to ibm securities: the company and its subsidiaries issue debt securities in the worldwide capital markets from time
to time, with a variety of different maturities and in different currencies. the value of the company's debt securities fluctuates based on many factors, including the methods employed for calculating
principal and interest, the maturity of the securities, the aggregate principal amount of securities outstanding, the redemption features for the securities, the level, direction and volatility of
interest rates, changes in exchange rates, exchange controls, governmental and stock exchange regulations and other factors over which the company has little or no control. the company's ability to
pay interest and repay the principal for its debt securities is dependent upon its ability to manage its business operations, as well as the other risks described under this item1a. entitled
"risk factors." there can be no assurance that the company will be able to manage any of these risks successfully.
the
company also issues its common stock from time to time in connection with various compensation plans, contributions to its pension plan and certain acquisitions. the market price of
ibm common stock is subject to significant volatility, due to other factors described under this item1a. entitled "risk factors," as well as economic and geopolitical conditions generally,
trading volumes, speculation by the press or investment community about the company's financial condition, and other factors, many of which are beyond the company's control. since the market price of
ibm's common stock fluctuates significantly, stockholders may not be able to sell the company's stock at attractive prices.
in
addition, changes by any rating agency to the company's outlook or credit ratings can negatively impact the value and liquidity of both the company's debt and equity securities. the
company does not make a market in either its debt or equity securities and cannot provide any assurances with respect to the liquidity or value of such securities.
item 1b. unresolved staff comments:
not applicable.
item 2. properties:
at december31, 2008, ibm's manufacturing and development facilities in the united states had aggregate floor space of
19million square feet, of which 15million was owned and 4million was leased. of these amounts, 2million square feet was vacant and 1million square feet was
being leased to non-ibm businesses. similar facilities in 8other countries totaled 6million square feet, of which 2million was owned and 4million was
leased. of these amounts, 1million square feet was being leased to non-ibm businesses.
although
improved production techniques, productivity gains and infrastructure reduction actions have resulted in reduced manufacturing floor space, continuous maintenance and upgrading
of facilities is essential to maintain technological leadership, improve productivity and meet customer demand.
item 3. legal proceedings:
refer to noteo, "contingencies and commitments" on pages97 to 99 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders:
not applicable.
part ii
item 5. market for the registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities:
refer
to pages121 and 125 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference solely as they relate to this item.
ibm
common stock is listed on the new york stock exchange and the chicago stock exchange. there were 561,442 common stockholders of record at february10, 2009.
the
following table provides information relating to the company's repurchase of common stock for the fourth quarter of 2008.
total number
of shares
purchased
average
price paid
per share
total number
of shares purchased
as part of publicly
announced program
approximate
dollar value
of shares that
may yet be
purchased under
the program(1)
october 1, 2008
october 31, 2008
6,297,500
$
95.95
6,297,500
$
5,646,743,392
november 1, 2008
november 30, 2008
$
5,646,743,392
december 1, 2008
december 31, 2008
$
5,646,743,392
total
6,297,500
$
95.95
6,297,500
(1)on
february26, 2008, the board of directors authorized $15.0billion in funds for use in the company's common stock repurchase program; the
company stated that it would repurchase shares on the open market
or
in private transactions depending on market conditions, and that it expects to use cash from operations for the repurchases. the common stock repurchase program does not have an expiration date.
this table does not include
shares tendered to satisfy the exercise price in connection with cashless exercises of employee stock options or shares tendered to satisfy tax withholding obligations in connection with employee
equity awards.
item 6. selected financial data:
refer to pages120 and 121 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations:
refer to pages18 through 57 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference.
in
addition to the information in the management discussion on page19 of ibm's 2008 annual report, 2008 gross profit increased 9percent (9percent adjusted for
currency) in growth markets and increased 11percent (7percent adjusted for currency) in major markets versus 2007.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk:
refer to the section titled "market risk" on pages51 and 52 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data:
refer to pages 60 through 119 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference. also refer to
the financial statement schedule on page s-1 of this form10-k.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure:
not
applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures:
the company's management evaluated, with the participation of the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, the
effectiveness of the company's disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this report. based on that evaluation, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer
have concluded that the company's disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this report.
refer
to "report of management" and "report of independent registered public accounting firm" on pages58 and 59 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which are
incorporated herein by reference. there has been no change in the company's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to material affect, the company's internal control over financial reporting.
item 9b. other information:
not applicable.
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance:
refer to the information under the captions "election of directors for a term of one year," "general informationcommittees
of the board," "audit committee" and "section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and
delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference. also refer to
item1 of this form10-k under the caption "executive officers of the registrant (at february24, 2009)" on page9 for additional information on the company's executive
officers.
item 11. executive compensation:
refer to the information under the captions "general information2008 director compensation narrative," "2008 director
compensation table," "2008 compensation discussion and analysis," "2008 summary compensation table narrative," "2008 summary compensation table," "2008 grants of plan-based awards table,"
"2008 outstanding equity awards at fiscal year-end narrative," "2008 outstanding equity awards at fiscal year-end table," "2008 option exercises and stock vested table," "2008
retention plan narrative," "2008 retention plan table," "2008 pension benefits narrative," "2008 pension benefits table," "2008 nonqualified deferred compensation narrative," "2008 nonqualified
deferred compensation table," "2008 potential payments upon termination narrative," "2008 potential payments upon termination table," "compensation committee interlocks and insider participation" and
"2008 report of the executive compensation and management resources committee of the board of directors" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and
delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters:
refer to the information under the caption "ownership of securitiessecurity ownership of certain beneficial owners,"
"ownership of securitiescommon stock and stock-based holdings of directors and executive officers" and "equity compensation plan information" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be
filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009, all of which information is
incorporated herein by reference.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence:
refer to the information under the captions "general informationboard of directors" and "general
informationcertain
transactions and relationships" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april28, 2009, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
item 14. principal accounting fees and services:
refer to the information under the captions "report of the audit committee of the board of directors" and "audit and
non-audit fees" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april28, 2009, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference.
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules:
(a)the
following documents are filed as part of this report:
1.financial
statements from ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference:
report
of independent registered public accounting firm (page59).
consolidated
statement of earnings for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 (page60).
consolidated
statement of financial position at december31, 2008 and 2007 (page61).
consolidated
statement of cash flows for the years ended december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 (page62).
consolidated
statement of stockholders' equity at december31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 (pages63 through65).
notes
to consolidated financial statements (pages66 through119).
2.financial
statement schedules required to be filed by item8 of this form:
page
schedule
number
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement schedule.
s-1
ii
valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves.
all
other schedules are omitted as the required matter is not present, the amounts are not significant or the information is shown in the consolidated financial
statements or the notes thereto.
3.exhibits:
reference number per item 601 of regulation s-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
(2)
plan of acquisition, reorganization, arrangement, liquidation or succession.
not applicable
(3)
certificate of incorporation and by-laws.
the certificate of incorporation of ibm is exhibit 3.2 to form 8-k filed april27, 2007, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the by-laws of ibm as amended through november14, 2008, are exhibit3.2 to form8-k filed november14, 2008, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
(4)
instruments defining the rights of security holders.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 7.50% debentures due 2013 are exhibits 4(a) through 4(l) to registration statement no. 33-49475(1) on form s-3, filed may 24, 1993, and are hereby incorporated
by reference.
reference number per item 601 of regulation s-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 8.375% debentures due 2019 are exhibits 4(a)(b)(c) and (d) to registration statement no. 33-31732 on form s-3, filed on october 24, 1989, and are hereby
incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 7.00% debentures due 2025 and the 7.00% debentures due 2045 are exhibits 2 and 3 to form 8-k, filed on october 30, 1995, and are hereby incorporated by
reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 7.125% debentures due 2096 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k/a, filed on december 6, 1996, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 6.22% debentures due 2027 is exhibit 3 to form 8-k, filed on august 1, 1997, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 6.50% debentures due 2028 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k, filed on january 8, 1998, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 4.00% notes due 2011 is exhibit 2 to form8-k, filed on november9, 2006, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 4.95% notes due 2011 is exhibit2 to form8-k, filed on march21, 2007, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 6.625% notes due 2014 is exhibit2 to form8-k, filed november5, 2008, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
(9)
voting trust agreement
not applicable
(10)
material contracts
the ibm 2001 long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-87708 on form s-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.1 to form 10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm pwcc acquisition long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-102872 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.2 to form10-q
for the quarter ended september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
reference number per item 601 of regulation s-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the ibm 1999 long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-30424 on form s-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.3 to form 10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm 1997 long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-31305 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit 10.4 to form 10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm 1994 long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.33-53777 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit 10.5 to form10-q for the quarter
ended september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
forms of ltpp equity award agreements for (i)stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, cash-settled restricted stock units, sars, (ii)performance share units and (iii)retention
restricted stock unit award. such equity award agreement forms and the related terms and conditions document effective january1, 2008 were filed as exhibit10.1 to form10-k for the year ended december31, 2007, are hereby
incorporated by reference.*
board of directors compensatory plans, as described under the caption "general information2008 director compensation" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the u.s. securities and exchange
commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april28, 2009, are hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm non-employee directors stock option plan, contained in registration statement 33-60227 on forms-8, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm board of directors deferred compensation and equity award plan, a compensatory plan, as amended effective october 28, 2008.*
10.1
the ibm supplemental executive retention plan, a compensatory plan, as amended and restated through december31, 2008.*
10.2
the ibm excess 401(k) plus plan, a compensatory plan, as amended and restated through december31, 2008 (formerly the ibm executive deferred compensation plan contained in registration statement
no.333-33692 on forms-8), which amended and restated plan is hereby incorporated by reference.*
10.3
reference number per item 601 of regulation s-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the ibm 401(k) plus plan, a compensatory plan, as amended and restated effective as of january1, 2008, which was filed as exhibit10.3 to form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2008 (formerly the
ibm tax deferred savings plan, contained in registration statement no.333-09055 on forms-8), is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm 2003 employees stock purchase plan, contained in registration statement 333-104806 on form s-8, as amended through april1, 2005, which was filed as exhibit10.3 to form10-q for the quarter
ended march31, 2005, is hereby incorporated by reference.
form of noncompetition agreement, filed as attachment1 to form8-k dated april6, 2005, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the $10,000,000,000 5-year credit agreement dated as of june28, 2006, among international business machines corporation, each subsidiary borrower, the several banks and other financial institutions from time to
time parties to the credit agreement, jpmorgan chase bank, n.a., as administrative agent for the lenders, and citibank, n.a., as syndication agent, which was filed as exhibit10.1 to form8-k dated june29, 2006, is hereby incorporated
by reference.
the $11,500,000,000 term loan agreement dated as of may25, 2007, among ibm international groupb.v. (the "borrower"), the several banks and other financial institutions from time to time parties thereto
(the "lenders"), morgan stanley senior funding, inc., as administrative agent for the lenders, deutsche bank agcayman islands branch, as documentation agent, and lehman commercial paper, inc., as syndication agent, which was filed as
exhibit10.1 to form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.
first amendment to term loan dated as of may25, 2007, among ibm international groupb.v. (the "borrower"), the several banks and other financial institutions from time to time parties thereto (the
"lenders"), morgan stanley senior funding,inc., as administrative agent for the lenders, deutsche bank ag cayman islands branch, as documentation agent, and lehman commercial paper,inc., as syndication agent, which was filed as
exhibit10.1 to form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2008, is hereby incorporated by reference.
the guaranty agreement dated as of may25, 2007, among international business machines corporation ("guarantor"), for the benefit of the lenders from time to time party to the $11,500,000,000 term loan agreement,
and in favor of morgan stanley senior funding, inc., as administrative agent for the lenders, which was filed as exhibit10.2 to form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.
reference number per item 601 of regulation s-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the accelerated share repurchase schedule of standard terms and conditions, which was filed as exhibit10.3 to form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by
reference.
form of parent guarantee agreement for accelerated stock repurchase, which was filed as exhibit10.4 to form10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by
reference.
(11)
statement re computation of per share earnings
the statement re computation of per share earnings is note r, "earnings per share of common stock" on page102 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, and is hereby incorporated by
reference.
(12)
statement re computation of ratios
(13)
annual report to security holders**
(18)
letter re change in accounting principles
not applicable
(19)
previously unfiled documents
not applicable
(21)
subsidiaries of the registrant
(22)
published report regarding matters submitted to vote of security holders
not applicable
(23.1)
consent of experts
23.1
(24.1)
powers of attorney
24.1
(24.2)
resolutions of the ibm board of directors authorizing execution of this report by powers of attorney
24.2
(28)
information from reports furnished to state insurance regulatory authorities
not applicable
(31.1)
certification by ceo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
31.1
(31.2)
certification by cfo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
31.2
(32.1)
certification by ceo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.1
(32.2)
certification by cfo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.
32.2
*management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
**the
performance graphs, set forth on pages122 and123 of ibm's 2008 annual report to stockholders, are deemed to be furnished but not filed.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this
report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
international business machines corporation (registrant)
by:
/s/samuel j. palmisano
samuel j. palmisano chairman of the board,
president and chief executive officer
date: february24, 2009
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/mark loughridge
mark loughridge
senior vice president, chief financial officer
february24, 2009
/s/james j. kavanaugh
james j. kavanaugh
vice president and controller
february24, 2009
alain j.p. belda
cathleen black
william r. brody
kenneth i. chenault
michael l. eskew
shirley ann jackson
taizo nishimuro
james w. owens
joan e. spero
sidney taurel
lorenzo h. zambrano
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
director
by:
/s/ andrew bonzani
andrew bonzani attorney-in-fact
february24, 2009
report of independent registered public accounting firm  on financial statement schedule
to
the stockholders and board of directors of
international business machines corporation:
our
audits of the consolidated financial statements and of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting referred to in our report dated february24, 2009
appearing in the 2008 annual report to shareholders of international business machines corporation (which report and consolidated financial statements are incorporated by reference in this annual
report on form10-k) also included an audit of the financial statement schedule listed in item 15(a)(2) of this form10-k. in our opinion, this financial
statement schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february24, 2009
schedule ii
international business machines corporation and subsidiary companies  valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves  for the years ended december31:  (dollars in millions)
description
balance at
beginning
of period
additions*
writeoffs
other**
balance at
end of
period
allowance for doubtful accounts
current
$
$
$
(92
)
$
$
noncurrent
$
$
$
(19
)
$
$
current
$
$
$
(112
)
$
$
noncurrent
$
$
$
(18
)
$
$
current
$
$
(10
)
$
(177
)
$
$
noncurrent
$
$
(2
)
$
(20
)
$
$
allowance for inventory losses
$
$
$
(248
)
$
(63
)
$
$
$
$
(308
)
$
$
$
$
$
(330
)
$
$
revenue based provisions
$
1,085
$
6,145
$
(6,195
)
$
(52
)
$
$
$
5,812
$
(5,722
)
$
$
1,085
$
$
5,399
$
(5,205
)
$
(85
)
$
*additions
for allowance for doubtful accounts and allowance for inventory losses are charged to expense and cost accounts, respectively, while revenue based
provisions are charged to revenue accounts.
**primarily
comprises currency translation adjustments.
s-1
quicklinks
part i
item 1a. risk factors
item 1b. unresolved staff comments
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5. market for the registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
item 9b. other information
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item 14. principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement schedule
schedule ii
international business machines corporation and subsidiary companies valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves for the years ended december 31: (dollars in millions)
