10-k
a2212340z10-k.htm
10-k
quicklinks
-- click here to rapidly navigate through this document
united states
securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k annual report
pursuant to section13 or 15 (d)of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the year ended december 31, 2012
1-2360 (commission file number)
international business machines corporation (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
new york (state of incorporation)
13-0871985 (irs employer identification number)
armonk, new york (address of principal executive offices)
10504 (zip code)
914-499-1900 (registrant's telephone number)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
voting shares outstanding
at february8, 2013
name of each exchange
on which registered
capital stock, par value $.20 per share
1,114,509,771
newyorkstockexchange
chicagostockexchange
6.625% notes due 2014
newyorkstockexchange
1.375% notes due 2019
newyorkstockexchange
7.50% debentures due 2013
newyorkstockexchange
8.375% debentures due 2019
newyorkstockexchange
7.00% debentures due 2025
newyorkstockexchange
6.22% debentures due 2027
newyorkstockexchange
6.50% debentures due 2028
newyorkstockexchange
7.00% debentures due 2045
newyorkstockexchange
7.125% debentures due 2096
newyorkstockexchange
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer as defined in rule405 of the securities act.
yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act.
yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days. yesnoo
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to rule405 of regulations-t (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to submit and post such files). yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulations-k (229.405 of this chapter) is not
contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company. see the definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer" and "smaller reporting company" in rule12b-2 of the exchange act.
large accelerated filer
acceleratedfilero
non-accelerated filero
smaller reporting companyo
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in exchange act rule12b-2).
yesono
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of the last business day of the registrant's most recently
completed second fiscal quarter was $223.4billion.
documents
incorporated by reference:
portions
of ibm's annual report to stockholders for the year ended december31, 2012 into parts i, ii and iv of form10-k.
portions
of ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders
to be held april30, 2013 are incorporated by reference into partiii of form10-k.
part i
item 1. business:
international business machines corporation (ibm or the company) was incorporated in the state of new york on june16, 1911, as
the computing-tabulating-recording co. (c-t-r), a consolidation of the computing scale co. of america, the tabulating machine co. and the international time recording co. of
new york. since that time, ibm has focused on the intersection of business insight and technological innovation, and its operations and aims have been international in nature. this was signaled over
85 years ago, in 1924, when c-t-r changed its name to international business machines corporation. and it continues today: the company creates business value for clients and solves business problems
through integrated solutions that leverage information technology and deep knowledge of business processes. ibm solutions typically create value by reducing a client's operational costs or by enabling
new capabilities that generate revenue. these solutions draw from an industry leading portfolio of consulting, delivery and implementation services, enterprise software, systems and financing.
strategy
despite the volatility of the information technology (it) industry over the past decade, ibm has consistently delivered strong
performance, with a steady track record of sustained earnings per share growth and cash generation. the company has shifted its business mix, exiting certain segments while increasing its presence in
higher-value areas such as services, software and integrated solutions. as part of this shift, the company has acquired more than 140 companies since 2000, complementing and scaling its portfolio of
products and offerings.
ibm's
strategy of delivering high value solutions to enterprise clients has yielded consistent business results. working with enterprise clients across the full spectrum of their
business and technical opportunities, ibm delivers leadership innovation in technology, high value solutions and insights that improve client and industry outcomes. a highly engaged, global workforce
with deep technical and business skills, teamed with an unmatched ecosystem of partners provides a world-class client experience.
these
priorities reflect a broad shift in client spending toward innovation and efficiency, as companies seek higher levels of business value from their it investments. ibm has been able
to deliver this enhanced client value thanks to its industry expertise, understanding of clients' businesses, sustained investment in core and applied research and development (r&d), global reach and
the breadth and depth of the company's capabilities.
new
types of solutions, new market opportunities and new decision makers are emerging as clients look to make use of technology to generate innovation and competitive advantage. these
opportunities are driven by a new era of computing that is enabled by analytics, cloud computing, big data, mobility, social computing and supported by enterprise grade security solutions. the
company's strategy is to establish leadership in this new era of smarter computingcomputing that is designed for big data, built on software-defined environments and openin
order to enhance the value we deliver, create new markets and engage new clients.
to
capture the opportunities arising from these market trends, ibm is focused on four key growth initiatives: smarter planet, growth markets, business analytics and optimization and
cloud computing. each initiative represents a significant growth opportunity with attractive profit margins for ibm.
smarter planet
smarter planet is ibm's vision of a technology-enabled world that is more instrumented, interconnected and intelligent than ever
before, enabling people and organizations to tackle significant
business
and societal challenges. at the heart of this vision is the opportunity for meaningful innovationexploring and extending the boundaries of businesses, industries and communities.
it's about helping the company's clients become better at what they do for their clients. ibm's strategy is to accelerate progress toward a "smarter planet" by equipping clients with the advanced,
integrated capabilities they need to thrive in this exciting new world that is unfolding before uscapabilities such as analytics for business and physical systems, business process
management, social business, mobile computing and cloud computing.
ibm
has continued to deepen its commitment to understanding and delivering on the promise of smarter planet for both line of business and it executives across a broad range of
industries. an industry-based approach is central to the strategy, since every industry confronts a distinct set of challenges and opportunities in today's constantly transforming world. whether
"smarter" means helping a hospital group to deliver improved healthcare, a local government to ease traffic congestion, or a retail chain to execute a successful cross-channel campaign, ibm is
aggressively developing and investing in a portfolio of industry solutions that helps these clients achieve their goals.
three
initiatives that drive significant value illustrate ibm's deep commitment to building a smarter planet: smarter commerce, smarter cities and social business. ibm's smarter commerce
model integrates and transforms how companies manage and adapt their buy, market, sell and service processes, placing the customer squarely at the center of their business. ibm's smarter cities
initiative enables federal, state and local governments to make smarter decisions, anticipate issues and coordinate resources more effectively, while delivering citizen-centric services that underpin
sustainable economic growth. ibm's social business initiative helps clients integrate social technologies and practices into their front-end processes to more effectively create and share
knowledge to accelerate innovation, improve customer service, and build a smarter workforce. each of these initiatives is powered by market-leading ibm innovations and software, developed both by ibm
and through acquisitions.
growth markets
the company has benefited from its investments over the past several years in the growth markets. the focus now is on geographic
expansion of ibm's presence; on selected industries of the highest impact and opportunity; on countries' build-outs of infrastructure aligned with their national agendas; and, on creating
markets and new business models to serve the different requirements that exist in these emerging countries. the company's effort in developing new growth markets within the african continent is a good
example of this focus. many of these initiatives are leading-edge, both in technologies and business models, and are delivering both increased revenue and margin expansion.
in
order to support this growth, ibm continues to invest significantly in these markets to expand capacity, to develop talent and to deepen its r&d capabilities on the ground. at the
same time, ibm continues to leverage talent across the growth markets under its globally integrated enterprise model to the benefit of both its clients and the company worldwide.
business analytics and optimization
business analytics and optimization (bao) is the category of software, systems and services that help organizations take advantage of
all the data available to them for better and faster decision making and process optimization. this includes data that is being labeled "big data," which is data of extreme volume, data being
generated at a high velocity, and newer varieties of data like blogs, tweets, pictures, videos, unstructured text created by the explosion of social media websites and the instrumentation of nearly
everything. bao is core to achieving a smarter planet, helping leaders of this new information-centric and insight-driven world infuse intelligence into their business processes.
smarter
analytics is ibm's unique offering for the bao category. with smarter analytics and the company's deep expertise, ibm can help organizations: 1)grow, retain and satisfy
customers through deep insight on individual customers and similar segments; 2)increase operational efficiency through, for example, supply chain optimization, predictive maintenance, fraud
reduction and optimization of sales incentives and compensation; 3)transform their financial processes such as planning, budgeting,
forecasting, financial consolidation, regulatory filing and financial reporting; and 4)better manage risk and regulatory compliance.
the
company's approach to analytics is to ensure clients have complete end-to-end solutions across industries and functional focus areas like finance, sales,
marketing, operations and risk. these solutions are designed to help organizations: 1)align around all their databoth traditional and big dataand establish a strong
information foundation; 2)apply analytics to their data so they can anticipate and shape business outcomes, identify patterns and gain insights into future performance; 3)enable
workers on the front lines who collectively make thousands and even millions of decisions daily with insight that is immediately actionable so they can make the best possible
decisiondecisions like what claims to fast track in an insurance call center, or what offer is the best for each individual customer who calls a call center; and 4)create a
culture that takes action on analytics and that truly transforms.
ibm
is committed to continually innovating across the spectrum of analytic capabilities, systems, research, services, deployment and skills. for example, in 2012, the game changing
innovations in watson were applied to healthcare and financial services, analytic research like the ground-breaking work being done on temporal causal modeling and visualization, and investments in
analytic skills and deployment ability in our new analytics research centers in columbus, ohio and halifax, nova scotia.
cloud computing
cloud is a model for consuming and delivering business and it services. it can deliver significant economies, enable new levels of
speed, flexibility and agility and even serve as a transformative platform for business innovation. from a business perspective, cloud computing is reshaping industry ecosystems, invigorating product
innovation and enabling new business models that leverage new sources of competitive differentiation. from an it perspective, cloud offers improved access to and utilization of information technology
through use of highly efficient virtualization and management technology, consumer-style user interfaces and ubiquitous connectivity, including via mobile technologies.
ibm
has already helped thousands of its clients adopt and leverage cloud computing through its broad portfolio of ibm smartcloud products, solutions and services. organizations moving
beyond initial exploration of cloud computing seek solutions that align with their specific needs. ibm's breadth of cloud capabilities gives it a unique ability to help clients exploit the advantages
of cloud. ibm has cloud solutions that span infrastructure, platform, applications and business process services all geared to enable clients to drive significant business value through the rapid
adoption and exploitation of new cloud capabilities. ibm's expert consulting, breakthrough technologies and a portfolio of cloud-based services are squarely focused on the requirements of the
enterprise.
the
company offers a full array of cloud delivery models, including private clouds, public clouds and a hybrid of both. ibm helps build out private, on-premises cloud-based
environments that provide the control, security and isolation that clients require for their most mission-critical workloads. ibm public clouds provide infrastructure, platforms and applications as
rapidly provisioned and highly-scalable cloud services on a pay-as-you-go basis. hybrid clouds provide seamless integration across private and public cloud models,
ensuring the interoperability, portability and scalability that clients need to realize the full value of cloud.
business model
the company's business model is built to support two principal goals: helping clients to become more innovative, efficient and
competitive through the application of business insight and it solutions; and providing long-term value to shareholders. the business model has been developed over time through strategic
investments in capabilities and technologies that have superior long-term growth and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients.
the
company's global capabilities include services, software, systems, fundamental research and related financing. the broad mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide
integrated solutions to the company's clients.
the
business model is resilient, adapting to the continuously changing market and economic environment. the company continues to divest certain businesses and strengthen its position
through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher- value segments like business analytics, smarter planet and cloud computing. in addition, the company has transformed itself into a
globally integrated enterprise which has improved overall productivity and is driving investment and expanding participation in the world's fastest growing markets.
this
business model, supported by the company's financial model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.
business segments and capabilities
the company's major operations consists of five business segments: global technology services and global business services, which the
company collectively calls global services, and software, systems and technology and global financing.
global services is a critical component of the company's strategy of providing it infrastructure and business insight and solutions to
clients. while solutions often include industry-leading ibm software and systems, other suppliers' products are also used if a client solution requires it. approximately 60percent of external
global services segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from outsourcing and maintenance arrangements. the global services backlog provides a solid revenue base entering each year. within
global services, there are two reportable segments: global technology services and global business services.
global technology services (gts) primarily provides it infrastructure and business process services, creating business value for clients
through unique technology and ip, integrated services within its global delivery model. by leveraging insights and experience drawn from ibm's global scale, skills and technology, with applied
innovation from ibm research, clients gain access to leading-edge, high-quality services with improved productivity, flexibility, cost and outcomes.
gts
capabilities
strategic outsourcing services: delivers comprehensive it outsourcing services dedicated to transforming
clients' existing infrastructures to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk management and financial value. the company integrates longstanding expertise in service management and
technology with the ability to exploit the power of new technologies from ibm systems and software, such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization, to deliver high performance, innovation and
improved ability to achieve business objectives.
global process services: delivers a range of offerings consisting of standardized through transformational solutions including processing
platforms and business process outsourcing. these services deliver improved business results to clients through the strategic change and/or operation of the client's business processes, applications
and infrastructure.
integrated technology services: delivers a portfolio of project- based and managed services that enable clients to transform and optimize
their it environments by driving efficiency, flexibility and productivity, while reducing costs. the standardized portfolio is built around key assets and patented software, and incorporates best
practices and proven methodologies that ensure predictive quality of delivery, security and compliance.
technology support services: delivers a complete line of support services from product maintenance through solution support to maintain
and improve the availability of clients' it infrastructures.
global business services (gbs) has the mission to deliver predictable business outcomes to the company's clients across two primary
business areas: consulting and application management services. these professional services deliver business value and innovation to clients through solutions which leverage industry and business
process expertise. the role of gbs is to drive initiatives that integrate ibm content and solutions and drive the progress of the company's four primary growth initiatives.
as
clients transform themselves in response to market trends like big data, social and mobile computing, gbs is aligning its expertise and capabilities to address two interdependent
categories of opportunity: front office digitization, which describes the markets forming around new models of engagement with all audiences; and the globally integrated enterprise, which describes
the mandate to integrate data and processes in support of the new front-office programs, and build far more flexible information applications.
gbs
capabilities
consulting: delivering client value with solutions in strategy and transformation, application innovation
services, enterprise applications and smarter analytics. consulting is also focused on bringing to market client solutions that drive front office digitization in smarter commerce, cloud, mobile and
social business.
application management services: application management, maintenance and support services for packaged software, as well as custom and
legacy applications. value is delivered through advanced capabilities in areas such as application testing and modernization, cloud application services, the
company's highly differentiated globally integrated capability model, industry knowledge and the standardization and automation of application management.
software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems software. middleware software enables clients to integrate systems,
processes and applications across a standard software platform to improve their business results, solve critical problems and gain competitive advantage within their industries. ibm middleware is
designed on open standards, making it easier to integrate disparate business applications, developed by different methods and implemented at different times. operating systems are the software engines
that run computers. approximately two-thirds of external software segment revenue is annuity based, coming from recurring license charges and ongoing post-contract support. the
remaining one-third relates to one-time charge (otc) arrangements in which clients pay one, up-front payment for a perpetual license. typically, the sale of otc
software includes one year of post-contract support. clients can also purchase ongoing post-contract support after the first year, which includes unspecified product upgrades
and technical support.
software
capabilities
websphere software: delivers capabilities that enable organizations to run high-performance business applications. with these
applications, clients can integrate and manage business processes across their organizations with the flexibility and agility they need to respond to changing conditions. built on services-oriented
architecture (soa), and open standards support for cloud, mobile and social interactions, the websphere platform enables enterprises to extend their reach and optimize interactions with their key
constituents. smarter commerce software helps companies better manage
and
improve each step of their value chain and capitalize on opportunities for profitable growth, efficiency and increased customer loyalty.
information management software: enables clients to integrate, manage and analyze enormous amounts of data from a large variety of sources
in order to gain competitive advantage and improve their business outcomes. with this approach, clients can extract real value out of their data and use it to make better business decisions. ibm's
middleware and integrated solutions include advanced database
management, information integration, data governance, enterprise content management, data warehousing, business analytics and intelligence, predictive analytics and big data analytics.
tivoli software: helps clients optimize the value they get from their infrastructures and technology assets through greater visibility,
control and automation across their end-to-end business operations. these asset management solutions foster integrated service delivery for cloud and datacenter management,
enterprise endpoint and mobile device management, asset and facilities management, and storage management. tivoli includes security systems software that provides clients with a single security
intelligence platform that enables them to better secure all aspects of their enterprise and prevent security breaches.
lotus software: enables businesses to connect people and processes for more effective communication and increased productivity through
collaboration, messaging and social networking software. by remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, ibm's social business offerings help organizations reap real benefits associated with
social networking, as well as create a more efficient and effective workforce.
rational software: supports software development for both it, as well as complex and embedded system solutions, with a suite of
collaborative lifecycle management products. jazz, rational's technology platform, transforms the way people work together to build software, making software delivery more integrated and
collaborative, while optimizing for successful business outcomes.
operating systems: software that manages the fundamental processes that make computers run.
systems and technology (stg) provides clients with business solutions requiring advanced computing power and storage capabilities.
approximately half of systems and technology's server and storage sales transactions are through the company's business partners; with the balance direct to end-user clients. in addition,
systems and technology provides leading semiconductor technology, products and packaging solutions for ibm's own advanced technology needs and for external clients.
systems
and technology capabilities
systems: a range of general purpose and integrated systems designed and optimized for specific business, public and scientific computing
needs. these systemssystem z, power systems and system xare typically the core technology in data centers that provide required
infrastructure for business and institutions. also, these systems form the foundation for ibm's integrated offerings, such as ibm puresystems, ibm smart analytics, ibm netezza, ibm smartcloud entry
and ibm bladecenter for cloud. ibm servers use both ibm and non-ibm microprocessor technology and operating systems. all ibm servers run linux, a key open-source operating
system.
storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital
information. these solutions address critical client requirements for information retention and archiving, security, compliance and storage optimization including data deduplication, availability and
virtualization. the portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and tape storage systems and software.
microelectronics: semiconductor design and manufacturing primarily for use in ibm systems and storage products as well as delivering
semiconductors and related services to external clients.
global financing facilitates clients' acquisition of ibm systems, software and services. global financing invests in financing assets,
leverages with debt and manages the associated risks with the objective of generating consistently strong returns on equity. the primary focus on the company's offerings and clients mitigates many of
the risks normally associated with a financing company. global financing has the benefit of both a deep knowledge of its client base and a clear insight into the products and services that are being
financed. this combination allows global financing to effectively manage two of the major risks (credit and residual value) that are normally associated with financing.
global
financing capabilities
client financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal clients for terms generally between one
and seven years. internal financing is predominantly in support of global services' long-term client service contracts. global financing also factors a selected portion of the company's
accounts receivable, primarily for cash management purposes. all internal financing arrangements are at arm's-length rates and are based upon market conditions.
commercial financing: short-term inventory and accounts receivable financing to dealers and remarketers of it products.
remanufacturing and remarketing: as equipment is returned at the conclusion of a lease transaction, these assets are refurbished and sold
or leased to new or existing clients both externally and internally. externally remarketed equipment revenue represents sales or leases to clients and resellers. internally remarketed equipment
revenue primarily represents used equipment that is sold internally to systems and technology and global services. systems and technology may also sell the equipment that it purchases from global
financing to external clients.
ibm worldwide organizations
the following worldwide organizations play key roles in ibm's delivery of value to its
clients:
sales and distribution
research, development and intellectual property
enterprise transformation
integrated supply chain
sales and distribution
ibm has a significant global presence, operating in more than 170 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribution
of revenue. the company's sales and distribution organization manages a strong global footprint, with dedicated country-based operating units focused on delivering client value. within these units,
client relationship professionals work with integrated teams of consultants, product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to improve
clients' business performance. these teams deliver value by understanding the clients' businesses and needs, and then bring together capabilities from across ibm and an extensive network of business
partners to develop and implement solutions.
by
combining global expertise with local experience, ibm's geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and
timely investments in emerging opportunities. the geographic units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients' agendas. ibm extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by
leveraging industry skills with marketing, inside sales and local business partner resources.
through
its growth markets organization, the company continues to increase its focus on the emerging markets around the world that have market growth rates greater than the global
averagecountries
within southeast asia, eastern europe, the middle east and latin america. the company's major markets include the g7 countries of canada, france, germany, italy, japan,
the united states (u.s.) and the united kingdom (uk) plus austria, the bahamas, belgium, the caribbean region, cyprus, denmark, finland, greece, iceland, ireland, israel, malta, the netherlands,
norway, portugal, spain, sweden and switzerland.
the
majority of ibm's revenue, excluding the company's original equipment manufacturer (oem) technology business, occurs in industries that are broadly grouped into six
sectors:
financial services: banking, financial markets, insurance
public: education, government, healthcare, life sciences
industrial: aerospace and defense, automotive, chemical and petroleum, electronics
distribution: consumer products, retail, travel and transportation
communications: telecommunications, media and entertainment, energy and utilities
general business: cross-sector representation of intermediate- sized large enterprises as well as midmarket clients (less
than 1,000 employees)
research, development and intellectual property
ibm's r&d operations differentiate the company from its competitors. ibm annually invests over $6billion for r&d, focusing on
high- growth, high-value opportunities.
ibm
research works with clients and the company's business units through 12 global labs on near-term and mid-term innovations. it contributes many new
technologies to ibm's portfolio every year and helps clients address their most difficult challenges. ibm research also explores the boundaries of science and technologyfrom
nanotechnology, to future systems, to big data analytics, to secure clouds, to ibm watson, a "cognitive" learning system that applied advanced analytics to defeat the all-time champions on
the television quiz show, jeopardy!. the watson system has been introduced to the market for advanced healthcare applications and is being further
developed and extended within healthcare and in other industries.
ibm
research also focuses on differentiating ibm's services businesses providing new capabilities and solutions. it has the world's largest mathematics department of any public company,
enabling ibm to create unique analytic solutions and actively engage with clients on their toughest challenges.
in
2012, ibm was awarded more u.s. patents than any other company for the 20thconsecutive year. ibm's 6,478 patents in 2012 included inventions that will enable fundamental
advancements in analytics, big data, cybersecurity, cloud, mobile, social networking and software defined environments,
as well as industry solutions for retail, banking, healthcare, and transportation. it was the most u.s. patents ever awarded to one company in a single year.
the
company continues to actively seek intellectual property protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on other initiatives designed to leverage its intellectual property
leadership. some of ibm's technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in ibm products, while others are licensed and may be used in either/both ibm products and/or the products of the licensee.
while the company's various proprietary intellectual property rights are important to its success, ibm believes its business as a whole is not materially dependent on any particular patent or license,
or any particular group of patents or licenses. ibm owns or is licensed under a number of patents, which vary in duration, relating to its products.
enterprise transformation
a key element of the company's strategy has been focused on becoming the premier globally integrated enterprise. the company has
implemented a consistent set of processes and standards worldwide to reduce inefficiencies and improve collaboration. with its processes fully standardized, the company implemented a new operating
model with work shared in global resource centers of excellence located where it made the most business sense. the company has shifted resources toward building client relationships and employee
skills, while positioning the company for new market opportunities. during this transformation, ibm pioneered this new operating model, changing from a classic "multinational," with smaller versions
of the parent company replicated in countries around the world, to a global model with one set of processes, shared services and broadly distributed decision making.
the
company has now embarked on the next generation of its transformation in which new capabilities and technologies like business analytics and cloud computing will drive performance.
the proven principles of the globally integrated enterprise will be applied to all of the company's spending to continue to drive additional productivity benefits in shared services,
end-to-end process transformation and integrated operations. the company primarily reinvests the benefits of its enterprise transformation initiatives in remixing its spending
profile and resources to the higher growth, higher margin initiatives such as business analytics, smarter planet and cloud computing, in addition to improving profitability.
integrated supply chain
ibm spends approximately $35billion annually through its supply chain, procuring materials and services globally. in addition,
in 2012, the company managed approximately $20billion in procurement spending for its clients through the global process services organization. the supply, manufacturing, and logistics and
customer fulfillment operations are integrated in one operating unit that has optimized inventories over time. simplifying and streamlining internal processes has improved sales force productivity and
operational effectiveness and efficiency. continuous improvements to supply chain resiliency against marketplace changes and risks have been particularly valuable in maintaining continuity during
natural disasters and other disruptive events.
the
company's continuing efforts to derive business value from its own globally integrated supply chain provides a strategic advantage for the company to create value for clients. ibm
leverages its supply chain expertise for clients through its supply chain business transformation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate clients' end-to-end supply
chain processes, from procurement to logistics.
increasingly
the company is using analytics to measure, manage and fine tune its supply chain operations, which will help to reshape its operations and create value for clients. the goal
is to continue to increase the use of analytics in the five major areas of supply chain: 1)supply chain visibility, 2)risk management, 3)customer insight, 4)cost
containment, and 5)global supply chainand sustainability.
competition
the company is a globally-integrated enterprise, operating in more than 170 countries. the company participates in a highly competitive
environment, where its competitors vary by industry segment, and range from large multinational enterprises to smaller, more narrowly focused entities. overall, across its business segments, the
company recognizes hundreds of competitors worldwide.
across
its business, the company's principal methods of competition are: technology innovation; performance; price; quality; brand; its broad range of capabilities, products and
services; client relationships; the ability to deliver business value to clients; and, service and support. in order to maintain leadership, a corporation must continue to invest, innovate and
integrate. the company has
been
executing a strategy to transform its business, including shifting to higher value market segments and offerings and increasing its capabilities through organic investments and strategic
acquisitions. as the company executes its strategy, it enters new markets, such as smarter planet and business analytics, which exposes the company to new competitors. overall, the company is the
leader or among the leaders in each of its business segments.
a
summary of the competitive environment for each business segment is included below:
global services:
the services segments, gts and gbs, operate in a highly competitive and continually evolving global market. gts competes in strategic
outsourcing, business process outsourcing, cloud services, and a wide range of technical and it support services. gbs competes in consulting, system integration and application management services.
the principal competitive factors in these business segments include: technical skills and capabilities, innovative service and product offerings, industry knowledge and experience, value and speed,
price, client relationships, quality of sales and delivery, reliability, security and the availability of resources. the company's competitive advantages in the services business include its global
reach and scale, global delivery model, best-of-breed process and industry skills, extensive technology expertise, services assets, an ability to deliver integrated solutions
that can address clients' needs in any environment and a strong set of relationships with clients and strategic business partners worldwide. the company competes with broad based competitors
including: accenture, amazon.com, inc., computer sciences corporation, fujitsu and hewlett-packard company (hp); india-based service providers; the consulting practices of public accounting firms; and
many companies that primarily focus on local markets or niche service areas.
software:
the enterprise management software market is highly competitive and, increasingly, technology companies are looking to implement
software solutions that will improve business outcomes for their clients. the key competitive factors in this segment include: functionality, ease-of-use, scalability, open
standards, total cost-of-ownership and business value. ibm's leadership in each of these areas, and the ability to deliver solutions that drive business results, provides it
with competitive advantages. the company's software business includes middleware, solutions offerings and operating
systems. the middleware portfolio is the broadest in the industry and covers both mainframe and distributed computing environments. the middleware portfolio also underpins ibm's solutions business and
enhances the business value the company brings to clients. the solutions portfolio provides comprehensive business and industry- specific offerings to new types of it decision makers, such as chief
marketing and procurement officers, chief information security officers, and chief financial officers. the depth and breadth of the company's software offerings, coupled with its global sales and
technical support infrastructure, differentiate the software business from its competitors. the company's research and development capabilities and intellectual property patent portfolio also
contribute to this segment's leadership. the company's principal competitors in this segment include ca,inc., microsoft corporation and oracle corporation (oracle). the company also competes
with smaller, niche competitors in specific geographic or product markets worldwide.
systems and technology:
the enterprise server and storage market is highly competitive and is characterized by ongoing technology innovation, with competition
focused on value, function and reliability, and new entrants leveraging technology to compete against traditional offerings. the company's principal competitors include cisco systems, inc. (cisco),
dell,inc., emc corporation, hp and oracle. the company's leadership in virtualization, power management, security, multi-operating system capabilities and the ability of its systems platforms
to leverage the entire system, from the company's custom
semiconductors
through the software stack to increase efficiency and lower cost, provide the company with competitive advantages in this segment. in addition, the company's research and development
capabilities and intellectual property patent portfolio contribute significantly to this segment's leadership.
global financing:
global financing provides client financing, commercial financing and participates in the remarketing of used equipment. the economic
crisis of 2008 and 2009 drove an increase in credit spreads and a tightening supply of credit which have subsequently eased. however, going forward credit spreads may increase and the supply of credit
may tighten based on worldwide economic conditions. global financing's access to capital and its ability to manage increased exposures
provide a competitive advantage for the company. the key competitive factors include price, it product expertise, client service, contract flexibility, ease of doing business, global capabilities and
residual values. in client and commercial financing, global financing competes with three types of companies in providing financial services to it customers: other captive financing entities of
companies such as cisco and hp and non-captive financing entities of companies such as general electric company and banks or financial institutions. in remarketing, the company competes
with local and regional brokers plus original manufacturers in the fragmented worldwide used it equipment market.
forward-looking and cautionary statements
certain statements contained in this form10-k may constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995 ("reform act"). forward-looking statements are based on the company's current assumptions regarding future business and financial performance. these statements
by their nature address matters that are uncertain to different degrees. the company may also make forward-looking statements in other reports filed with the securities and exchange commission, in
materials delivered to stockholders and in press releases. in addition, the company's representatives may from time to time make oral forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements provide
current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. words such as "anticipates," "believes,"
"expects," "estimates," "intends," "plans," "projects," and similar expressions, may identify such forward-looking statements. any forward-looking statement in this form10-k speaks only as of
the date on which it is made. the company assumes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements. in accordance with the reform act, set forth under item1a. "risk factors" on
pages12 to 17 are cautionary statements that accompany those forward-looking statements. readers should carefully review such cautionary statements as they identify certain important factors
that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements and from historical trends. those cautionary statements are not exclusive and are in addition to other
factors discussed elsewhere in this form10-k, in the company's filings with the securities and exchange commission or in materials incorporated therein by reference.
the
following information is included in ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders and is incorporated herein by reference:
segment
information and revenue by classes of similar products or servicespages134 to138.
financial
information by geographic areaspage138.
amount
spent during each of the last three years on r&d activitiespage115.
financial
information regarding environmental activitiespages106 and107.
the
number of persons employed by the registrantpage63.
the
management discussion overviewpages18 to 21.
available
informationpage143.
also
refer to item1a. entitled "risk factors" in part i of this form.
executive officers of the registrant (at february26, 2013):
age
officer since
virginia m. rometty, chairman of the board, president and chief executive officer*
rodney c. adkins, senior vice president, systems and technology group
colleen f. arnold, senior vice president, application management services
james p. bramante, senior vice president, growth markets
erich clementi, senior vice president, global technology services
michael e. daniels, senior vice president**
bruno v. di leo allen, senior vice president, sales and distribution
jon c. iwata, senior vice president, marketing and communications
james j. kavanaugh, vice president and controller
john e. kelly iii, senior vice president and director, research
robert j. leblanc, senior vice president, middleware software group
mark loughridge, senior vice president and chief financial officer, finance and enterprise transformation
j. randall macdonald, senior vice president, human resources
steven a. mills, senior vice president and group executive, software and systems
michael d. rhodin, senior vice president, software solutions group
linda s. sanford, senior vice president, enterprise transformation
timothy s. shaughnessy, senior vice president, gts services delivery
bridget a.van kralingen, senior vice president, global business services
robert c. weber, senior vice president, legal and regulatory affairs, and general counsel
*member
of the board of directors.
**mr.
daniels will retire on march31, 2013, after a 36-year career with the company.
all
executive officers are elected by the board of directors and serve until the next election of officers in conjunction with the annual meeting of the stockholders as provided in the
by-laws. each executive officer named above has been an executive of ibm or its subsidiaries during the past five years.
item1a. risk factors:
downturn in economic environment and corporate it spending budgets could impact the company's business: if overall demand for systems,
software and services decreases, whether due to general economic conditions or a shift in corporate buying patterns, the company's revenue and profit could be impacted.
the company may not meet its growth and productivity objectives under its internal business transformation and global integration
initiatives: on an ongoing basis, ibm seeks to drive greater productivity, flexibility and cost savings by transforming and globally integrating its own business processes and
functions to remain competitive and to enable scaling of resources and offerings in both emerging and more established markets. these various initiatives may not yield their intended gains in quality,
productivity and enablement of rapid scaling, which may impact the company's competitiveness and its ability to meet its growth and productivity objectives.
failure of innovation initiatives could impact the long-term success of the company: ibm has been moving away from certain
segments of the it industry and into areas in which it can differentiate itself through innovation and by leveraging its investments in r&d. if ibm is unable to continue its cutting-edge
innovation in a highly competitive environment, the company could fail in its ongoing
efforts
to maintain and increase its market share and its profit margins. in addition, ibm has one of the strongest brand names in the world, and its brand and overall reputation could be negatively
impacted by many factors, including if the company does not continue to be recognized for its industry-leading technology and solutions. if the company's brand image is tarnished by negative
perceptions, our ability to attract and retain customers could be impacted.
risks from investing in growth opportunities could impact the company's business: the company continues to invest significantly in growth
opportunities, including higher-value segments of enterprise computing, cloud computing, and new and emerging markets and countries to drive revenue growth and market share gains. client adoption
rates and viable economic models are less certain in the high-value and rapidly-growing segments, and new delivery models may unfavorably impact demand for our other products or services.
in addition, as the company expands to capture emerging growth opportunities, it needs to rapidly secure the appropriate mix of trained, skilled and experienced personnel. in emerging growth
countries, the developing nature presents potential political, social, legal and economic risks from inadequate infrastructure, creditworthiness of customers and business partners, labor disruption
and corruption, which could impact the company's ability to meet its growth objectives and to deliver to its clients around the world.
ibm's intellectual property portfolio may not prevent competitive offerings, and ibm may not be able to obtain necessary licenses: the
company's patents and other intellectual property may not prevent competitors from independently developing products and services similar to or duplicative to the company's, nor can there be any
assurance that the resources invested by the company to protect its intellectual property will be sufficient or that the company's intellectual property portfolio will adequately deter
misappropriation or improper use of the company's technology. in addition, the company may be the target of aggressive and opportunistic enforcement of patents by third parties, including
non-practicing entities. also, there can be no assurances that ibm will be able to obtain from third parties the licenses it needs in the future.
cybersecurity and privacy considerations could impact the company's business: the company's products, services, and systems may affect
critical third party operations or involve the storage, processing and transmission of proprietary information and sensitive or confidential data, including personal information of employees,
customers and others. breaches of security could expose the company, its customers or others to risks of loss, including the misuse of information or systems, resulting in litigation and potential
liability for the company, as well as the loss of existing or potential customers and damage to the company's brand and reputation. in addition, the cost and operational consequences of implementing
further data protection measures could be significant. also, the company could be negatively impacted by existing and proposed laws and regulations related to privacy and data protection.
the company's financial results for particular periods are difficult to predict: ibm's revenues are affected by such factors as the
introduction of new products and services, the length of the sales cycles
and the seasonality of technology purchases. the company's financial results may also be impacted by the structure of products and services contracts and the nature of its customers' businesses; for
example, certain of the company's services contracts with commercial customers in regulated industries are subject to periodic review by regulators with respect to controls and processes. as a result
of the above-mentioned factors, the company's financial results are difficult to predict. historically, the company has had lower revenue in the first quarter than in the immediately preceding fourth
quarter. in addition, the high volume of products typically ordered at the end of each quarter, especially at the end of the fourth quarter, may affect ibm's ability to successfully ship all orders
before the end of the quarter.
due to the company's global presence, its business and operations could be impacted by local legal, economic, political and health
conditions: the company is a globally integrated entity, operating in over 170 countries worldwide and deriving more than sixty percent of its revenues from sales outside the
united states. changes in the laws or policies of the countries in which the company operates, or
inadequate
enforcement of laws or policies, could affect the company's business and the company's overall results of operations. the company's results of operations also could be affected by economic
and political changes in those countries and by macroeconomic changes, including recessions, inflation and currency fluctuations between the u.s. dollar and non-u.s. currencies. further,
as the company expands its customer base and the scope of its offerings, both within the u.s. and globally, it may be impacted by additional regulatory or other risks. in addition, any widespread
outbreak of an illness, pandemic or other local or global health issue, natural disasters, or any terrorist activities, could adversely affect customer demand and the company's operations and its
ability to source and deliver products and services to its customers.
the company could incur substantial costs for environmental matters: the company is subject to various federal, state, local and foreign
laws and regulations concerning the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise related to environmental protection, including the u.s. superfund law. the company could incur substantial
costs, including cleanup costs, fines and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if it were to violate or become liable under environmental
laws and regulations. compliance with environmental laws and regulations is not expected to have a material adverse effect on the company's financial position, results of operations and competitive
position.
tax matters could impact the company's results of operations and financial condition: the company is subject to income taxes in both the
united states and numerous foreign jurisdictions. ibm's provision for income taxes and cash tax liability in the future could be adversely affected by numerous factors including, but not limited to,
income before taxes being lower than anticipated in countries with lower statutory tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries with higher statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of
deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting
principles or interpretations thereof, which could adversely impact the company's results of operations and financial condition in future periods. in addition, ibm is subject to the continuous
examination of its income tax returns by the united states internal revenue service and other tax authorities. the company regularly assesses the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these
examinations to determine the adequacy of its provision for income taxes. there can be no assurance that the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse effect on the
company's provision for income taxes and cash tax liability.
the company's results of operations and financial condition could be negatively impacted by its u.s. and non-u.s. pension
plans: adverse equity market conditions and volatility in the credit markets may have an unfavorable impact on the value of the company's pension trust assets and its future
estimated pension liabilities. as a result, the company's financial results in any period could be negatively impacted. in addition, in a period of an extended financial market downturn, the company
could be required to provide incremental pension plan funding with resulting liquidity risk which could negatively impact the company's financial flexibility. further, the company's results of
operations and financial results could be negatively impacted by premiums for mandatory pension insolvency insurance coverage outside the u.s. premium increases can be significant due to the level of
insolvencies of unrelated companies in the country at issue. currently, canada, germany, luxembourg and the united kingdom require that these premiums be paid directly by the company and not out of
plan assets, which could negatively impact the company's earnings. ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders includes information about potential impacts from pension funding and the use of certain
assumptions regarding pension matters.
ineffective internal controls could impact the company's business and operating results: the company's internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements because of its inherent limitations, including the possibility of human error, the circumvention or overriding of controls, or fraud. even effective
internal controls can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements. if the company fails to maintain the adequacy of its internal
controls, including any failure to implement required new or improved controls,
or
if the company experiences difficulties in their implementation, the company's business and operating results could be harmed and the company could fail to meet its financial reporting obligations.
the company's use of accounting estimates involves judgment and could impact the company's financial results: the application of generally
accepted accounting principles requires the company to make estimates and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly affect its reported financial condition. the company's most
critical accounting estimates are described in the management discussion in ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, under "critical accounting estimates." in addition, as discussed in notem,
"contingencies and commitments," in ibm's 2012 annual report to
stockholders, the company makes certain estimates including decisions related to legal proceedings and reserves. these estimates and assumptions involve the use of judgment. as a result, actual
financial results may differ.
the company depends on skilled personnel and could be impacted by the loss of critical skills: much of the future success of the company
depends on the continued service, availability and integrity of skilled personnel, including technical, marketing and staff resources. experienced personnel in the information technology industry are
in high demand, and competition for their talents is intense. changing demographics and labor work force trends may result in a loss of knowledge and skills as experienced workers leave the company.
in addition, as global opportunities and industry demand shifts, realignment, training and scaling of skilled resources may not be sufficiently rapid. further, many of ibm's key personnel receive a
total compensation package that includes equity awards. new regulations, volatility in the stock market and other factors could diminish the company's use, and the value, of the company's equity
awards, putting the company at a competitive disadvantage or forcing the company to use more cash compensation.
the company's business could be impacted by its relationships with critical suppliers: ibm's business employs a wide variety of
components, supplies, services and raw materials from a substantial number of suppliers around the world. certain of the company's businesses rely on single or a limited number of suppliers. changes
in the financial or business condition of these suppliers could subject the company to losses and affect its ability to bring products to market. further, the failure of the company's suppliers to
deliver components, supplies, services and raw materials in sufficient quantities and in a timely manner could adversely affect the company's business. in addition, any defective components, supplies
or materials, or inadequate services, received from suppliers could reduce the reliability of the company's products and services and harm the company's reputation.
the company could be impacted by its business with government clients: the company's customers include numerous governmental entities
within and outside the u.s., including the u.s. federal government and state and local entities. some of the company's agreements with these customers may be subject to periodic funding approval.
also, some agreements may contain provisions allowing the customer to terminate without cause and providing for higher liability limits for certain losses. in addition, the company could be suspended
or debarred as a governmental contractor and could incur civil and criminal fines and penalties, which could negatively impact the company's results of operations and financial results.
the company is exposed to currency and customer financing risks that could impact its revenue and business: the company derives a
significant percentage of its revenues and costs from its affiliates operating in local currency environments, and those results are affected by changes in the relative values of non-u.s.
currencies and the u.s. dollar. further, inherent in the company's customer financing business are risks related to the concentration of credit, client creditworthiness, interest rate and currency
fluctuations on the associated debt and liabilities, the determination of residual values and the financing of other than traditional it assets. the company employs a number of strategies to manage
these risks, including the use of derivative financial instruments; derivatives involve the risk of non-performance by the counterparty. in addition, there can be no assurance that the
company's efforts to manage its currency and customer financing risks will be successful.
the company's financial performance could be impacted by changes in market liquidity conditions and by customer credit risk on
receivables: the company's financial performance is exposed to a wide variety of industry sector dynamics worldwide. the company's earnings and cash flows, as well as its
access to funding, could be negatively impacted by changes in market liquidity conditions. ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders includes information about the company's liquidity position. the
company's client base includes many worldwide enterprises, from small and medium businesses to the world's largest organizations and governments, with a significant portion of the company's revenue
coming from global clients across many sectors. most of the company's sales are on an open credit basis, and the company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its clients' financial conditions. if
the company becomes aware of information related to the creditworthiness of a major customer, or, if future actual default rates on receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the
company may have to adjust its allowance for credit losses, which could affect the company's consolidated net income in the period the adjustments are made.
the company's reliance on third party distribution channels could impact its business: the company offers its products directly and
through a variety of third party distributors and resellers. changes in the financial or business condition of these distributors and resellers could subject the company to losses and affect its
ability to bring its products to market. as the company moves into new areas, distributors and resellers may be unable to keep up with changes in technology and offerings, and the company may be
unable to recruit and enable appropriate partners to achieve growth objectives.
risks to the company from acquisitions and alliances include integration challenges, failure to achieve objectives, and the assumption of liabilities:  the company has made and expects to continue to make
acquisitions or enter into alliances. acquisitions and alliances present significant challenges and risks relating to the
integration of the business into the company, and there can be no assurances that the company will manage acquisitions and alliances successfully. the related risks include the company failing to
achieve strategic objectives and anticipated revenue improvements and cost savings, as well as the failure to retain key personnel of the acquired business and the assumption of liabilities related to
litigation or other legal proceedings involving the acquired business.
risk factors related to ibm securities: the company and its subsidiaries issue debt securities in the worldwide capital markets from time
to time, with a variety of different maturities and in different currencies. the value of the company's debt securities fluctuates based on many factors, including the methods employed for calculating
principal and interest, the maturity of the securities, the aggregate principal amount of securities outstanding, the redemption features for the securities, the level, direction and volatility of
interest rates, changes in exchange rates, exchange controls, governmental and stock exchange regulations and other factors over which the company has little or no control. the company's ability to
pay interest and repay the principal for its debt securities is dependent upon its ability to manage its business operations, as well as the other risks described under this item1a.
entitled "risk factors." there can be no assurance that the company will be able to manage any of these risks successfully.
the
company also issues its common stock from time to time in connection with various compensation plans, contributions to its pension plan and certain acquisitions. the market price of
ibm common stock is subject to significant volatility, due to other factors described under this item1a. entitled "risk factors," as well as economic and geopolitical conditions generally,
trading volumes, speculation by the press or investment community about the company's financial condition, and other factors, many of which are beyond the company's control. since the market price of
ibm's common stock fluctuates significantly, stockholders may not be able to sell the company's stock at attractive prices.
in
addition, changes by any rating agency to the company's outlook or credit ratings can negatively impact the value and liquidity of both the company's debt and equity securities. the
company does not
make
a market in either its debt or equity securities and cannot provide any assurances with respect to the liquidity or value of such securities.
item 1b. unresolved staff comments:
not applicable.
item 2. properties:
at december31, 2012, ibm's manufacturing and development facilities in the united states had aggregate floor space of
18million square feet, of which 16million was owned and 2million was leased. of these amounts, 3million square feet was vacant and 1million square feet was
being leased to non-ibm businesses. similar facilities in 14 other countries totaled
6million square feet, of which 2million was owned and 4million was leased. of these amounts, 1million square feet was vacant.
although
improved production techniques, productivity gains and infrastructure reduction actions have resulted in reduced manufacturing floor space, continuous maintenance and upgrading
of facilities is essential to maintain technological leadership, improve productivity and meet customer demand.
item 3. legal proceedings:
refer to notem, "contingencies and commitments," on pages110 to 112 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which
is incorporated herein by reference.
item 4. mine safety disclosures:
not applicable.
part ii
item 5. market for the registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities:
refer
to pages139 and 143 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference solely as they relate to this item.
ibm
common stock is listed on the new york stock exchange and the chicago stock exchange. there were 488,800 common stockholders of record at february8, 2013.
the
following table provides information relating to the company's repurchase of common stock for the fourth quarter of 2012.
total number
of shares
purchased
average
price paid
per share
total number
of shares purchased
as part of publicly
announced program
approximate
dollar value
of shares that
may yet be
purchased under
the program(1)
october 1, 2012
october 31, 2012
4,601,621
$
202.42
4,601,621
$
10,722,136,206
november 1, 2012
november 30, 2012
5,593,491
$
191.01
5,593,491
$
9,653,711,820
december 1, 2012
december 31, 2012
5,212,946
$
192.14
5,212,946
$
8,652,080,389
total
15,408,058
$
194.80
15,408,058
(1)on
april24, 2012, the board of directors authorized $7.0billion in funds for use in the company's common stock repurchase program. on
october30, 2012, the board of directors authorized an additional $5.0billion in funds for use in such program. in each case, the company stated that it would repurchase shares on the
open market or in private transactions depending on market conditions and that it expects to use cash from operations for the repurchases. the common stock repurchase program does not have an
expiration date. this table does not include shares tendered to satisfy the exercise price in connection with cashless exercises of employee stock options or shares tendered to satisfy tax withholding
obligations in connection with employee equity awards.
item 6. selected financial data:
refer to pages139 and 140 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations:
refer to pages18 through 67 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk:
refer to the section titled "market risk" on page62 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which is incorporated herein
by reference.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data:
refer to pages 70 through 138 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference. also refer to
the financial statement schedule on page s-1 of this form10-k.
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure:
not
applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures:
the company's management evaluated, with the participation of the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, the
effectiveness of the company's disclosure controls
and procedures as of the end of the period covered by this report. based on that evaluation, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that the company's disclosure
controls and procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this report.
refer
to "report of management" and "report of independent registered public accounting firm" on pages68 and 69 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which are
incorporated herein by reference. there has been no change in the company's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the company's internal control over financial reporting.
item 9b. other information:
the following are compensation arrangements for the company's named executive officers identified in the 2012 proxy
statement(1). information regarding the structure of compensation programs and awards is included in the company's proxy statement.
2013 cash
2013 long-term
incentive award
salary
rate
annual incentive
target
performance
share units*
m. loughridge
$
775,000
$
1,046,000
$
5,750,000
s. a. mills
$
716,000
$
968,000
$
5,000,000
(1)mr.s.
j. palmisano, mr.m.e.daniels and mrs.v.m.rometty were named executive officers in the
company's 2012 proxy statement filed on march12, 2012, but were not included in the table above; mr.palmisano retired from the company effective december1, 2012;
mr.daniels will retire on march31, 2013; and there are no new compensation arrangements for mrs.rometty.
*performance
share units will be granted on june7, 2013. the actual number of units granted on this date will be determined by dividing the value shown
above by a predetermined, formulaic planning price for the second quarter 2013. these performance share units will be paid out in february 2016 as explained in the company's proxy statement.
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance:
refer to the information under the captions "election of directors for a term of one year," "general informationcommittees
of the board," "audit committee" and "section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and
delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april30, 2013, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference. also refer to
item1 of this form10-k under the caption "executive officers of the registrant (at february26, 2013)" on page12 for additional information on the company's executive
officers.
item 11. executive compensation:
refer to the information under the captions "general information2012 director compensation narrative," "2012 director
compensation
table," "2012 compensation discussion and analysis," "2012 summary compensation table narrative," "2012 summary compensation table," "2012 grants of plan-based awards table," "2012
outstanding equity awards at fiscal year-end narrative," "2012 outstanding equity awards at fiscal year-end table," "2012 option exercises and stock vested table," "2012
retention plan narrative," "2012 retention plan table," "2012 pension benefits narrative," "2012 pension benefits table," "2012 nonqualified deferred compensation narrative," "2012 nonqualified
deferred compensation table," "2012 potential payments upon termination narrative," "2012 potential payments upon termination table," "compensation committee interlocks and insider participation" and
"2012 report of the executive compensation and management resources committee of the board of directors" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and
delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april30, 2013, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters:
refer to the information under the caption "ownership of securitiessecurity ownership of certain beneficial owners" and
"ownership of securitiescommon stock and stock-based holdings of directors and executive officers" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange
commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april30, 2013, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference.
equity compensation plan information
(a)
(b)
(c)
plan category
numberofsecurities
tobeissuedupon
exerciseofoutstanding
options, warrants
and rights(1)
weighted-average
exercise price
of outstanding
options,warrants
and rights(1)
numberofsecurities
remainingavailable
forfutureissuance
underequity
compensationplans
(excludingsecurities
reflectedincolumn(a))
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
options
1,401,475
$
97.86
rsus
6,973,298
n/a
psus
4,020,419
(2)
n/a
subtotal
12,395,192
$
97.86
105,509,920
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
options
9,988,246
$
93.03
rsus
2,868,163
n/a
psus
737,883(2)
n/a
dceap shares
135,040
n/a
subtotal
13,729,332
$
93.03
15,649,090
total
26,124,524
$
93.63
121,159,010
n/a
is not applicable
rsusrestricted
stock units, including retention restricted stock units
psusperformance
share units
dceap
sharespromised fee shares under the dceap (see plan description below)
(1)in
connection with 37 acquisition transactions, 920,848 additional share based awards, consisting of stock options and rsu's, were outstanding at
december31, 2012 as a result of the company's assumption of awards granted by the acquired entities. the weighted-average exercise price of these awards was $67.64. the company has not made,
and will not make, any future grants or awards of equity securities under the plans of these acquired companies.
(2)the
numbers included for psus in column(a) above reflect the maximum number payout. assuming target number payout, the number of securities to be
issued upon the exercise of psus for equity compensation plans approved by security holders is 2,680,279 and for equity compensation plans not approved by security holders is 491,922. for additional
information about psus, including payout calculations, refer to the information under "2012 summary compensation table narrative" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities
and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april30, 2013.
the
material features of each equity compensation plan under which equity securities are authorized for issuance that was adopted without stockholder approval are described below:
2001 long-term performance plan
the 2001 long-term performance plan (the "2001 plan") has been used to fund awards for employees other than senior
executives of the company. awards for senior executives of the company
have
been and will continue to be funded from the stockholder-approved 1999 long-term performance plan (the "1999 plan"); the 1999 plan is also used to fund awards for employees other than
senior executives. otherwise, the provisions of the 2001 plan are identical to the 1999 plan, including the type of awards that may be granted under the plan (stock options, restricted stock and unit
awards and long-term performance incentive awards).
the
2001 plan is administered by the executive compensation and management resources committee of the board of directors, and that committee may delegate to officers of the company
certain of its duties, powers and authority. payment of awards may be made in the form of cash, stock or combinations thereof and may be deferred with committee approval. awards are not transferable
or assignable except (i)by law, will or the laws of descent and distribution, (ii)as a result of the disability of the recipient, or (iii)with the approval of the committee.
if
the employment of a participant terminates, other than as a result of the death or disability of a participant, all unexercised, deferred and unpaid awards shall be canceled
immediately, unless the award agreement provides otherwise. in the event of the death of a participant or in the event a participant is deemed by the company to be disabled and eligible for benefits
under the terms of the ibm long-term disability plan (or any successor plan or similar plan of another employer), the participant's estate, beneficiaries or representative, as the case may
be, shall have the rights and duties of the participant under the applicable award agreement. in addition, unless the award agreement specifies otherwise, the committee may cancel, rescind, suspend,
withhold or otherwise limit or restrict any unexpired, unpaid, or deferred awards at any time if the participant is not in compliance with all applicable provisions of the award agreement and the
plan. in addition, awards may be cancelled if the participant engages in any conduct or act determined to be injurious, detrimental or prejudicial to any interest of the company.
pwcc acquisition long-term performance plan
the ibm pwcc acquisition long-term performance plan (the "pwcc plan") was adopted by the board of directors in connection
with the company's acquisition of pricewaterhousecoopers consulting ("pwcc") from pricewaterhousecoopersllp, as announced on october1, 2002. the pwcc plan has been and will continue to
be used solely to fund awards for employees of pwcc who have come over to the company as a result of the acquisition. awards for senior executives of the company will not be funded from the pwcc plan.
the terms and conditions of the pwcc plan are substantively identical to the terms and conditions of the 2001 plan, described above.
ibm deferred compensation and equity award plan
the ibm deferred compensation and equity award plan (the "dceap") was adopted in 1993. under the dceap, non-management
directors receive promised fee shares in connection with deferred annual retainer payments. each promised fee share is equal in value to one share of the company's common stock. upon a director's
retirement or other completion of service as a director, all amounts deferred into promised fee shares are payable in either cash and/or shares of the company's stock at the director's election. (for
additional information about the dceap, see "general information2012 director compensation narrative" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange
commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april30, 2013).
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence:
refer to the information under the captions "general informationboard of directors" and "general
informationcertain transactions and relationships" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection
with
the
annual meeting of stockholders to be held april30, 2013, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
item 14. principal accounting fees and services:
refer to the information under the captions "report of the audit committee of the board of directors" and "audit and
non-audit fees" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held april30, 2013, all of which information is incorporated herein by reference.
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules:
(a)the
following documents are filed as part of this report:
1.financial
statements from ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, which are incorporated herein by reference:
report
of independent registered public accounting firm (page69).
consolidated
statement of earnings for the years ended december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 (page70).
consolidated
statement of comprehensive income for the years ended december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 (page71).
consolidated
statement of financial position at december31, 2012 and 2011 (page72).
consolidated
statement of cash flows for the years ended december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 (page73).
consolidated
statement of changes in equity at december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 (pages74 and 75).
notes
to consolidated financial statements (pages76 through138).
2.financial
statement schedule required to be filed by item8 of this form:
page
schedule
number
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement schedule.
s-1
ii
valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves.
all
other schedules are omitted as the required matter is not present, the amounts are not significant or the information is shown in the consolidated financial
statements or the notes thereto.
3.exhibits:
reference
numberper
item601of
regulations-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
(2)
plan of acquisition, reorganization, arrangement, liquidation or succession.
not applicable
(3)
certificate of incorporation and by-laws.
reference
numberper
item601of
regulations-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the certificate of incorporation of ibm is exhibit 3.2 to form 8-k filed april27, 2007, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the by-laws of ibm, as amended through october1, 2012, is exhibit3.2 to form10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2012, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
(4)
instruments defining the rights of security holders.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 7.50% debentures due 2013 are exhibits 4(a) through 4(l) to registration statement no. 33-49475(1) on form s-3, filed may 24, 1993, and are hereby incorporated
by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 8.375% debentures due 2019 are exhibits 4(a)(b)(c) and (d), respectively, to registration statement no. 33-31732 on form s-3, filed on october 24, 1989, and
are hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 7.00% debentures due 2025 and the 7.00% debentures due 2045 are exhibits 2 and 3, respectively, to form 8-k, filed on october 30, 1995, and are hereby
incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 7.125% debentures due 2096 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k/a, filed on december 6, 1996, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 6.22% debentures due 2027 is exhibit 3 to form 8-k, filed on august 1, 1997, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 6.50% debentures due 2028 is exhibit 2 to form 8-k, filed on january 8, 1998, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 6.625% notes due 2014 is exhibit2 to form8-k, filed november5, 2008, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 2.1% notes due 2013 is exhibits2.1 to form8-k, filed on november5, 2009, and are hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 1.000% notes due 2013 is exhibit2.1 to form8-k, filed august4, 2010, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 2.000% notes due 2016 is exhibit2.1 to form8-k, filed december8, 2010, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
reference
numberper
item601of
regulations-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 1.250% notes due 2014 is exhibit2.1 to form8-k, filed may11, 2011, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 1.950% notes due 2016 is exhibit2.1 to form8-k, filed july21, 2011, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 0.875% notes due 2014 and the 2.900% notes due 2021 are exhibits2.1 and 3.1 to form8-k, filed october31, 2011, and are hereby incorporated by
reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 0.550% notes due 2015 and the 1.250% notes due 2017 are exhibits2.1 and 3.1 to form8-k, filed february3, 2012, and are hereby incorporated by
reference.
the instrument defining the rights of the holders of the 2.20% notes due 2017 is exhibit2.1 to form8-k, filed february9, 2012, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 0.750% notes due 2015 and the 1.875% notes due 2019 are exhibits2.1 and 3.1 to form8-k, filed may10, 2012, and are hereby incorporated by
reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 1.875% notes due 2022 is exhibit2.1 to form8-k, filed july27, 2012, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 1.375% notes due 2019 is exhibit2.1 to form8-k, filed november16, 2012, and is hereby incorporated by reference.
the instruments defining the rights of the holders of the 1.250% notes due 2018 and floating rate notes due 2015 are exhibits2.1 and 3.1 to form 8-k, filed february7, 2013, and are hereby incorporated by
reference
(9)
voting trust agreement
not applicable
(10)
material contracts
the ibm 2001 long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-87708 on form s-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.1 to form 10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
reference
numberper
item601of
regulations-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the ibm pwcc acquisition long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-102872 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.2 to form10-q for
the quarter ended september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm 1999 long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-30424 on form s-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit10.3 to form 10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm 1997 long-term performance plan, a compensatory plan, contained in registration statement no.333-31305 on forms-8, as such amended plan was filed as exhibit 10.4 to form 10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2007, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
forms of ltpp equity award agreements for (i)stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, cash-settled restricted stock units, sars, (ii)performance share units and (iii)retention
restricted stock unit awards. such equity award agreement forms and the related terms and conditions document, effective june 8, 2011, were filed as exhibit10.1 to form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2011, are hereby
incorporated by reference.*
board of directors compensatory plans, as described under the caption "general information2012 director compensation" in ibm's definitive proxy statement to be filed with the securities and exchange commission
and delivered to stockholders in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held april30, 2013, are hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm non-employee directors stock option plan, contained in registration statement 33-60227 on forms-8, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm board of directors deferred compensation and equity award plan, a compensatory plan, as amended effective october 28, 2008, was filed as exhibit10.1 to form10-k for the year ended december31,
2008, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
the ibm supplemental executive retention plan, a compensatory plan, as amended and restated through december31, 2008, was filed as exhibit10.2 to form10-k for the year ended december31, 2008,
is hereby incorporated by reference.*
reference
numberper
item601of
regulations-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
the ibm excess 401(k) plus plan, a compensatory plan (formerly the ibm executive deferred compensation plan), as amended and restated through january1, 2010, which was filed as exhibit10.1 to the
form10-k for the year ended december31, 2009 contained in registration statement no.333-171968, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
amendment no.1 to the ibm excess 401(k) plus plan, a compensatory plan, effective january1, 2013.*
10.1
amendment no.2 to the ibm excess 401(k) plus plan, a compensatory plan, effective january1, 2013.*
10.2
the ibm 2003 employees stock purchase plan, contained in registration statement 333-104806 on form s-8, as amended through april1, 2005, which was filed as exhibit10.3 to form10-q for the quarter
ended march31, 2005, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
form of noncompetition agreement, filed as exhibit10.2 to form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2009, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
form of noncompetition agreement, filed as exhibit10.1 to form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2012, is hereby incorporated by reference.*
letter dated september25, 2012, signed by samuelj. palmisano and ibm was included as exhibit99.2 to the form8-k filed september25, 2012, and is hereby incorporated by
reference.*
the $10,000,000 5-year credit agreement dated as of november10, 2011, among international business machines corporation, the subsidiary borrowers parties thereto, the lenders parties thereto, jpmorgan chase bank,
n.a., as administrative agent, and the syndication and documentation agents named therein, which was filed as exhibit10.1 to form8-k dated november14, 2011, the term of which was extended through november10, 2017, is hereby
incorporated by reference.
(11)
statement re computation of per share earnings
the statement re computation of per share earnings is notep, "earnings per share of common stock," on page116 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, and is hereby incorporated by
reference.
(12)
statement re computation of ratios
(13)
annual report to security holders**
(18)
letter re: change in accounting principles
not applicable
reference
numberper
item601of
regulations-k
description of exhibits
exhibit number
in this
form10-k
(19)
previously unfiled documents
not applicable
(21)
subsidiaries of the registrant
(22)
published report regarding matters submitted to vote of security holders
not applicable
(23.1)
consent of experts
23.1
(24.1)
powers of attorney
24.1
(24.2)
resolution of the ibm board of directors authorizing execution of this report by powers of attorney
24.2
(28)
information from reports furnished to state insurance regulatory authorities
not applicable
(31.1)
certification by ceo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
31.1
(31.2)
certification by cfo pursuant to rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
31.2
(32.1)
certification by ceo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
32.1
(32.2)
certification by cfo pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
32.2
(101)
interactive data files pursuant to rule405 of regulations-t: (i)the consolidated statement of earnings for the twelve month period ended december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, (ii)consolidated
statement of comprehensive income for the twelve month period ended december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, (iii)the consolidated statement of financial position at december31, 2012 and 2011, (iv)the consolidated statement of cash
flows for the twelve months ended december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, (v)the consolidated statement of changes in equity for the twelve month period ended december31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, (vi)financial statement scheduleii
and (vii)the notes to the consolidated financial statements
*management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
**the
performance graph, set forth on page141 of ibm's 2012 annual report to stockholders, is deemed to be furnished but not filed.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this
report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
international business machines corporation (registrant)
by:
/s/virginia m. rometty
virginia m. rometty chairman of the board,
president and chief executive officer
date: february26, 2013
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/virginia m. rometty
virginia m. rometty
chairman of the board,
president and chief executive
officer
february26, 2013
/s/mark loughridge
mark loughridge
senior vice president and chief
financial officer,
finance and enterprise
transformation
february26, 2013
/s/james j. kavanaugh
james j. kavanaugh
vice president and controller
february26, 2013
alain j. p. belda
director
william r. brody
director
kenneth i. chenault
director
by:
/s/michelle h. browdy
michelle h. browdy
michael l. eskew
director
attorney-in-fact
february26, 2013
david n. farr
director
shirley ann jackson
director
andrew n. liveris
director
w. james mcnerney, jr.
director
james w. owens
director
joan e. spero
director
sidney taurel
director
lorenzo h. zambrano
director
report of independent registered public accounting firm  on financial statement schedule
to
the stockholders and board of directors of
international business machines corporation:
our
audits of the consolidated financial statements and of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting referred to in our report dated february26, 2013
appearing in the 2012 annual report to shareholders of international business machines corporation (which report and consolidated financial statements are incorporated by reference in this annual
report on form10-k) also included an audit of the financial statement schedule listed in item 15(a)(2) of this form10-k. in our opinion, this financial
statement schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february26, 2013
schedule ii
international business machines corporation and subsidiary companies  valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves  for the years ended december31:  (dollars in millions)
description
balance at
beginning
of period
additions*
writeoffs
other**
balance at
end of
period
allowance for doubtful accounts
current
$
$
$
(45
)
$
(15
)
$
noncurrent
$
$
$
$
$
current
$
$
$
(154
)
$
(34
)
$
noncurrent
$
$
$
(17
)
$
(3
)
$
current
$
$
$
(146
)
$
$
noncurrent
$
$
(12
)
$
(29
)
$
(1
)
$
allowance for inventory losses
$
$
$
(240
)
$
(28
)
$
$
$
$
(279
)
$
$
$
$
$
(285
)
$
$
revenue based provisions
$
$
3,228
$
(3,345
)
$
$
$
$
3,157
$
(3,132
)
$
(51
)
$
$
$
3,234
$
(3,216
)
$
(1
)
$
*additions
for allowance for doubtful accounts and allowance for inventory losses are charged to expense and cost accounts, respectively, while revenue based
provisions are charged to revenue accounts.
**primarily
comprises currency translation adjustments.
s-1
quicklinks
part i
item 1a. risk factors
item 1b. unresolved staff comments
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. mine safety disclosures
part ii
item 5. market for the registrant's common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
item 9b. other information
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item 14. principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement schedule
schedule ii
international business machines corporation and subsidiary companies valuation and qualifying accounts and reserves for the years ended december 31: (dollars in millions)
