10-k
f10k2000.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
united states securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
[x]
annual report pursuant to section
13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2000
commission file number 1-35
or
[ ]
transition report pursuant to
section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from
______to ______
general electric company
(exact name of registrant as specified
in charter)
new york
14-0689340
(state or other jurisdiction
of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
3135 easton turnpike,
fairfield, ct
06431-0001
203/373-2211
(address of principal
executive offices)
(zip code)
(telephone no.)
securities registered
pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $0.06 per share
new york stock exchange
boston stock exchange
there were 9,932,928,724 shares of voting common stock with a par value
of $0.06 outstanding at march 4, 2001. these shares, which constitute all
of the outstanding common equity of the registrant, had an aggregate market
value on march 5, 2001, of $447.9 billion. affiliates of the company beneficially
own, in the aggregate, less than one-tenth of one percent of such shares.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports
required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes
x no __
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item
405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained,
to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any
amendment to this form 10-k.
documents incorporated by reference
the definitive proxy statement relating to the registrant's annual meeting
of share owners, to be held april 25, 2001, is incorporated by reference
in part iii to the extent described therein.
table of contents
page
part i
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
part ii
item 5.
market for the registrant's common equity
and related stockholder matters
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
management's discussion and analysis of results
of operations
item 7a
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
part iv
item 14.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form 8-k
signatures
part i
item 1. business
general
unless otherwise
indicated by the context, the terms "ge," "gecs" and
"ge capital services" are used on the basis of consolidation described
in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements on page 56 of the 2000 annual
report to share owners of general electric company. the financial section of
such annual report to share owners (pages 33 through 76 of that document) is set
forth in part iv item 14(a)(1) of this 10-k report and is an integral part
hereof. references in parts i and ii of this 10-k report are to the page numbers
of the 2000 annual report to share owners included in part iv of this 10-k
report. also, unless otherwise indicated by the context, "general
electric" means the parent company, general electric company.
general electric's
address is 1 river road, schenectady, ny 12345-6999; the company also maintains
executive offices at 3135 easton turnpike, fairfield, ct 06431-0001.
ge is one of the
largest and most diversified industrial corporations in the world. ge has
engaged in developing, manufacturing and marketing a wide variety of products
for the generation, transmission, distribution, control and utilization of
electricity since its incorporation in 1892. over the years, ge has developed or
acquired new technologies and services that have broadened considerably the
scope of its activities.
ge's products
include major appliances; lighting products; industrial automation products;
medical diagnostic imaging equipment; motors; electrical distribution and
control equipment; locomotives; power generation and delivery products; nuclear
power support services and fuel assemblies; commercial and military aircraft jet
engines; and engineered materials, such as plastics, silicones and superabrasive
industrial diamonds.
ge's services
include product services; electrical product supply houses; electrical apparatus
installation, engineering, repair and rebuilding services; and computer-related
information services. through its affiliate, the national broadcasting company,
inc., ge delivers network television services, operates television stations, and
provides cable, internet and multimedia programming and distribution services.
through another affiliate, general electric capital services, inc., ge offers a
broad array of financial and other services including consumer financing,
commercial and industrial financing, real estate financing, asset management and
leasing, mortgage services, consumer savings and insurance services, specialty
insurance and reinsurance, and satellite communications.
in virtually all of
its global business activities, ge encounters aggressive and able competition.
in many instances, the competitive climate is characterized by changing
technology that requires continuing research and development, as well as
customer, commitments. with respect to manufacturing operations, management
believes that, in general, ge is one of the leading firms in most of the major
industries in which it participates. the nbc television network is one of four
major u.s. commercial broadcast television networks. it also competes with two
relatively new commercial broadcast networks, syndicated broadcast television
programming and cable and satellite television programming activities. the
businesses in which ge capital services engages are subject to competition from
various types of financial institutions, including commercial banks, thrifts,
investment banks, broker-dealers, credit unions, leasing companies, consumer
loan companies, independent finance companies, finance companies associated with
manufacturers, and insurance and reinsurance companies.
this 10-k report includes certain
"forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995. these statements are based on
management's current expectations and are subject to uncertainty and changes in
circumstances. actual results may differ materially from these expectations due
to changes in global economic, business, competitive, market and regulatory
factors.
ge has substantial
export sales from the united states. in addition, the company has expanded
significantly its non-u.s. activities through majority, minority or other joint
venture interests in companies engaged primarily in manufacturing and
distributing products and providing nonfinancial services similar to those sold
within the united states. gecs financial services operations outside the united
states also have expanded considerably over the past several years.
operating segments
revenue and segment
profit information about the company's operating segments in accordance with
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no. 131, disclosures about
segments of an enterprise and related information, is presented on page 44
of the 2000 annual report to share owners. additional financial data and
commentary on recent financial results for operating segments are provided on
pages 43-48 of that report and in note 28 (pages 72 and 73) to the consolidated
financial statements.
operating
businesses that are reported as segments under sfas no. 131 include aircraft
engines, appliances, gecs, power systems, plastics and nbc. the remaining key
businesses do not meet the definition of a reportable segment and have been
aggregated into two operating segments based on common characteristics of their
activities (industrial products and systems, and technical products and
services). for the gecs segment, revenues and net earnings are presented and
analyzed on pages 45-48 of the 2000 annual report to share owners by the five
major operating activities in which it conducts its business (consumer services,
equipment management, mid-market financing, specialized financing and specialty
insurance). there is appropriate elimination of the net earnings of gecs and the
immaterial effect of transactions between ge and gecs segments to arrive at
total consolidated data. a summary description of each of the company's
operating segments follows.
aircraft engines
aircraft engines
(8.3%, 9.6% and 10.2% of consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively) produces, sells and services jet engines, turboprop and turboshaft
engines, and related replacement parts for use in military and commercial
aircraft. ge's military engines are used in a wide variety of aircraft that
includes fighters, bombers, tankers, helicopters and surveillance aircraft. the
cfm56, produced by cfmi, a company jointly owned by ge and snecma of france, and
ge's cf6 engines power aircraft in all categories of large commercial
aircraft: short/medium, intermediate and long-range. applications for the cfm56
engine include: boeing's 737-300/-400/-500 series, the next generation
737-600x/-700/-800/-900 series, and the 737 business jet; airbus industrie's
a318, a319, a320, a321 and a340-300 series; and military aircraft such as the
kc-135r, e/ke-3 and e-6. the cf6 family of engines powers intermediate and
long-range aircraft such as boeing's 747, 767, dc-10 and md-11 series, as well
as airbus industrie's a300, a310 and a330 series. the ge90 engine is used to
power boeing's 777 series twin-engine aircraft. the gp7000, being designed and
marketed in a joint venture with the pratt & whitney division of utx, is
offered on airbus industrie's a380 and the boeing 747 growth version, although
no firm orders have yet been taken. the business also produces jet engines for
executive aircraft and regional commuter aircraft and aircraft engine
derivatives used for marine propulsion, mechanical drives and industrial power
generation sources. these aircraft engine derivatives are also reported as part
of the power systems segment. maintenance, overhaul and component repair
services are provided for many models of engines, including engines manufactured
by competitors. the business further expanded its product services operations
through acquisitions of the overhaul operations of varig airlines in 1998.
the worldwide
competition in aircraft jet engines is intense. both u.s. and export markets are
important. product development cycles are long and product quality and
efficiency are critical to success. research and development expenditures, both
customer-financed and internally funded, are also important in this segment.
potential sales for any engine are limited by, among other things, its
technological lifetime, which may vary considerably depending upon the rate of
advance in the state of the art, by the small number of potential customers and
by the limited number of applicable airframe applications. sales of product
services (replacement parts and services) are an important part of the business.
aircraft engine orders tend to follow military and airline procurement cycles,
although cycles for military and commercial engine procurement are different.
procurements of military jet engines are affected by changes in global political
and economic factors.
in line with
industry practice, airframe manufacturers support their sales of commercial jet
aircraft from time to time with long-term financing commitments to customers,
and engine manufacturers are often asked to participate in such financings. in
making such commitments, it is ge's general practice to require that it have or
be able to establish an ownership or secured position in the aircraft being
financed. under such airline financing programs, ge had issued loans and
guarantees (principally guarantees) amounting to $1.2 billion at year-end 2000,
and had entered into commitments totaling $1.5 billion to provide financial
assistance on future aircraft engine sales. estimated fair values of the
aircraft securing these receivables and associated guarantees exceeded the
related account balances and guaranteed amounts at december 31, 2000. see page
43 of the 2000 annual report to share owners for information about aircraft
engines orders and backlog.
appliances
appliances (4.5%, 5.1% and 5.6% of
consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively) manufactures and/or
markets a single class of product - major appliances - that includes
refrigerators, electric and gas ranges, microwave ovens, freezers, dishwashers,
clothes washers and dryers, water-softening and filtering products, and room air
conditioning equipment. these are sold under ge, hotpoint, monogram, and profile
brands as well as under private brands for retailers and others. ge microwave
ovens, gas and electric ranges, room air conditioners, water softening and
filtering products, and freezers are sourced from suppliers while investment in
company-owned facilities is focused on refrigerators, dishwashers, electric
ranges and home laundry equipment. a large portion of appliance sales is for
replacement of installed units. such sales are effected through a variety of
retail outlets. the other principal channel consists of residential building
contractors who install appliances in new dwellings. ge has an extensive u.s.
product services network that provides repair services, expanded service plans,
warranty administration and risk management services.
demand for appliances is
influenced by economic trends such as increases or decreases in consumer
disposable income, availability of credit and housing construction. competition
is very active in all products and comes from a number of principal
manufacturers and suppliers. an important factor is the degree of product
differentiation achieved through innovation and new product features. ge
appliances continued to use its six sigma new product introduction process to
bring new and differentiated products to the consumer. the business recently
launched the arctica refrigerator, which includes a
number of innovative time-saving features, as well as prodigy and wizard, the industry's first full line of
electronically controlled washing machines. in 1999, the business introduced the
advantium speedcooking oven which cooks oven
quality food in about one-fourth the time of a conventional oven. highlighting
this revolutionary advance in cooking technology were "best new product of
the year" awards from business week and popular science. also
in 1999, the business launched the triton dishwasher, spectra electric range and customstyle
refrigerator. quality is also a key element to success in the appliance market.
the six sigma quality initiative continues to enable the business to improve the
quality of products to record levels, reduce waste and provide better product
services. other significant factors include product cost, brand recognition,
customer responsiveness and appliance service capability.
ge appliances continued to grow
e-commerce revenues in 2000, selling approximately $2.9 billion of appliances
electronically and more than $0.7 billion using its state-of-the-art customernet
website. the business has also used web-based technology to improve efficiency
in its procurement process, purchasing more than $1 billion through its
suppliernet web-site.
industrial products and systems
industrial products
and systems (9.1%, 10.4% and 11.2% of consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and
1998, respectively) encompasses the following businesses: lighting,
transportation systems, industrial systems, and ge supply. products and services
provided by each of the businesses in this segment are sold primarily to
industrial customers, including original equipment manufacturers, industrial end
users, utilities, electrical contractors, as well as to distributors. these
businesses compete against a variety of both u.s. and non-u.s. manufacturers and
service providers. markets for industrial products and services are diverse,
global and highly price competitive. the aggregate level of economic activity in
markets for such products and services generally lag overall economic slowdowns
as well as subsequent recoveries. in the united states, industrial markets are
undergoing significant structural changes reflecting, among other factors,
increased international competition and pressures to modernize productive
capacity. a description of products and services provided by each of the
businesses in this segment follows.
lighting includes a
wide variety of lamps -- incandescent, fluorescent, high intensity discharge,
halogen and specialty -- as well as outdoor lighting fixtures, wiring devices
and quartz products. customers for lighting products are diverse, ranging from
household consumers to commercial and industrial end users and original
equipment manufacturers. markets and customers are global. in 1999, the business
formed gelcore llc, a joint venture with emcore corporation, focusing on the
technology and market development of "white light" leds
(light-emitting diodes). additionally, its industrial fixtures business acquired
a majority interest in hadasa, a spanish company specializing in the manufacture
and sale of high-intensity discharge lighting fixtures.
transportation
systems includes locomotives, transit propulsion and control equipment,
motorized wheels for off-highway vehicles such as those used in mining
operations, motors for drilling devices, and parts and product services for the
foregoing. locomotives are sold worldwide, principally to railroads, while
customers for other products include state and urban transit authorities and
industrial users. an increasingly important product line is the alternating
current (ac) locomotive, which was first introduced at 4,400 horsepower. in
1998, the business began delivering a new 6,000 horsepower ac unit. product
services include maintenance and repair of locomotives and communications and
logistics systems for locomotive and train control provided through ge-harris
railway electronics, l.l.c., a joint venture with harris corporation. in 2000,
the business acquired harmon industries, a leading provider of wayside
signaling, and crossing warning systems as well as microprocessor-based signal
and train control systems and services, which further enhances its product
services offerings. information about transportation systems orders and backlog
is provided on page 43 of the 2000 annual report to share owners.
industrial systems
includes electric motors and related products and services for the appliance,
commercial, industrial, heating, air conditioning, automotive and utility
markets; power delivery and control products such as circuit breakers,
transformers, electricity meters, relays, capacitors and arresters sold for
installation in commercial, industrial and residential facilities; electrical
and electronic industrial automation products, including drive systems, for
metal and paper processing, mining, utilities and marine applications. product
services include engineering, management and technical expertise for power
plants and other large projects; maintenance, inspection, repair and rebuilding
of electrical apparatus produced by ge and others; and on-site engineering and
upgrading of already installed products sold by ge and others. other product
services include the integration of software with hardware (principally motors,
drives and programmable controls) into customized systems solutions for
customers in the semiconductor, water treatment, pulp and paper, and petroleum
industries. in 1999, the business strengthened its position in the equipment
market by acquiring the gec alstom low voltage business in the united kingdom
and the gec alstom and aeg-ngef ltd. businesses in india. through a 50-50 joint
venture (ge fanuc automation corporation) which has two operating subsidiaries
(one in north america and the other in europe), the business offers a wide range
of high-technology industrial automation systems and equipment, including
computer numerical controls and programmable logic controls. in 1998, ge fanuc
acquired total control products, inc., strengthening its position in the
emerging market for open control systems.
ge supply operates
a u.s. network of electrical supply houses and, through its affiliates, has
operations in mexico, brazil and ireland. ge supply offers products of ge and other manufacturers to electrical contractors and to industrial,
commercial and utility customers.
nbc
nbc (5.2%, 5.2% and
5.2% of consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively) is
principally engaged in the broadcast of network television services to
affiliated television stations within the united states; the production of live
and recorded television programs; the operation, under licenses from the federal
communications commission (fcc), of television broadcasting stations; the
ownership of four cable/satellite networks around the world, and investment and
programming activities in multimedia, the internet and cable television. the nbc
television network is one of four major u.s. commercial broadcast television
networks and serves more than 220 affiliated stations within the united states.
at december 31, 2000, nbc owned and/or operated 13 vhf and uhf television
stations located in birmingham, al; los angeles, ca; san diego, ca; hartford,
ct; miami, fl; chicago, il; columbus, oh; new york, ny; raleigh-durham, nc;
philadelphia, pa; providence, ri; dallas, tx; and washington, dc. broadcasting
operations, including the nbc television network and owned stations, are subject
to fcc regulation. nbc's operations include investment and programming
activities in cable television, principally through cnbc, msnbc, cnbc europe,
and cnbc asia, as well as equity investments in arts and entertainment, the
history channel, valuevision, inc. and rainbow media holdings, inc., as well as
a non-voting equity interest in paxson communications corporation. in addition,
nbc holds an equity interest in nbc internet, inc. (nbci), an entity formed in
1999 combining certain of nbc's internet assets (including nbc.com, nbc-in.com,
videoseeker, nbc's interest in snap.com, an internet directory and search
service, plus a 10% interest in cnbc.com llc) with the businesses of xoom.com, a
community services internet site, and snap.com. along with its ownership
interest in paxson, nbc has entered into a number of joint marketing
arrangements with paxson. nbc's strategic alliance with dow jones merged the
european and asian business news services of dow jones with those of cnbc to
form cnbc europe and cnbc asia, and in addition permits nbc to use dow jones
editorial resources in the united states. nbc has entered into long-term
arrangements with triple crown productions and the national association for
stock car auto racing (nascar) that give nbc exclusive american broadcast rights
to the kentucky derby, the preakness stakes and the belmont stakes beginning in
2001 through 2005 and, in conjunction with turner broadcasting system, inc., to
the exclusive television rights to 20 nascar races per network per year
beginning in 2001 through 2006. in 1998, nbc acquired a majority ownership
position in kxas, a television station in dallas. 1998 marked the end of a
33-year affiliation with the national football league. the business has entered
into long-term arrangements with the national basketball association (nba) and
the united states golf association (usga) that give nbc exclusive national
over-the-air broadcast rights to nba games through the 2002 season and to the
usga's major golf championships through the year 2005. nbc also has secured
united states television rights to the 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2008 olympic games.
plastics
plastics
(6.0%, 6.2% and 6.6% of consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively) includes high-performance plastics used by compounders, molders
and major original equipment manufacturers for use in a variety of applications,
including fabrication of automotive parts, computer enclosures, compact disks
and optical-quality media, major appliance parts and construction materials.
products also include abs resins, shapes, silicones, superabrasive industrial
diamonds and laminates. market opportunities for many of these products are
created by substituting resins for other materials, which provides customers
with productivity through improved material performance at lower cost. these
materials are sold to a diverse worldwide customer base, mainly manufacturers.
the business has a significant operating presence around the world and
participates in numerous manufacturing and distribution joint ventures. during
2000, the business announced expansions of polycarbonate resin plants in
cartagena, spain and burkville, alabama, adding 400 million pounds of new
capacity. new compounding plants in thailand and china were opened in 2000 to
support demand in asia. also in 2000, plastics completed the transition to a new
internet-based commercial model. the ge polymerland model has been
replicated in all businesses and internet sales grew from $5 million a week to
$50 million weekly by the end of 2000. during 2000, ge plastics acquired both
cadillac plastics and commercial plastics, global distributors of plastic sheet,
rod, tube, film and shapes. the silicones business enhanced its growth trend by
acquiring macklanburg-duncan sealants and adhesives business. they also signed
an agreement with toshiba, the joint venture partner in asia, and shin-etsu
chemical to build additional manufacturing capacity in thailand to serve
anticipated demand.
the materials
business environment is characterized by technological innovation and heavy
capital investment. being competitive requires emphasis on efficient
manufacturing process implementation and significant resources devoted to market
and application development. competitors include large, technology-driven
suppliers of the same, as well as other functionally equivalent, materials. the
business is cyclical and is subject to variations in price and in the
availability of raw materials, such as cumene, benzene and methanol. adequate
capacity to satisfy growing demand and anticipation of new product or material
performance requirements are key factors affecting competition.
power systems
power systems
(11.4%, 9.0% and 8.5% of consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively) serves utility, industrial and governmental customers worldwide
with electricity generating products, services and energy management systems.
gas turbines are used principally in power plants for generation of electricity
and for industrial cogeneration and mechanical drive applications. the business
acquired several key european businesses in 2000, including the hydro power
generation and gas turbine divisions of kvaerner, smallworld energy management
solutions and thermodyn's centrifugal compressor and steam turbine operations.
these acquisitions continue to improve the ability of the business to serve its
global customers. in 1999, the business acquired the heavy duty gas turbine
division at alstom with manufacturing facilities in france and germany. in 1998,
the business acquired the gas turbine division of stewart and stevenson
services, inc., which further expands its product and product services offerings
to the industrial power generation market. power systems also packages aircraft
engine derivatives for use as industrial power sources. this activity is also
reported in the aircraft engines segment. centrifugal compressors are sold for
application in gas reinjection, pipeline services and such process applications
as refineries and ammonia plants. steam turbine-generators are sold to the
electric utility industry and to private industrial customers for cogeneration
applications. nuclear reactors, fuel and support services for both new and
installed boiling water reactors are also a part of this segment. there have
been no nuclear power plant orders in the united states since the mid-1970's.
however, the business is currently participating in the construction of nuclear
power plants in taiwan. the business continues to invest in advanced technology
development and to focus its resources in refueling and servicing its installed
boiling-water reactors.
worldwide
competition for power generation products and services is intense. demand for
most power generation products and services is worldwide and as a result is
sensitive to the economic and political environment of each country in which the
business participates. in the united states, demand for power generation
equipment is sensitive to regional load growth requirements and demand side
management. internationally, the influence of available fuels and related prices
has a large impact on demand. for information about orders and backlog, see page
45 of the 2000 annual report to share owners.
technical products and services
technical products
and services (6.1%, 6.1% and 5.3% of consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and
1998, respectively) consists of technology operations providing products,
systems and services to a variety of customers. principal businesses included in
this segment are medical systems and information services.
medical systems
includes magnetic resonance (mr) scanners, computed tomography (ct) scanners,
x-ray, nuclear imaging, ultrasound, and other diagnostic and therapy equipment,
and product services sold to hospitals and medical facilities worldwide. product
services include remote diagnostic and repair services for medical equipment
manufactured by ge and by others, as well as computerized data management and
customer productivity services. ge medical systems has a significant operating
presence in europe and asia, including the operations of its affiliates, ge
medical systems s.a. (france), ge yokogawa medical systems (japan) and wipro ge
medical systems (india). in 2000, the business entered the bone mineral
densitometry market through the acquisition of lunar, a leading player in the
segment, and also made a number of acquisitions to strengthen geographic and
product positions in diagnostic cardiology and patient monitoring devices,
including: nec, prucka, and critikon. other acquisitions in 2000 included sopha
medical vision, a france based global nuclear medicine company; parallel design,
a leader in ultrasound imaging transducers, and sec, a provider of
leading-technology clinical information systems. acquisitions in 1999 included
oec medical systems, a leader in mobile and surgical x-ray systems, and
applicare, a leading supplier of web-based archiving and imaging services. in
addition, the business announced an agreement to acquire mecon, a leader in
healthcare data mining. in 1998, the business completed three strategic
acquisitions: marquette medical systems, a global leader in diagnostic
cardiology and patient monitoring devices, diasonics vingmed ultrasound, a
leading maker of cardiac ultrasound systems, and elscint ltd., which enhances
medical systems' position in the nuclear imaging and magnetic resonance imaging
segments. see page 45 of the 2000 annual report to share owners for information
about orders and backlog of ge medical systems.
ge global exchange
services (gxs) operates one of the largest business-to-business e-commerce
networks in the world, with more than 100,000 trading partners. the network's 1
billion annual transactions account for $1 trillion in goods and services. gxs
provides an extensive range of software and services to optimize and digitize
customer supply chain management. from integration solutions, which enable
information sharing across internal applications and between business partners,
to interchange solutions, which provide electronic machine-to-machine
communications across trading communities and finally marketplace solutions,
with internet-based offerings for cost effective public and private exchanges,
gxs provides tools to add value and lower costs for global b2b e-commerce.
serving a range of
customers with special needs (which are rapidly changing in areas such as
medical and information systems), businesses in this segment compete against a
variety of both u.s. and non-u.s. manufacturers or services operations.
technological competence and innovation, excellence in design, high product
performance, quality of services and competitive pricing are among the key
factors affecting competition for these products and services. throughout the
world, demands on health care providers to control costs have become much more
important for the medical systems business.
gecs
ge capital services
(51.0%, 49.9% and 48.5% of consolidated revenues in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively) consists of ownership of two principal subsidiaries which,
together with their affiliates, constitute ge's principal financial services
businesses. ge capital services is the sole owner of the common stock of general
electric capital corporation ("ge capital") and ge global insurance
holding corporation ("ge global insurance").
ge capital's
activities are subject to a variety of federal and state regulations including,
at the u.s. federal level, the consumer credit protection act, the equal credit
opportunity act and certain regulations issued by the federal trade commission.
a majority of states have ceilings on rates chargeable to customers in retail
time sales transactions, installment loans and revolving credit financing.
common carrier services of ge americom are subject to regulation by the federal
communications commission. certain gecs consolidated affiliates are restricted
from remitting funds to gecs in the form of dividends or loans by a variety of
regulations, the purpose of which is to protect affected insurance
policyholders, depositors or investors. gecs international operations are also
subject to regulation in their respective jurisdictions. to date, compliance
with the regulations discussed above has not had a material adverse effect on ge
capital's financial position or results of operations.
gecs businesses are
generally affected by general business and economic conditions in countries in
which gecs conducts business. when overall economic conditions deteriorate in
those countries, there generally are adverse effects on gecs operations,
although those effects are dynamic and complex. for example, a downturn in
employment or economic growth in a particular national or regional economy will
generally increase the pressure on customers, which generally will result in
deterioration of repayment patterns and a reduction in the value of collateral.
however, in such a downturn, demand for loans and other products and services
offered by gecs may actually increase. interest rates, another macro-economic
factor, are important to gecs businesses. in the lending and leasing businesses,
higher real interest rates increase gecs cost to borrow funds, but also provide
higher levels of return on new investments. for gecs operations that are less
directly linked to interest rates, such as the insurance operations, rate
changes generally affect returns on investment porfolios. further information
about business and financial risks affecting gecs can be found in its annual
report on form 10-k.
on march 28, 1991,
ge entered into an agreement to make payments to ge capital, constituting
additions to pre-tax income, to the extent necessary to cause the ratio of
earnings to fixed charges of ge capital and consolidated affiliates (determined
on a consolidated basis) to be not less than 1.10 for the period, as a single
aggregation, of each ge capital fiscal year commencing with fiscal year 1991.
the agreement can only be terminated by written notice and termination is not
effective until the third anniversary of the date of such notice. ge capital's
ratios of earnings to fixed charges for the years 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively, were 1.52, 1.60 and 1.50, substantially above the level at which
payments would be required. under a separate agreement, ge has committed to make
a capital contribution to ge capital in the event certain ge capital preferred
stock is redeemed and caused the ge capital
debt-to-equity ratio, excluding from equity all net unrealized gains and losses
on investment securities, to exceed 8 to 1.
gecs businesses are
categorized for management purposes into five operating activities: consumer
services, equipment management, mid-market financing, specialized financing and
specialty insurance. very little of the financing provided by gecs businesses
involves products that are manufactured by ge. a description of the principal
businesses included in each of gecs operating activities follows.
consumer services
ge financial
assurance ("gefa") provides consumers financial security solutions by
selling a wide variety of insurance, investment and retirement products, payment
protection insurance, and income protection packages, almost entirely in north
america, europe, and asia. these products help consumers accumulate wealth,
transfer wealth, and protect their lifestyles and assets and are sold through a
family of regulated insurance and annuity affiliates. gefa's principal product
lines in north america and asia are annuities (deferred and immediate, fixed and
variable), life insurance (universal, term, ordinary and group), guaranteed
investment contracts including funding agreements, mutual funds, long-term care
insurance, supplemental accident and health insurance, personal lines of
automobile insurance and consumer club memberships. gefa's principal product
lines and services in europe are payment protection insurance (designed to
protect customers' loan repayment obligations), personal investment products,
and travel and personal accident insurance, as well as management of uninsured
loss claims on behalf of victims of traffic accidents. gefa's product
distribution in north america, europe, and asia are accomplished primarily
through four channels: intermediaries (brokerage general agents, banks and
securities brokerage firms), dedicated sales forces, financial advisors, and
affinity based marketing (through electronic-commerce, telemarketing, and direct
mail). on march 1, 2000, one of gefa's subsidiaries, ge edison life insurance
company ("ge edison"), acquired by means of a comprehensive transfer
the insurance policies and related assets of toho mutual life insurance company.
total cash, investment securities and other tangible assets acquired by ge
edison was $20.3 billion, and restructured insurance contracts and other
liabilities assumed were $21.9 billion.
ge capital auto
financial services ("afs") provided financial services in north
america to automobile dealers, manufacturers, banks, financing companies and the
consumer customers of those entities, both through traditional channels and
through the internet. in the united states, afs was a leading independent
provider of leases for new and used motor vehicles and of non-prime financing
products. in addition, afs offered inventory financing programs, off-lease
vehicle sales, productivity enhancing internet solutions, and direct loans to
the industry. on november 29, 2000, afs announced its decision to discontinue
originating new lease, loan and commercial transactions effective december 1,
2000. as a result of this announcement, afs future operations will consist of
servicing their existing portfolios and re-marketing off-lease vehicles.
ge card services
("cs") provides sales financing services to north american retailers
in a broad range of consumer industries. details of financing plans differ, but
include customized private-label credit card programs with retailers and
inventory financing programs with manufacturers, distributors and retailers. cs
provides financing directly to customers of retailers or purchases the retailers' customer receivables. most of the retailers sell a variety of
products of various manufacturers on a time sales basis. the terms for these
financing plans differ according to the size of contract and credit standing of
the customer. financing is provided to consumers under contractual arrangements,
both with and without recourse to retailers. cs' wide range of financial
services includes application processing, sales authorization, statement
billings, customer services and collection services. cs provides inventory
financing for retailers primarily in the appliance and consumer electronics
industries. cs maintains a security interest in the inventory financed and
retailers are obliged to maintain insurance coverage for the merchandise
financed. additionally, cs issues and services the ge capital corporate card
product, providing payment and information systems which help medium and
large-sized companies reduce travel costs and the ge capital purchasing card
product, which helps customers streamline their purchasing and accounts payable
processes.
ge capital global
consumer finance ("gcf") is a leading provider of credit services to
non-u.s. retailers and consumers. gcf provides private-label credit cards and
proprietary credit services to retailers in europe, asia and, to a lesser
extent, south america, as well as offering a variety of direct-to-consumer
credit programs such as consumer loans, auto loans and finance leases, bankcards
and credit insurance. gcf provides financing to consumers through operations in
argentina, australia, austria, brazil, china, the czech republic, denmark,
france, germany, hong kong, india, indonesia, italy, japan, norway, poland,
portugal, republic of ireland, spain, sweden, switzerland, thailand, and the
united kingdom.
ge capital mortgage
services, inc. ("mortgage services") engaged primarily in the business
of originating, purchasing, selling and servicing residential mortgage loans
collateralized by one-to-four-family homes located throughout the united states.
mortgage services obtained servicing through the origination and purchase of
mortgage loans and servicing rights, and primarily packaged the loans it
originated and purchased into mortgage-backed securities which it sold to
investors. mortgage services also originated and serviced home equity loans. on
september 29, 2000, mortgage services closed on a transaction with a major
mortgage company, which is owned by a major national bank holding company, to
subservice mortgage services' mortgage servicing portfolio and to acquire
mortgage services' servicing facility and mortgage origination business.
mortgage services retains its financial interest in the servicing portfolio and
the related assets. as a result of this transaction, mortgage services will be
exiting the business of originating, purchasing and selling of residential
mortgage loans.
equipment management
ge capital aviation
services ("gecas") is a global commercial aviation financial services
business that offers a broad range of financial products to airlines, aircraft
operators, owners, lenders and investors. financial products include operating
leases, sale/leasebacks, aircraft purchasing and trading, financing leases,
engine/spare parts financing, pilot training, fleet planning and financial
advisory services. gecas owns or manages a fleet of over 1,000 aircraft
world-wide with more than 900 additional planes on order or on option from
boeing, airbus, fairchild dornier, embraer and bombardier. gecas has 173
customers in 60 countries.
ge capital fleet
services ("fleet") is one of the leading corporate fleet management
companies with operations in north america, europe, australia, new zealand and
japan and approximately 1.2 million cars and trucks under lease and service
management. fleet offers finance and operating leases to several thousand
customers with an average lease term of 36 months. the primary product in north
america is a terminal rental adjustment clause lease through which the customer
assumes the residual risk -- that is, risk that the book value will be greater
than market value at lease termination. in europe, the primary product is a
closed-end lease in which fleet assumes residual risk. in addition to the
services directly associated with the lease, fleet offers value-added fleet
management services designed to reduce customers' total fleet management costs.
these services include, among others, maintenance management programs, accident
services, national account purchasing programs, fuel programs and title and
licensing services. fleet's customer base is diversified with respect to
industry and geography and includes many fortune 500 companies.
ge capital
information technology solutions ("it solutions") is a leading
worldwide provider of a broad array of information technology products and
services, including full life cycle services that provide customers with
cost-effective control and management of their information systems. products
offered include desktop personal computers, client server systems, unix systems,
local and wide area network hardware, and software. services offered include
network design, network support, asset management, help desk, disaster recovery,
enterprise management and financial services. it solutions serves commercial,
educational and governmental customers in 13 countries.
in april, 1999,
transport international pool and ge capital modular space were combined to
generate cost savings and management synergies. this merger has resulted in the
elimination of separate support functions and the integration of back offices.
transport international pool ("tip") is one of the global leaders in
renting, leasing, selling and financing transportation equipment. tip's fleet of
over 350,000 dry freight, refrigerated and double vans, flatbeds, intermodal
assets, and specialized trailers is available for rent, lease or purchase at
over 250 locations in the united states, europe, canada, and mexico. tip's
commercial vehicle fleet of over 24,000 units is available for rent, lease, or
purchase in the united kingdom. tip also finances new and used trailers and buys
trailer fleets. tip's customer base comprises trucking companies, railroads,
shipping lines, manufacturers and retailers. ge capital modular space
("modular space") provides commercial mobile and modular structures
for rental, lease and sale from over 100 facilities in the united states,
europe, canada and mexico. the primary markets served include construction,
education, healthcare, financial, commercial, institutional and government.
modular space products are available as custom mobile and modular buildings,
designed to customer specifications, or are available through the modular space
stock fleet of approximately 125,000 mobile and modular units.
in may 1998, ge
capital and sea containers ltd. formed ge seaco srl ("ge seaco"), a
joint venture which operates the combined marine container fleets of genstar
container corporation ("genstar") and sea containers ltd. ge seaco is
one of the world's largest lessors of marine shipping containers with a combined
fleet of over 1,100,000 twenty foot equivalent units of dry cargo, refrigerated
and specialized containers for global cargo transport. lessees are primarily
shipping lines that lease on a long term or master lease basis. concurrent with
the formation of the joint venture, ge capital container finance corporation
("container finance") was created to service the existing finance
lease portfolio formerly run by genstar, and to provide traditional finance
leases and structured finance products to the global marine container industry.
ge capital is a
limited partner in penske truck leasing ("penske"), which is a leading
provider of full-service truck leasing and commercial and consumer truck rental
in the united states. penske operates through a national network of full-service
truck leasing and rental facilities. at december 31, 2000, penske had a fleet of
about 103,000 tractors, trucks and trailers in its leasing and rental fleets and
provided contract maintenance programs or other support services for about
42,000 additional vehicles. penske also provides dedicated logistics operations
support which combines company-employed drivers with its full-service lease
vehicles to provide dedicated contract carriage services. in addition, penske
offers supply chain services such as distribution consulting, warehouse
management and information systems support.
ge american
communications ("ge americom") is a leading satellite service supplier
to a diverse array of customers, including the broadcast and cable tv
industries, as well as broadcast radio. it is also a leading supplier of
integrated communications services for government and commercial customers. ge
americom operates 14 communications satellites and maintains a supporting
network of earth stations, central terminal offices, and telemetry, tracking and
control facilities. through a recent acquisition and the successful launch of
the ge-1a satellite through its joint venture, americom asia-pacific llc, ge
americom's satellite fleet will be globally connected to deliver service in the
americas, europe and asia-pacific.
ge capital rail
services ("gersco") is one of the leading railcar leasing companies in
north america, with a fleet of 190,000 railcars in its total portfolio. serving
class 1 and short-line railroads and shippers throughout north america, gersco
offers one of the most diverse fleets in the industry and a variety of lease
options. gersco also owns and operates a network of railcar repair and
maintenance facilities located throughout north america. the repair facilities
offer a variety of services, ranging from light maintenance to heavy repair of
damaged railcars. the company also provides railcar management, administration
and other services. in addition, gersco is a pan-european provider of rail
transport services, offering a broad range of railcar equipment and rail-related
services to railroads, shippers and other transport providers.
mid-market financing
ge capital
commercial equipment financing ("cef") offers a broad line of
financial products including leases and loans to middle-market customers,
including manufacturers, distributors, dealers and end-users, as well as
municipal financing and facilities financing. products are either held for cef's
own account or brokered to third parties. generally, transactions range in size
from $50 thousand to $50 million, with financing terms from 36 to 180 months.
cef also maintains an asset management operation that redeploys off-lease
equipment. the portfolio includes loans and leases for vehicles, manufacturing
equipment, corporate aircraft, construction equipment, medical diagnostic
equipment, office equipment, telecommunications equipment and electronics.
ge capital vendor
financial services ("vfs") provides financing services to over 100
equipment manufacturers and more than 3,500 dealers in north america, europe and
asia (including japan). customers include major u.s. and non-u.s. manufacturers
in a variety of industries including information technology, office equipment,
healthcare, telecommunications, energy and industrial equipment. vfs establishes
sales financing in two ways: by forming captive partnerships with manufacturers
that do not have them, and by outsourcing captive partnerships from
manufacturers that do (captive partnerships provide sales financing solely for
products of a given manufacturer). vfs offers industry-specific knowledge,
leading edge technology, leasing and equipment expertise, and global
capabilities. in addition, vfs provides an expanding array of related financial
services to customers, including trade payables services.
during 1999, cef
and vfs purchased the leasing and installment sales division of japan leasing
corporation.
ge capital european
equipment finance ("eef") is one of europe's leading diversified
equipment leasing businesses, offering financial solutions on a single-country
and pan-european basis. customers include manufacturers, vendors and end-users
in industries such as office imaging, materials handling, corporate aircraft,
information technology, broadcasting, machine tools, telecommunications and
transportation. products and services include loans, leases, off-balance sheet
financing, master lease coordination and other services, such as helping
end-users increase purchasing power through financing options and helping
manufacturers and vendors offer leasing programs.
specialized financing
ge capital real
estate ("real estate") provides funds for the acquisition, refinancing
and renovation of a wide range of commercial and residential properties located
throughout the united states, and, to a lesser extent, in canada, mexico,
europe, and the far east. real estate also provides asset management services to
real estate investors and selected services to real estate owners. lending is a
major portion of real estate's business in the form of intermediate-term senior
or subordinated fixed and floating-rate loans secured by existing
income-producing commercial properties such as office buildings, rental
apartments, shopping centers, industrial buildings, mobile home parks, hotels
and warehouses. loans range in amount from single-property mortgages, typically
not less than $5 million, to multi-property portfolios of several hundred
million dollars. approximately 90% of all loans are senior mortgages. real
estate purchases and provides restructuring financing for portfolios of real
estate, mortgage loans, limited partnerships, and tax-exempt bonds. real estate's business also includes the origination and securitization of low
leverage real estate loans, which are intended to be held less than one year
before outplacement. to a lesser degree, real estate provides equity capital for
real estate partnerships through the holding of limited partnership interests
and receives preferred returns; typically such investments range from $2 million
to $10 million. real estate also offers a variety of asset management services
to outside investors, institutions, corporations, investment banks, and others
through its real estate services subsidiaries. asset management services include
acquisitions and dispositions, strategic asset management, asset restructuring,
and debt and equity management. real estate also provides investment products
and advisory and asset management services to pension fund clients through ge
capital investment advisors, its registered investment advisor, as well as loan
administration and servicing through ge capital asset management. in addition,
real estate offers owners of multi-family housing ways to reduce costs and
enhance value in properties by offering buying services (e.g., for appliances
and roofing).
ge capital
structured finance group ("sfg") makes equity investments and provides
specialized financial products and services to its client partners in the
commercial and industrial, energy, telecommunications, and industrial and
transportation sectors, worldwide. sfg combines industry and technical expertise
to deliver a full range of sophisticated financial services and products.
services include project finance (construction and term), corporate finance,
acquisition finance and arrangement and placement services. products include a
variety of debt and equity instruments, as well as structured transactions,
including leasing and partnerships. sfg manages an investment portfolio of
approximately $12 billion.
ge capital
commercial finance ("cf") is a leading provider of revolving and term
debt and equity to finance acquisitions, business expansion, bank refinancings,
recapitalizations and other special situations. products also include asset
securitization facilities, capital expenditure lines and bankruptcy-related
facilities. transactions typically range in size from under $2 million to over
$200 million. cf's clients are owners, managers and buyers of both public and
private companies, principally manufacturers, distributors, retailers and
diversified service providers, and cf has industry specialists in the
healthcare, retail and communications industries. through its merchant banking
group, cf provides senior debt, subordinated debt and bridge financing to buyout
and private equity firms, and co-invests in equity with buying groups or invests
directly on a select basis.
ge equity (formerly
equity capital group) purchases equity investments in early-stage, early growth,
pre-ipo companies with a primary objective of long-term capital appreciation. ge
equity's portfolio consists primarily of direct investments in convertible
preferred and common stocks in both public and private companies; ge equity also
participates in certain investment limited partnerships. the portfolio includes
investments in the technology and communications, media and entertainment,
business services, financial services and healthcare sectors. the portfolio is
geographically diversified with investments located throughout the united
states, as well as in latin america, europe and asia.
specialty insurance
ge global
insurance, together with its affiliates, writes substantially all lines of
reinsurance and certain lines of property and casualty insurance. ge global
insurance has three principal subsidiaries: employers reinsurance corporation,
ge reinsurance corporation and medical protective corporation. these affiliates,
together with their direct and indirect subsidiaries, reinsure property and
casualty risks written by more than 1,000 insurers around the world. they also
write certain specialty lines of insurance on a direct basis, principally excess
workers' compensation for self-insurers, medical malpractice coverage for
physicians and dentists, errors and omissions coverage for insurance agents and
brokers, excess indemnity for self-insurers of medical benefits, and libel and
allied torts. other property and casualty affiliates write excess and surplus
lines insurance. the life reinsurance affiliates are engaged in the reinsurance
of life insurance products, including term, whole and universal life, annuities,
group long-term health products and the provision of financial reinsurance to
life insurers.
fgic holdings
("fgic"), through its subsidiary, financial guaranty insurance company
("financial guaranty"), is an insurer of municipal bonds, including
new issues, bonds traded in the secondary market and bonds held in unit
investment trusts and mutual funds. financial guaranty also guarantees certain
taxable structured debt. the in force guaranteed principal, after reinsurance,
amounted to approximately $150.6 billion at december 31, 2000. approximately 86%
of the business written by financial guaranty is municipal bond insurance. fgic
subsidiaries provide a variety of services to state and local governments and
agencies, liquidity facilities in variable-rate transactions, municipal
investment products and other services.
ge capital mortgage
insurance ("mortgage insurance") is engaged principally in providing
residential mortgage guaranty insurance. operating in 30 field locations,
mortgage insurance is licensed in 50 states, the district of columbia and the
u.s. virgin islands. at december 31, 2000, mortgage insurance was the mortgage
insurance carrier for over 1,690,000 residential homes, with total insurance in
force aggregating approximately $156 billion and total risk in force aggregating
approximately $66 billion. when a claim is received, mortgage insurance either
pays up to a guaranteed percentage based on the specified coverage, or pays the
mortgage and delinquent interest, taking title to the property and arranging for
its sale. mortgage insurance also provides mortgage guaranty insurance in the
united kingdom, canada, and australia.
all other
all other consists
primarily of operating results of montgomery ward, llc ("wards") from
august 2, 1999, when gecs acquired control of the retailer upon its emergence
from bankruptcy reorganization, to december 28, 2000, when wards again filed for
bankruptcy protection. the retailer is currently in liquidation.
geographic segments, exports from the u.s. and
total international operations
financial data for
geographic segments (based on the location of the company operation supplying
goods or services and including exports from the u.s. to unaffiliated customers)
are reported in note 29 to consolidated financial statements on page 74 of the
2000 annual report to share owners.
additional
financial data about ge's exports from the u.s. and total international
operations are provided on pages 48-49 of the 2000 annual report to share
owners.
orders backlog
see pages 43, 45
and 54 of the 2000 annual report to share owners for information about ge's
backlog of unfilled orders.
research and development
total expenditures
for research and development were $2,193 million in 2000. total expenditures had
been $2,017 million in 1999 and $1,930 million in 1998. of these amounts, $1,867
million in 2000 was ge-funded ($1,667 million in 1999 and $1,537 million in
1998); and $326 million in 2000 was funded by customers ($350 million in 1999
and $393 million in 1998), principally the u.s. government. aircraft engines
accounts for the largest share of ge's research and development expenditures
from both ge and customer funds. medical systems, power systems, transportation
systems and plastics made other significant expenditures of ge and customer
research and development funds.
approximately
11,391 person-years of scientist and engineering effort were devoted to research
and development activities in 2000, with about 93% of the time involved
primarily in ge-funded activities.
environmental matters
see pages 54 and 68
of ge's 2000 annual report to share owners for a discussion of environmental
matters.
employee relations
at year-end 2000,
general electric company and consolidated affiliates employed 313,000 persons,
of whom approximately 168,000 were in the united states. for further information
about employees, see page 55 of the 2000 annual report to share owners.
approximately
30,700 ge manufacturing and service employees in the united states are
represented for collective bargaining purposes by a total of approximately 150
different local collective bargaining groups. a majority of such employees are
represented by union locals that are affiliated with, and bargain in conjunction
with, the international union of electronic, electrical, salaried, machine and
furniture workers (iue/cwa-afl-cio). during 2000, general electric company
negotiated three-year contracts with unions representing a substantial majority
of those united states employees who are represented by unions. most of these
contracts will terminate in june 2003. nbc is party to approximately 100 labor
agreements covering about 2,000 staff employees (and a large number of freelance
employees) in the united states. these agreements are with various labor unions,
expire at various dates and are generally for a term ranging from three to five
years.
executive officers
see part iii, item
10 of this 10-k report for information about executive officers of the
registrant.
other
because of the
diversity of the company's products and services, as well as the wide geographic
dispersion of its production facilities, the company uses numerous sources for
the wide variety of raw materials needed for its operations. the company has not
been adversely affected by inability to obtain raw materials.
the company owns,
or holds licenses to use, numerous patents. new patents are continuously being
obtained through the company's research and development activities as existing
patents expire. patented inventions are used both within the company and
licensed to others, but no operating segment is substantially dependent on any
single patent or group of related patents.
agencies of the
u.s. government constitute ge's largest single customer. an analysis of sales of
goods and services as a percentage of revenues follows:
% of consolidated revenues
% of ge revenues
total sales to u.s. government agencies
2%
2%
2%
3%
3%
4%
aircraft engines defense-related sales
item 2. properties
manufacturing
operations are carried out at approximately 150 manufacturing plants located in
36 states in the united states and puerto rico and at 176 manufacturing plants
located in 34 other countries.
item 3. legal proceedings
general
as previously
reported, on march 12, 1993, a complaint was filed in united states district
court for the district of connecticut by ten employees of the company's former
aerospace business, purportedly on behalf of all ge aerospace employees whose ge
employment status is or was affected by the then planned transfer of ge
aerospace to a new company controlled by the stockholders of martin marietta
corporation. the complaint sought to clarify and enforce the plaintiffs' claimed
rights to pension benefits in accordance with, and rights to assets then held
in, the ge pension plan (the "plan"). the complaint named the company,
the trustees of the ge pension trust ("trust"), and martin marietta
corporation and one of its former plan administrators as defendants. the
complaint alleged primarily that the company's planned transfer of certain
assets of the trust to a martin marietta pension trust, in connection with the
transfer of the aerospace business, violated the rights of the plaintiffs under
the plan and applicable provisions of the employee retirement income security
act of 1974 and the internal revenue code. the complaint sought equitable and
declaratory relief, including an injunction against transfer of the plan assets
except under circumstances and protections, if any, approved by the court, an
order that the company disgorge all profits allegedly received by it as a result
of any such transfer and the making of restitution to the trust for alleged
investment losses resulting from the company's treatment of plan assets in
connection with the transaction or alternatively the transfer of additional
assets from the trust to a new martin marietta pension trust, and an order
requiring martin marietta to continue to offer transferred employees all accrued
pension-related benefits for which they were eligible under the plan as of the
closing date of the transfer of the ge aerospace business to martin marietta. on
march 23, 1993, the company and martin marietta corporation filed motions to
dismiss the complaint on the basis that the complaint does not state any claim
upon which relief can be granted as a matter of law. on april 2, 1993, the
transfer of the aerospace business occurred, and on june 7, 1993, the court
issued an order denying plaintiffs' request for injunctive relief. on september
26, 1996, the district court granted defendants' motion to dismiss those claims
which were based on allegations that the transfer of plan assets was unlawful,
and ordered discovery on the remaining claims. on september 28, 1998, the class
was certified as to the remaining claims. on march 29, 2000, the district court
dismissed the complaint. plaintiffs filed an appeal from the district court's
order. on march 2, 2001, the second circuit court of appeals held in favor of ge
on all counts and affirmed the district court's rulings.
as
previously reported, the directors serving on the board in 1991 and certain
officers are defendants in a civil suit purportedly brought on behalf of the
company as a shareholder derivative action by leslie mcneil, harold sachs, arun
shingala and paul and harriet luts (the mcneil action) in new york state supreme
court on november 19, 1991. the suit alleges the company was negligent and
engaged in fraud in connection with the design and construction of containment
systems for nuclear power plants and contends that, as a result, ge has incurred
significant financial liabilities and is potentially exposed to additional
liabilities from claims brought by the company's customers. the suit alleges
breach of fiduciary duty by the defendants and seeks unspecified compensatory
damages and other relief. on march 31, 1992, the defendants filed motions to
dismiss the suit. on september 28, 1992, the court denied the motions as
premature but ruled that they may be renewed after the completion of limited
discovery. defendants moved for reconsideration of that order, and on april 3,
1993, the court granted defendants' motion for reconsideration and directed
that discovery be stayed pending the filing of an amended complaint. plaintiffs
filed an amended complaint on march 18, 1994, alleging breach of fiduciary duty,
waste and indemnification claims. on june 5, 2000, the court dismissed the
amended complaint, and on july 11, 2000, the plaintiffs filed a notice of
appeal. the company and the defendants believe the plaintiffs' claims are
without merit.
environmental
as previously
reported, in may 1999, the new york state department of environmental
conservation informed the company that it was seeking penalties of $325,000 for
violations of the state's clean water act at its waterford, ny facility. the
state alleges discharges in excess of permitted limits as well as reporting
violations. the state has since reduced its penalty demand to $200,000.
in addition, as
previously reported, in march 2000, the new york state department of
environmental conservation informed the company that it was seeking penalties of
$204,000 for violations of the state's hazardous waste rules at its waterford,
ny facility. the state alleges violations of requirements for labeling,
inspection and management of hazardous waste. both matters are currently under
negotiation.
for further
information regarding environmental matters, see pages 54 and 68 of ge's 2000
annual report to share owners.
it is the view of
management that none of the above described proceedings will have a material
effect on the company's financial position, results of operations, liquidity or
competitive position.
item 4. submission of
matters to a vote of security holders
not applicable.
part ii
item 5. market for the
registrant's common equity and related stockholder matters
with respect to
"stock exchange information", in the united states, ge common stock is
listed on the new york stock exchange (its principal market) and on the boston
stock exchange. ge common stock also is listed on the stock exchange, london.
trading, as reported on the new york stock exchange, inc., composite
transactions tape, and dividend information follows:
common stock
market price
(in dollars)
high
low
dividends
declared
fourth quarter
$59.94
$47.19
$.16
third quarter
60.50
49.50
.13 2/3
second quarter
55.98
47.69
.13 2/3
first quarter
54.96
41.67
.13 2/3
fourth quarter
$53.17
$38.21
$.13 2/3
third quarter
40.83
34.19
.11 2/3
second quarter
39.15
33.27
.11 2/3
first quarter
38.06
31.42
.11 2/3
the per-share
amounts and share data above have been adjusted to reflect the 3-for-1 stock
split effective on april 27, 2000. as of december 31,
2000, there were about 616,000 share owner accounts of record.
item 6. selected
financial data
reported as data
for revenues; net earnings; net earnings per share (basic and diluted);
dividends declared; dividends declared per share; long-term borrowings; and
total assets appearing on page 55 of the 2000 annual report to share owners.
item 7. management's
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
reported on pages
41-43 and 45-55 (and graphs on pages 41, 42, 43, 45-49, and 51-54) of the annual
report to share owners for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2000.
item 7a. quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
reported on page 52
of the annual report to share owners for the fiscal year ended december 31,
2000.
item 8. financial
statements and supplementary data
see index under
item 14.
item 9. changes in and
disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure not
applicable.
part iii
item 10. directors and
executive officers of registrant
executive officers
of the registrant (as of march 23, 2001)
name
position
age
date assumed
executive officer
position
john f. welch, jr.
chairman of the board and chief
executive officer
april 1981
jeffrey r. immelt
president and chairman-elect
january 1997
philip d. ameen
vice president and comptroller
april 1994
francis s. blake
senior vice president, corporate
business development
july 2000
james r. bunt
vice president and treasurer
january 1993
david l. calhoun
senior vice president, ge aircraft
engines
june 1995
william j. conaty
senior vice president, human
resources
october 1993
dennis d. dammerman
vice chairman of the board and
executive officer
march 1984
scott c. donnelly
senior vice president, research and
development
august 2000
matthew j. espe
senior vice president, ge
lighting
may 2000
benjamin w. heineman, jr.
senior vice president, general counsel
and secretary
september 1987
joseph m. hogan
senior vice president, ge medical
systems
november 2000
lawrence r. johnston
senior vice president, ge
appliances
november 1999
john krenicki, jr.
vice president, ge transportation
systems
march 2000
robert w. nelson
vice president, financial planning and
analysis
september 1991
gary m. reiner
senior vice president, chief
information officer
january 1991
john g. rice
senior vice president, ge power
systems
september 1997
gary l. rogers
senior vice president, ge
plastics
december 1989
keith s. sherin
senior vice president, finance, and
chief financial officer
january 1999
lloyd g. trotter
senior vice president, ge industrial
systems
november 1992
robert c. wright
vice chairman of the board and
executive officer
july 2000
all executive officers are elected by the board
of directors for an initial term which continues until the first board meeting
following the next annual statutory meeting of share owners and thereafter are
elected for one-year terms or until their successors have been elected. all
executive officers have been executives of ge for the last five years.
the remaining
information called for by this item is incorporated by reference to
"election of directors" in the definitive proxy statement relating to
the registrant's annual meeting of share owners to be held april 25, 2001.
item 11. executive
compensation
incorporated by
reference to "board of directors and committees," "summary
compensation table," "stock options and stock appreciation
rights" and "retirement benefits" in the definitive proxy
statement relating to the registrant's annual meeting of share owners to be held
april 25, 2001.
item 12. security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
incorporated by
reference to "information relating to directors, nominees and executive
officers" in the registrant's definitive proxy statement relating to its
annual meeting of share owners to be held april 25, 2001.
item 13. certain
relationships and related transactions
incorporated by
reference to "certain transactions" in the registrant's definitive
proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of share owners to be held april
25, 2001.
part iv
item 14. exhibits,
financial statement schedules and reports on form 8-k
(a)1. financial
statements applicable to general electric company and consolidated affiliates
are contained on the page(s) indicated in the ge annual report to share owners
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2000.
annual
report
page(s)
10-k
report
page(s)
statement of earnings for the
years ended december 31, 2000, 1999 and 1998
f-2
consolidated statement of
changes in share owners' equity
for the years ended december 31, 2000,
1999 and 1998
f-2
statement of financial
position at december 31, 2000 and 1999
f-4
statement of cash flows for
the years ended december 31, 2000, 1999 and 1998
f-6
independent auditors'
report
f-8
other financial
information:
notes to consolidated financial
statements
56-76
f-24 to f-44
operating segment information
43-48
72-73
f-11 to f-16
f-40 to f-41
geographic segment information
f-42
operations by quarter (unaudited)
f-44
(a)2. the schedules
listed in reg. 210.5-04 have been omitted because they are not applicable or the
required information is shown in the consolidated financial statements or notes
thereto.
(a)3. exhibit index
(3) the
certificate of incorporation, as amended, and by-laws, as amended, of general
electric company are incorporated by reference to exhibit (3) of general
electric's current report on form 8-k dated april 27, 2000.
(4) agreement
to furnish to the securities and exchange commission upon request a copy of
instruments defining the rights of holders of certain long-term debt of the
registrant and consolidated subsidiaries.*
(10) all of the
following exhibits consist of executive compensation plans or arrangements:
(a)
general electric incentive compensation plan, as amended effective july 1, 1991.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit of the same number to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year
ended december 31, 1991.)
(b)
general electric insurance plan for directors. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(i) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1980.)
(c)
general electric financial planning program, as amended through september 1993.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(h) to general electric annual report on
form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31,
1993.)
(d)
general electric supplemental life insurance program, as amended february 8,
1991. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(i) to general electric annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 1990.)
(e)
general electric directors' retirement and optional life insurance plan.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(l) to general electric annual report on
form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31,
1986.)
(f)
general electric 1987 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(k) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1987.)
(g)
general electric 1991 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(n) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1990.)
(h)
general electric 1994 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(o) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1993.)
(i)
general electric directors' charitable gift plan, as amended through may 1993.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(p) to general electric annual report on
form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31,
1993.)
(j)
general electric leadership life insurance program, effective january 1, 1994.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(r) to general electric annual report on
form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31,
1993.)
(k)
general electric 1996 stock option plan for non-employee directors.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit a to the general electric proxy statement
for its annual meeting of share owners held on april 24, 1996.)
(l)
general electric 1995 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(t) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1995.)
(m)
general electric 1996 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(v) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1996.)
(n)
employment and post-retirement consulting agreement between general electric
company and john f. welch, jr. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(w) to
general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for
the fiscal year ended december 31, 1996.)
(o)
general electric 1997 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(t) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1997.)
(p)
general electric 1990 long term incentive plan as restated and amended effective
august 1, 1997. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(u) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year
ended december 31, 1997.)
(q)
general electric deferred compensation plan for directors, as amended december
19, 1997. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(v) to general electric annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 1997.)
(r)
general electric 1998 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(v) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1998.)
(s)
general electric non-employee director fee plan (formerly the deferred
compensation plan for directors). (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(w) to
general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for
the fiscal year ended december 31, 1998.)
(t)
general electric 1999 executive deferred salary plan. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10(v) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1999.)
(u)
general electric 2000 executive deferred salary plan.*
(v)
general electric supplementary pension plan, as amended effective july 1, 2000.*
(w) form of ge
executive life insurance agreement provided to ge officers, as revised september
2000.*
(11) statement re
computation of per share earnings.**
(12) computation of
ratio of earnings to fixed charges.*
(21) subsidiaries
of registrant.*
(23) consent of
independent auditors incorporated by reference in each prospectus constituting
part of the registration statements on form s-3 (registration nos. 33-47085,
33-50639, 33-61029, 33-61029-01, 333-46551 and 333-59671), on form s-4
(registration nos. 333-01947, 333-42442 and 333-49710) and on form s-8
(registration nos. 2-84145, 33-35922, 333-01953, 333-96287, 333-42695,
333-74415, 333-65781, 333-88233 and 333-94101).*
(24) power of
attorney.*
(99)(a)income
maintenance agreement, dated march 28, 1991, between the registrant and general
electric capital corporation. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 28(a) to
general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for
the fiscal year ended december 31, 1990.)
(99)(b)undertaking
for inclusion in registration statements on form s-8 of general electric
company. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 99(b) to general electric annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 1992.)
(99)(c)letter,
dated june 29, 1995, from dennis d. dammerman of general electric company to
gary c. wendt of general electric capital corporation pursuant to which general
electric company agrees to provide additional equity to general electric capital
corporation in conjunction with certain redemptions by general electric capital
corporation of share of its variable cumulative preferred stock. (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 99(g) to general electric capital corporation's
registration statement on form s-3, file no. 33-61257.)
* filed
electronically herewith.
** information
required to be presented in exhibit 11 is now provided in note 8 to the 2000
annual report to share owners in accordance with the provisions of fasb
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no. 128, earnings per
share.
(b) reports on form
8-k during the quarter ended december 31, 2000.
a
form 8-k was filed on october 23, 2000, concerning the proposed acquisition of
honeywell.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section 13 of the securities exchange act
of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this annual report on form 10-k
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2000, to be signed on its behalf
by the undersigned, and in the capacities indicated, thereunto duly authorized
in the town of fairfield and state of connecticut on the 23rd day of march 2001.
general electric
company
(registrant)
by
/s/ keith s. sherin
keith s. sherin
senior vice president, finance, and
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this
report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signer
title
date
/s/ keith s. sherin
keith s. sherin
senior vice president, finance,
and chief financial officer
principal financial officer
march 23, 2001
/s/ philip d. ameen
philip d. ameen
vice president and comptroller
principal accounting officer
march 23, 2001
john f. welch, jr.*
chairman of the board of directors
(principal executive officer)
jeffrey r. immelt*
president and chairman-elect
james i. cash, jr.*
director
dennis d. dammerman*
director
paolo fresco*
director
ann m. fudge*
director
andrea jung*
director
kenneth g. langone*
director
rochelle b. lazarus*
director
scott g. mcnealy*
director
gertrude g. michelson*
director
sam nunn*
director
frank h.t. rhodes*
director
douglas a. warner iii*
director
robert c. wright*
director
a majority of the board of directors
*by
/s/ benjamin w. heineman, jr.
benjamin w. heineman, jr.
attorney-in-fact
march 23, 2001
f-1
annual report page 33
financial section
contents
40    independent auditors' report
audited financial statements
34    earnings
34    changes in share owners' equity
36    financial position
38    cash flows
56    notes to consolidated financial statements
management's discussion
40    financial responsibility
41    operations
41       consolidated operations
43       segment operations
48       international operations
50    financial resources and liquidity
54    selected financial data
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
consolidated revenues
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$129.90  $111.63  $100.47  $90.84    $79.18
================================================================================
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
earnings per share
(in dollars)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$1.27    $1.07    $0.93   $0.82     $0.72
================================================================================
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
dividends declared per share
(in dollars)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$0.5700  $0.4866  $0.4166 $0.3600   $0.3166
================================================================================
f-2
annual report page 34
statement of earnings
general electric company
and consolidated affiliates
---------------------------------------
for the years ended december 31
(in millions; per-share amounts in dollars)                            2000        1999          1998
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
revenues
sales of goods                                                 $  54,828    $  47,785    $  43,749
sales of services                                                 18,126       16,283       14,938
other income (note 2)                                                436          798          649
earnings of gecs                                                    --           --           --
gecs revenues from services (note 3)                              56,463       46,764       41,133
---------------------------------------
total revenues                                                 129,853      111,630      100,469
---------------------------------------
costs and expenses (note 4)
cost of goods sold                                                39,312       34,554       31,772
cost of services sold                                             12,511       11,404       10,508
interest and other financial charges                              11,720       10,013        9,753
insurance losses and policyholder and annuity benefits            14,399       11,028        9,608
provision for losses on financing receivables (note 14)            2,045        1,671        1,603
other costs and expenses                                          30,993       27,018       23,483
minority interest in net earnings of consolidated affiliates         427          365          265
---------------------------------------
total costs and expenses                                       111,407       96,053       86,992
---------------------------------------
earnings before income taxes                                         18,446       15,577       13,477
provision for income taxes (note 7)                                  (5,711)      (4,860)      (4,181)
---------------------------------------
net earnings                                                      $  12,735    $  10,717    $   9,296
=========================================================================================================
per-share amounts (note 8)
diluted earnings per share                                        $   1.27     $   1.07     $    0.93
basic earnings per share                                          $   1.29     $   1.09     $    0.95
=========================================================================================================
dividends declared per share                                      $   0.57     $   0.48 2/3 $    0.41 2/3
=========================================================================================================
consolidated statement of changes in share owners' equity
-----------------------------------
(in millions)                                                          2000         1999         1998
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
changes in share owners' equity (note 25)
balance at january 1                                              $  42,557    $  38,880    $  34,438
-----------------------------------
dividends and other transactions with share owners                   (3,044)      (4,632)      (5,178)
-----------------------------------
changes other than transactions with share owners
increase attributable to net earnings                             12,735       10,717        9,296
unrealized gains (losses) on investment securities--net             (552)      (1,776)         264
currency translation adjustments                                  (1,204)        (632)          60
-----------------------------------
total changes other than transactions with share owners         10,979        8,309        9,620
-----------------------------------
balance at december 31                                            $  50,492    $  42,557    $  38,880
=====================================================================================================
the notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 56-76 are an integral
part of these statements. per-share amounts have been adjusted for the 3-for-1
stock split effective on april 27, 2000.
f-3
annual report pages 35
statement of earnings (continued)
ge                               gecs
------------------------------   -------------------------------
2000       1999       1998       2000       1999       1998
----------------------------------------------------------------
revenues
sales of goods                                                   $ 45,427   $ 39,045   $ 36,376   $  9,408   $  8,740   $  7,374
sales of services                                                  18,380     16,600     15,170       --         --         --
other income (note 2)                                                 498        856        684       --         --         --
earnings of gecs                                                    5,192      4,443      3,796       --         --         --
gecs revenues from services (note 3)                                 --         --         --       56,769     47,009     41,320
----------------------------------------------------------------
total revenues                                                   69,497     60,944     56,026     66,177     55,749     48,694
----------------------------------------------------------------
costs and expenses (note 4)
cost of goods sold                                                 30,782     26,578     24,996      8,537      7,976      6,777
cost of services sold                                              12,765     11,721     10,740       --         --         --
interest and other financial charges                                  811        810        883     11,111      9,359      8,966
insurance losses and policyholder and annuity benefits               --         --         --       14,399     11,028      9,608
provision for losses on financing receivables (note 14)              --         --         --        2,045      1,671      1,603
other costs and expenses                                            8,392      7,732      7,177     22,767     19,433     16,432
minority interest in net earnings of consolidated affiliates          213        179        117        214        186        148
----------------------------------------------------------------
total costs and expenses                                         52,963     47,020     43,913     59,073     49,653     43,534
----------------------------------------------------------------
earnings before income taxes                                          16,534     13,924     12,113      7,104      6,096      5,160
provision for income taxes (note 7)                                   (3,799)    (3,207)    (2,817)    (1,912)    (1,653)    (1,364)
----------------------------------------------------------------
net earnings                                                        $ 12,735   $ 10,717   $  9,296   $  5,192   $  4,443   $  3,796
====================================================================================================================================
in the consolidating data on this page, "ge" means the basis of consolidation as
described in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements; "gecs" means
general electric capital services, inc. and all of its affiliates and associated
companies. transactions between ge and gecs have been eliminated from the
"general electric company and consolidated affiliates" columns on page 34.
f-4
annual report page 36
statement of financial position
general electric company
and consolidated affiliates
----------------------
at december 31 (in millions)                                               2000        1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
assets
cash and equivalents                                                  $   8,195    $   8,554
investment securities (note 10)                                          91,339       81,758
current receivables (note 11)                                             9,502        8,531
inventories (note 12)                                                     7,812        7,007
financing receivables (investments in time sales, loans and
financing leases)--net (notes 13 and 14)                             143,299      134,215
insurance receivables (note 15)                                          23,802       18,969
other gecs receivables                                                   11,714       14,153
property, plant and equipment (including equipment leased
to others)--net (note 16)                                             40,015       41,022
investment in gecs                                                         --           --
intangible assets--net (note 17)                                         27,441       26,010
all other assets (note 18)                                               73,887       64,981
----------------------
total assets                                                          $ 437,006    $ 405,200
============================================================================================
liabilities and equity
short-term borrowings (note 19)                                       $ 119,180    $ 130,346
accounts payable, principally trade accounts                             14,853       13,676
progress collections and price adjustments accrued                        8,271        4,618
dividends payable                                                         1,589        1,347
all other ge current costs and expenses accrued                          12,219       11,229
long-term borrowings (note 19)                                           82,132       71,427
insurance liabilities, reserves and annuity benefits (note 20)          106,150       86,776
all other liabilities (note 21)                                          28,494       28,772
deferred income taxes (note 22)                                           8,690        9,238
----------------------
total liabilities                                                    381,578      357,429
----------------------
minority interest in equity of consolidated affiliates (note 23)       4,936        5,214
----------------------
accumulated unrealized gains on investment securities--net (a)               74          626
accumulated currency translation adjustments (a)                        (2,574)      (1,370)
common stock (9,932,006,000 and 9,854,528,000 shares outstanding
at year-end 2000 and 1999, respectively)                                 669          594
other capital                                                            15,195       10,790
retained earnings                                                        61,572       54,484
less common stock held in treasury                                      (24,444)     (22,567)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
total share owners' equity (notes 25 and 26)                          50,492       42,557
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
total  liabilities and equity                                         $ 437,006    $ 405,200
============================================================================================
the notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 56-76 are an integral
part of this statement. share data have been adjusted for the 3-for-1 stock
split effective on april 27, 2000.
(a)  the sum of "accumulated unrealized gains on investment securities--net" and
"accumulated currency translation adjustments" constitutes "accumulated
nonowner changes other than earnings," as shown in note 25, and was
$(2,500)and $(744) at year-end 2000 and 1999, respectively.
f-5
annual report page 37
statement of financial position (continued)
ge                      gecs
----------------------    ----------------------
2000         1999         2000         1999
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
assets
cash and equivalents                                                  $   7,210    $   2,000    $   6,052    $   6,931
investment securities (note 10)                                           1,009        1,273       90,330       80,485
current receivables (note 11)                                             9,727        8,743         --           --
inventories (note 12)                                                     7,146        5,798          666        1,209
financing receivables (investments in time sales, loans and
financing leases)--net (notes 13 and 14)                                --           --        143,299      134,215
insurance receivables (note 15)                                            --           --         23,802       18,969
other gecs receivables                                                     --           --         13,288       15,126
property, plant and equipment (including equipment leased
to others)--net (note 16)                                             12,199       12,381       27,816       28,641
investment in gecs                                                       23,022       20,321         --           --
intangible assets--net (note 17)                                         12,424       11,262       15,017       14,748
all other assets (note 18)                                               24,028       20,805       50,366       44,694
----------------------    ----------------------
total assets                                                          $  96,765    $  82,583    $ 370,636    $ 345,018
======================================================================================================================
liabilities and equity
short-term borrowings (note 19)                                       $     940    $   2,245    $ 123,992    $ 129,259
accounts payable, principally trade accounts                              6,153        5,068       10,436        9,749
progress collections and price adjustments accrued                        8,271        4,618         --           --
dividends payable                                                         1,589        1,347         --           --
all other ge current costs and expenses accrued                          12,219       11,048         --           --
long-term borrowings (note 19)                                              841          722       81,379       70,766
insurance liabilities, reserves and annuity benefits (note 20)             --           --        106,150       86,776
all other liabilities (note 21)                                          14,840       13,872       13,451       14,801
deferred income taxes (note 22)                                             452          283        8,238        8,955
----------------------    ----------------------
total liabilities                                                     45,305       39,203      343,646      320,306
----------------------    ----------------------
minority interest in equity of consolidated affiliates (note 23)         968          823        3,968        4,391
----------------------    ----------------------
accumulated unrealized gains on investment securities--net (a)               74          626            4          170
accumulated currency translation adjustments (a)                         (2,574)      (1,370)        (957)        (384)
common stock (9,932,006,000 and 9,854,528,000 shares outstanding
at year-end 2000 and 1999, respectively)                                 669          594            1            1
other capital                                                            15,195       10,790        2,752        2,682
retained earnings                                                        61,572       54,484       21,222       17,852
less common stock held in treasury                                      (24,444)     (22,567)        --           --
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------    ----------------------
total share owners' equity (notes 25 and 26)                          50,492       42,557       23,022       20,321
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------    ----------------------
total  liabilities and equity                                         $  96,765    $  82,583    $ 370,636    $ 345,018
======================================================================================================================
in the consolidating data on this page, "ge" means the basis of consolidation as
described in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements; "gecs" means
general electric capital services, inc. and all of its affiliates and associated
companies.
transactions between ge and gecs have been eliminated from the "general electric
company and consolidated affiliates" columns on page 36.
f-6
annual report page 38
statement of cash flows
general electric company
and consolidated affiliates
----------------------------------------
for the years ended december 31 (in millions)                                                 2000             1999            1998
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
cash flows--operating activities
net earnings                                                                               $ 12,735        $ 10,717        $  9,296
adjustments to reconcile net earnings to cash provided
from operating activities
depreciation and amortization of property, plant and equipment                           5,039           4,908           4,377
amortization of goodwill and other intangibles                                           2,697           1,783           1,483
earnings retained by gecs                                                                 --              --              --
deferred income taxes                                                                    1,153           1,502           1,143
decrease (increase) in ge current receivables                                             (537)            143             649
decrease (increase) in inventories                                                        (924)            266             150
increase in accounts payable                                                             3,297             820           1,576
increase (decrease) in insurance liabilities and reserves                               (1,009)          4,584           3,670
provision for losses on financing receivables                                            2,045           1,671           1,603
all other operating activities                                                          (1,806)         (1,801)         (4,587)
----------------------------------------
cash from operating activities                                                               22,690          24,593          19,360
----------------------------------------
cash flows--investing activities
additions to property, plant and equipment                                                  (13,967)        (15,502)         (8,982)
dispositions of property, plant and equipment                                                 6,767           6,262           4,043
net increase in gecs financing receivables                                                  (16,076)        (12,628)         (5,999)
payments for principal businesses purchased                                                  (2,332)        (11,654)        (18,610)
all other investing activities                                                              (12,091)         (8,657)        (10,585)
----------------------------------------
cash used for investing activities                                                          (37,699)        (42,179)        (40,133)
----------------------------------------
cash flows--financing activities
net increase (decrease) in borrowings (maturities of 90 days or less)                        (8,243)          6,171          16,881
newly issued debt (maturities longer than 90 days)                                           47,645          48,158          42,008
repayments and other reductions (maturities longer than 90 days)                            (32,762)        (27,539)        (32,814)
net dispositions (purchases) of ge shares for treasury                                          469          (1,002)         (2,819)
dividends paid to share owners                                                               (5,401)         (4,587)         (3,913)
all other financing activities                                                               12,942             622            (114)
----------------------------------------
cash from (used for) financing activities                                                    14,650          21,823          19,229
----------------------------------------
increase (decrease) in cash and equivalents during year                                        (359)          4,237          (1,544)
cash and equivalents at beginning of year                                                     8,554           4,317           5,861
----------------------------------------
cash and equivalents at end of year                                                        $  8,195        $  8,554        $  4,317
===================================================================================================================================
supplemental disclosure of cash flows information
cash paid during the year for interest                                                     $(11,617)       $(10,078)       $ (9,297)
cash paid during the year for income taxes                                                   (2,604)         (1,597)         (2,098)
===================================================================================================================================
the notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 56-76 are an integral
part of this statement.
f-7
annual report page 39
statement of cash flows (continued)
ge                             gecs
------------------------------   -------------------------------
2000       1999       1998       2000       1999       1998
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
cash flows--operating activities
net earnings                                                        $ 12,735   $ 10,717   $  9,296   $  5,192   $  4,443   $  3,796
adjustments to reconcile net earnings to cash provided
from operating activities
depreciation and amortization of property,
plant and equipment                                            1,725      1,735      1,761      3,314      3,173      2,616
amortization of goodwill and other intangibles                      523        584        531      2,174      1,199        952
earnings retained by gecs                                        (3,370)    (2,777)    (2,124)      --         --         --
deferred income taxes                                               470        655        594        683        847        549
decrease (increase) in ge current receivables                      (550)       190        520       --         --         --
decrease (increase) in inventories                                 (663)       (61)        69       (261)       327         81
increase in accounts payable                                        845        104        199      3,047        699      1,673
increase (decrease) in insurance liabilities and reserves          --         --         --       (1,009)     4,584      3,670
provision for losses on financing receivables                      --         --         --        2,045      1,671      1,603
all other operating activities                                    3,701        616       (814)    (5,901)    (2,124)    (3,985)
------------------------------   -------------------------------
cash from operating activities                                        15,416     11,763     10,032      9,284     14,819     10,955
------------------------------   -------------------------------
cash flows--investing activities
additions to property, plant and equipment                            (2,536)    (2,036)    (2,047)   (11,431)   (13,466)    (6,935)
dispositions of property, plant and equipment                             53       --            6      6,714      6,262      4,037
net increase in gecs financing receivables                              --         --         --      (16,076)   (12,628)    (5,999)
payments for principal businesses purchased                           (1,156)    (1,594)    (1,455)    (1,176)   (10,060)   (17,155)
all other investing activities                                          (234)      (432)       477    (12,173)    (8,283)   (11,380)
------------------------------   -------------------------------
cash used for investing activities                                    (3,873)    (4,062)    (3,019)   (34,142)   (38,175)   (37,432)
------------------------------   -------------------------------
cash flows--financing activities
net increase (decrease) in borrowings
(maturities of 90 days or less)                                    (1,331)    (1,230)     1,015     (2,121)     7,308     16,288
newly issued debt (maturities longer than 90 days)                       785        558        509     46,887     47,605     41,440
repayments and other reductions (maturities
longer than 90 days)                                                 (855)      (615)    (1,787)   (31,907)   (26,924)   (31,027)
net dispositions (purchases) of ge shares for treasury                   469     (1,002)    (2,819)      --         --         --
dividends paid to share owners                                        (5,401)    (4,587)    (3,913)    (1,822)    (1,666)    (1,672)
all other financing activities                                          --         --         --       12,942        622       (114)
------------------------------   -------------------------------
cash from (used for) financing activities                             (6,333)    (6,876)    (6,995)    23,979     26,945     24,915
------------------------------   -------------------------------
increase (decrease) in cash and equivalents during year                5,210        825         18       (879)     3,589     (1,562)
cash and equivalents at beginning of year                              2,000      1,175      1,157      6,931      3,342      4,904
------------------------------   -------------------------------
cash and equivalents at end of year                                 $  7,210   $  2,000   $  1,175   $  6,052   $  6,931   $  3,342
====================================================================================================================================
supplemental disclosure of cash flows information
cash paid during the year for interest                              $   (388)  $   (482)  $   (620)  $(11,229)  $ (9,596)  $ (8,677)
cash paid during the year for income taxes                            (1,804)    (1,246)    (1,151)      (800)      (351)      (947)
====================================================================================================================================
in the consolidating data on this page, "ge" means the basis of consolidation as
described in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements; "gecs" means
general electric capital services, inc. and all of its affiliates and associated
companies. transactions between ge and gecs have been eliminated from the
"general electric company and consolidated affiliates" columns on page 38.
f-8
annual report page 40
management's discussion of financial responsibility
the financial data in this report, including the audited financial statements,
have been prepared by management using the best available information and
applying judgment. accounting principles used in preparing the financial
statements are those that are generally accepted in the united states of
america.
management believes that a sound, dynamic system of internal financial
controls that balances benefits and costs provides a vital ingredient for the
company's six sigma quality initiative as well as the best safeguard for company
assets. professional financial managers are responsible for implementing and
overseeing the financial control system, reporting on management's stewardship
of the assets entrusted to it by share owners and maintaining accurate records.
ge is dedicated to the highest standards of integrity, ethics and social
responsibility. this dedication is reflected in written policy statements
covering, among other subjects, environmental protection, potentially
conflicting outside interests of employees, compliance with antitrust laws,
proper business practices, and adherence to the highest standards of conduct and
practices in transactions with customers, including the u.s. government.
management continually emphasizes to all employees that even the appearance of
impropriety can erode public confidence in the company. ongoing education and
communication programs and review activities, such as those conducted by the
company's policy compliance review board, are designed to create a strong
compliance culture--one that encourages employees to raise their policy
questions and concerns and that prohibits retribution for doing so.
kpmg llp, independent auditors, provide an objective, independent review of
management's discharge of its obligations relating to the fairness of reporting
of operating results and financial condition. their report for 2000 appears
below.
the audit committee of the board (consisting solely of directors from
outside ge) maintains an ongoing appraisal--on behalf of share owners--of the
activities and independence of the company's independent auditors, the
activities of its audit staff, financial reporting process, internal financial
controls and compliance with key company policies.
john f. welch, jr.
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer
jeffrey r. immelt
president and chairman-elect
keith s. sherin
senior vice president, finance,
and chief financial officer
february 2, 2001
independent auditors' report
to share owners and board of directors of
general electric company
we have audited the financial statements of general electric company and
consolidated affiliates as listed in item 14 (a)1 on page 21. these consolidated
financial statements are the responsibility of the company's management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial
statements based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted
in the united states of america. those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
in our opinion, the aforementioned financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of general electric company and
consolidated affiliates at december 31, 2000 and 1999, and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period
ended december 31, 2000, in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the united states of america.
kpmg llp
stamford, connecticut
february 2, 2001
f-9
annual report page 41
management's discussion of operations
overview
general electric company's consolidated financial statements represent the
combination of the company's manufacturing and nonfinancial services businesses
("ge") and the accounts of general electric capital services, inc. ("gecs"). see
note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, which explains how the various
financial data are presented.
management's discussion of operations is presented in three parts:
consolidated operations, segment operations and international operations.
consolidated operations
general electric company achieved record revenues, earnings and cash generation
in 2000, demonstrating the benefits of its continuing emphasis on globalization,
growth in services, six sigma quality and e-business.
revenues rose 16% to a record $129.9 billion in 2000, compared with $111.6
billion in 1999, which was 11% higher than the $100.5 billion reported in 1998.
the improvements in revenues over the three-year period reflect continued growth
from global activities and services.
earnings increased to a record $12,735 million, a 19% increase from $10,717
million reported in 1999. earnings per share increased to $1.27 during 2000, up
19% from the prior year's $1.07 (except as otherwise noted, earnings per share
are presented on a diluted basis). earnings in 1999 rose 15% from $9,296 million
in 1998. in 1999, earnings per share increased 15% from $0.93 in 1998.
the financial accounting standards board ("fasb") has issued, then subsequently
amended, statement of financial accounting standards ("sfas") no. 133,
accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities, effective for ge
on january 1, 2001. upon adoption, all derivative instruments (including certain
derivative instruments embedded in other contracts) will be recognized in the
balance sheet at their fair values; changes in such fair values must be
recognized immediately in earnings unless specific hedging criteria are met.
effects of qualifying changes in fair value will be recorded in equity pending
recognition in earnings as offsets to the related earnings effects of the hedged
items. management estimates that, at january 1, 2001, the effects on its
consolidated financial statements of adopting sfas no. 133, as amended, will be
a one-time reduction of net earnings of less than $0.5 billion, and a one-time
reduction of equity, excluding the net earnings effect, of less than $1.0
billion. the precise transition effect is uncertain because the accounting for
certain derivatives and hedging relationships in accordance with sfas no. 133 is
subject to further interpretation by the fasb.
dividends declared in 2000 amounted to $5,647 million. per-share dividends of
$0.57 were up 17% from 1999, following a 17% increase from the preceding year.
ge has rewarded its share owners with 25 consecutive years of dividend growth.
the chart above illustrates that ge's dividend growth for the past five years
has significantly outpaced dividend growth of companies in the standard & poor's
500 stock index.
return on average share owners' equity was 27.5% in 2000, up from 26.8% and
25.7% in 1999 and 1998, respectively.
except as otherwise noted, the analysis in the remainder of this section
presents ge results with gecs reported on an equity basis.
ge total revenues were $69.5 billion in 2000, compared with $60.9 billion in
1999 and $56.0 billion in 1998.
*  ge sales of goods and services were $63.8 billion in 2000, an increase of 15%
from 1999, which in turn was 8% higher than in 1998. volume was about 16%
higher in 2000, reflecting growth across most businesses during the year, led
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge/s&p cumulative dividend
growth since 1995
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge                                   101.01%   70.28%   45.19%  25.19%    10.94%
s&p                                   21.10    20.67    17.48   12.40      8.05
================================================================================
by strong double-digit increases at power systems and medical systems. while
overall selling prices were down slightly in 2000, the effects of selling
prices on sales in various businesses differed markedly. the net effect of
exchange rates on sales denominated in currencies other than the u.s. dollar
also negatively affected revenues. volume in 1999 was about 10% higher than
in 1998, with selling price and currency effects both slightly negative.
for purposes of the financial statement display of sales and costs of
sales on pages 34 and 35, "goods" is required to include sales of tangible
products, and "services" must include all other sales, including broadcasting
and information services activities. an increasingly important element of ge
f-10
annual report page 42
sales includes both spare parts (goods) as well as repair services. such
sales are referred to by management as "product services." sales of product
services were $16.2 billion in 2000, a 9% increase over 1999 on a comparable
basis. increases in product services revenues in 2000 were widespread, led by
power systems, medical systems and transportation systems. operating margin
from product services was approximately $3.9 billion, up 10% from 1999 on a
comparable basis. the increase reflected improvements in most product
services businesses and was led by power systems, medical systems and
transportation systems.
*  ge other income, earned from a wide variety of sources, was $0.5 billion in
2000, $0.9 billion in 1999 and $0.7 billion in 1998. comparisons over the
three-year period are affected by a pre-tax gain of $388 million in 1999
resulting from the contribution of certain of nbc's media properties to nbc
internet (nbci), a publicly-traded company, in exchange for a noncontrolling
interest in nbci.
*  earnings of gecs were up 17% in 2000, following a 17% increase the year
before. see page 45 for an analysis of these earnings.
principal costs and expenses for ge are those classified as costs of goods and
services sold, and selling, general and administrative expenses. two ge
initiatives had significant effects on costs:
*  the six sigma quality initiative has lowered ge's costs by dramatically
reducing rework, simplifying processes and reducing direct material costs.
design for six sigma has been a key to the introduction of numerous
high-quality new products with significantly enhanced features.
*  costs have also been reduced by the e-business initiative, a broad-based
program under which ge is investing in internal infrastructure hardware and
software that is enabling its businesses to conduct a growing portion of
their business over the internet. benefits from the e-business initiative
include improved customer service, expanded product and service offerings and
increased operating efficiency for both ge and its customers.
principally because of the funding status of the ge pension plan (described in
note 6) and other retiree benefit plans (described in note 5), principal u.s.
postemployment benefit plans contributed pre-tax cost reductions of $1,266
million and $1,062 million in 2000 and 1999, respectively, about 6.5% of net
earnings in both years. the present funding status provides assurance of
benefits for participating employees, but future effects on operating results
depend on economic conditions and investment performance.
costs and expenses in 1999 included $326 million of unusual charges, the
largest of which resulted from fourth-quarter developments affecting liabilities
associated with past activities at former manufacturing sites that are not part
of any current business segment. other significant components of unusual charges
included amounts described on page 45 for nbc and costs for rationalizing
certain operations and facilities of ge's worldwide industrial businesses. major
elements of the restructuring program included costs for employee severance,
lease termination, dismantlement and site restoration. the program was
essentially completed by the end of 2000.
operating margin is sales of goods and services less the costs of goods and
services sold, and selling, general and administrative expenses. ge's ongoing
operating margin reached a record 18.9% of sales in 2000, up from 17.8% in 1999
and 16.7% in 1998. reported operating margin was 18.6% in 2000, including the
effects of a one-time retirement benefit provision associated with the new labor
agreement. reported operating margin in 1999 was 17.3% of sales, including the
$326 million of unusual charges discussed in the preceding paragraph. the
improvement in ongoing operating margin in 2000 was broad-based, with
improvements in a majority of ge's businesses, led by power systems and aircraft
engines, reflecting the increasing benefits from ge's product services, six
sigma quality and e-business initiatives.
total cost productivity (sales in relation to costs, both on a constant dollar
basis) has paralleled the significant improvement in ge's ongoing operating
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge returns on invested capital
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
return on equity                      27.50%   26.80%   25.70%  25.00%    24.00%
return on total capital               27.40    25.80    23.90   23.60     22.20
================================================================================
f-11
annual report page 43
margin. total cost productivity in 2000 was 3.6%, reflecting benefits from
improvements in base cost productivity achieved through strong volume growth and
the six sigma quality and e-business initiatives. most businesses achieved
improvements in base cost productivity in excess of 5%. total cost productivity
was 4.2% in 1999, reflecting six sigma quality benefits as well as higher
volume. the total contribution of productivity in the last two years offset not
only the negative effects of total cost inflation, but also the effects of
selling price decreases.
ge interest and other financial charges in 2000 amounted to $811 million, about
the same as 1999 and slightly lower than the $883 million in 1998. during 2000,
higher average interest rates were more than offset by lower average borrowing
levels. the decrease in 1999 arose from a combination of lower average interest
rates and lower average levels of borrowing.
income taxes on a consolidated basis were 31.0% of pre-tax earnings in 2000,
compared with 31.2% in 1999 and 31.0% in 1998. a more detailed analysis of
differences between the u.s. federal statutory rate and the consolidated rate,
as well as other information about income tax provisions, is provided in note 7.
segment operations
revenues and segment profit for operating segments are shown on page 44. for
additional information, including a description of the products and services
included in each segment, see note 28.
aircraft engines reported a 17% increase in operating profit in 2000, on
revenues that were slightly higher than in 1999. the improvement in operating
profit reflected strong productivity. revenues in 1999 increased 4%, principally
reflecting higher volume in product services. operating profit increased 19% in
1999 as a result of productivity and growth in product services.
in 2000, $1.6 billion of aircraft engines revenues were from sales to the
u.s. government, about the same as in 1999.
aircraft engines received orders of $13.5 billion in 2000 compared with $12.0
billion in 1999. the $12.0 billion total backlog at year-end 2000 comprised
unfilled product orders of $9.5 billion (of which 57% was scheduled for delivery
in 2001) and product services orders of $2.5 billion to be delivered in 2001.
comparable december 31, 1999 total backlog was $10.0 billion.
appliances revenues were 4% higher than a year ago, as volume increases more
than offset lower selling prices. operating profit also increased 4%, largely as
a result of productivity and higher volume from new products. revenues in 1999
were 1% higher than in 1998, as volume increases offset lower selling prices.
operating profit decreased 13% in 1999, reflecting lower selling prices and
increased spending on programs for new products and e-business.
industrial products and systems revenues increased 3% in 2000, largely as a
result of volume increases at industrial systems and growth in product services,
including acquisitions, which more than offset lower selling prices. operating
profit increased 4%, primarily reflecting productivity and growth in product
services. revenues rose 3% in 1999, primarily as a result of volume increases at
transportation systems, which more than offset lower selling prices. operating
profit increased 11% in 1999 as strong productivity at industrial systems and
lighting more than offset lower selling prices.
transportation systems received orders of $2.1 billion in 2000, compared with
$1.4 billion in 1999. the $1.4 billion total backlog at year-end 2000 comprised
unfilled product orders of $1.0 billion (of which 78% was scheduled for delivery
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge operating margin as
a percentage of sales
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
as reported                           18.60%   17.30%   16.70%  11.00%    14.80%
restructuring and other unusual
charges                             0.30     0.50       --    4.70        --
================================================================================
in 2001) and product services orders of $0.4 billion to be delivered in 2001.
comparable december 31, 1999 total backlog was $1.4 billion.
nbc revenues increased 17% in 2000, reflecting its coverage of the summer
olympic games as well as continued strong growth in cable operations,
particularly at cnbc. operating profit increased 14% as growth in
owned-and-operated stations, cable operations and network operations was
somewhat reduced by higher license fees associated with renewal of certain
sports and prime-time programs. in 1999, revenues increased 10%, reflecting
higher revenues in nbc's owned-and-operated stations and growth in cable
operations. operating profit was 17% higher, reflecting a strong advertising
marketplace and improved pricing at the network, excellent results in cable
f-12
annual report page 44
summary of operating segments
general electric company and consolidated affiliates
-----------------------------------------------------------
for the years ended december 31 (in millions)      2000         1999         1998        1997        1996
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
revenues
ge
aircraft engines                         $  10,779    $  10,730    $  10,294    $  7,799    $  6,302
appliances                                   5,887        5,671        5,619       5,801       5,586
industrial products and systems             11,848       11,555       11,222      10,984      10,401
nbc                                          6,797        5,790        5,269       5,153       5,232
plastics                                     7,776        6,941        6,633       6,695       6,509
power systems                               14,861       10,099        8,500       7,986       7,704
technical products and services              7,915        6,863        5,323       4,861       4,700
eliminations                                (2,075)      (1,767)      (1,401)     (1,247)     (1,093)
-----------------------------------------------------------
total ge segment revenues                63,788       55,882       51,459      48,032      45,341
corporate items (a)                              517          619          771       3,227       1,407
gecs net earnings                              5,192        4,443        3,796       3,256       2,817
-----------------------------------------------------------
total ge revenues                        69,497       60,944       56,026      54,515      49,565
gecs segment revenues                         66,177       55,749       48,694      39,931      32,713
eliminations (b)                              (5,821)      (5,063)      (4,251)     (3,606)     (3,099)
-----------------------------------------------------------
consolidated revenues                         $ 129,853    $ 111,630    $ 100,469    $ 90,840    $ 79,179
=========================================================================================================
segment profit
ge
aircraft engines                         $   2,464    $   2,104    $   1,769    $  1,366    $  1,214
appliances                                     684          655          755         771         748
industrial products and systems              2,187        2,095        1,880       1,789       1,587
nbc                                          1,797        1,576        1,349       1,216       1,020
plastics                                     1,923        1,651        1,584       1,500       1,443
power systems                                2,809        1,753        1,338       1,275       1,189
technical products and services              1,718        1,359        1,109         988         855
-----------------------------------------------------------
total ge operating profit                13,582       11,193        9,784       8,905       8,056
gecs net earnings                              5,192        4,443        3,796       3,256       2,817
-----------------------------------------------------------
total segment profit                     18,774       15,636       13,580      12,161      10,873
corporate items and eliminations (c) (d)      (1,429)        (902)        (584)     (1,351)       (703)
ge interest and other financial charges         (811)        (810)        (883)       (797)       (595)
ge provision for income taxes                 (3,799)      (3,207)      (2,817)     (1,810)     (2,295)
-----------------------------------------------------------
consolidated net earnings                     $  12,735    $  10,717    $   9,296    $  8,203    $  7,280
=========================================================================================================
the notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 56-76 are an integral
part of this statement. "ge" means the basis of consolidation as described in
note 1 to the consolidated financial statements; "gecs" means general electric
capital services, inc. and all of its affiliates and associated companies. the
segment profit measure for ge's industrial businesses is operating profit
(earnings before interest and other financial charges, and income taxes). the
segment profit measure for gecs is net earnings, reflecting the importance of
financing and tax considerations to its operating activities.
(a)   includes revenues of $944 million and $789 million in 1997 and 1996,
respectively, from an appliance distribution affiliate that was
deconsolidated in 1998. also includes $1,538 million in 1997 from an
exchange of preferred stock in lockheed martin corporation for the stock
of a newly formed subsidiary.
(b)   principally the elimination of gecs net earnings.
(c)   includes income, principally from licensing activities, of $79 million,
$62 million, $271 million, $310 million and $282 million in 2000, 1999,
1998, 1997 and 1996, respectively.
(d)   1999 includes unusual charges amounting to $265 million. of the total,
amounts that relate to activities of ge operating segments were as
follows: aircraft engines--$42 million, appliances--$75 million,
industrial products and systems--$12 million, plastics--$13 million and
technical products and services --$34 million. 1997 includes unusual
charges of $2,322 million. of the total, amounts that relate to activities
of ge operating segments were as follows: aircraft engines--$342 million,
appliances--$330 million, industrial products and systems--$352 million,
nbc--$161 million, plastics--$63 million, power systems--$437 million and
technical products and services--$157 million. also included in 1997 is
$1,538 million associated with the lockheed martin corporation transaction
described in (a) above.
================================================================================
f-13
annual report page 45
operations and continued cost reductions, which more than offset higher license
fees for certain prime-time programs that were renewed. operating profit in 1999
included $123 million of the gain from the nbci transaction, described on page
42. that gain was entirely offset by $62 million of operating losses from nbci
and predecessor operations (recorded as a reduction of "other income"), as well
as $61 million of unusual costs recorded as "other costs and expenses" for
entering into a loss programming contract and for closing certain cnbc
facilities.
plastics operating profit increased 16% in 2000 on revenues that were 12% higher
than a year ago. the increases in both revenues and operating profit were
primarily attributable to higher volume and improved selling prices, which more
than offset the effects of higher raw material prices. revenues in 1999
increased by 5%, as improved volume across all product lines more than offset
the effects of lower selling prices. operating profit increased by 4% as
productivity and the increase in volume more than offset lower prices.
power systems revenues increased 47% in 2000, primarily as a result of sharply
higher volume in gas turbines and continued growth in product services,
including acquisitions. operating profit rose 60%, reflecting the increase in
volume, selling prices and productivity. revenues in 1999 were 19% higher than
in 1998, primarily as a result of strong double-digit growth in gas turbine
volume and in product services. operating profit rose 31%, reflecting
productivity, growth in product services and the increase in volume.
power systems orders were $23.6 billion for 2000, a 68% increase over 1999,
reflecting very strong americas market growth. the $25.1 billion total backlog
at year-end 2000 comprised unfilled product orders of $21.9 billion (of which
63% was scheduled for delivery in 2001) and product services orders of $3.2
billion to be delivered in 2001. comparable december 31, 1999 total backlog was
$16.1 billion.
technical products and services revenues rose 15% in 2000, reflecting sharply
higher volume at medical systems, including acquired businesses. operating
profit grew 26%, largely as a result of productivity and volume growth at
medical systems, which more than offset lower selling prices across the segment.
revenues in 1999 were 29% higher than 1998 primarily attributable to growth at
medical systems, the result of higher equipment volume, including new products,
and continued growth in product services, partially offset by lower selling
prices across the segment. operating profit increased 23% as productivity and
volume increases, particularly at medical systems, more than offset lower
selling prices.
orders received by medical systems in 2000 were $7.6 billion, a 19% increase
over 1999. the $3.6 billion total backlog at year-end 2000 comprised unfilled
product orders of $2.3 billion (of which 87% was scheduled for delivery in 2001)
and product services orders of $1.3 billion to be delivered in 2001. comparable
december 31, 1999 total backlog was $3.1 billion.
gecs businesses are categorized for management purposes into five operating
activities: consumer services, equipment management, mid-market financing,
specialized financing and specialty insurance.
gecs net earnings were $5,192 million in 2000, up 17% from $4,443 million in
1999, with strong double-digit earnings growth in four of the five operating
activities. net earnings in 1999 increased 17% from 1998. the earnings
improvement throughout the three-year period resulted from asset growth,
principally from acquisitions of businesses and portfolios, and origination
volume.
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
operating profit of ge segments
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$13.58   $11.19    $9.78   $8.90    $8.056
================================================================================
on december 28, 2000, montgomery ward, llc (wards), formerly a gecs
subsidiary, filed for bankruptcy protection and began liquidation proceedings.
net earnings for the year 2000 included operating losses from wards amounting to
$245 million as well as a charge, primarily to other costs and expenses, for
$815 million ($537 million, after tax) to recognize the additional losses
resulting from the bankruptcy of wards.
*  gecs total revenues increased 19% to $66.2 billion in 2000, following a 14%
increase to $55.7 billion in 1999. the increases in both years reflected the
contributions of acquired businesses as well as growth in origination volume.
revenues in 2000 included a gain of $1,366 million ($848 million, after tax)
from sale of gecs investment in common stock of paine webber group, inc.
(painewebber).
f-14
annual report page 46
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gecs revenues
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$66.18   $55.75   $48.70  $39.93    $32.71
================================================================================
*  gecs cost of goods sold amounted to $8.5 billion in 2000, compared with $8.0
billion in 1999 and $6.8 billion in 1998, and relates to it solutions and
wards. the increase in 2000 and 1999 primarily reflects the consolidation of
wards from august 2, 1999, when gecs acquired control, through december 28,
2000, when wards commenced liquidation proceedings and was deconsolidated.
*  gecs interest on borrowings in 2000 was $11.1 billion, up from $9.4 billion
in 1999 and $9.0 billion in 1998. the increase in both years reflected the
effects of both interest rates and the average level of borrowings used to
finance asset growth. gecs average composite interest rate was 5.89% in 2000,
compared with 5.14% in 1999 and 5.92% in 1998. in 2000, average assets of
$360.5 billion were 13% higher than in 1999, which in turn were 16% higher
than in 1998. see page 52 for a discussion of interest rate risk management.
*  gecs insurance losses and policyholder and annuity benefits increased to
$14.4 billion in 2000, compared with $11.0 billion in 1999 and $9.6 billion
in 1998. this increase reflected effects of growth in premium volume and
business acquisitions throughout the period, as well as a higher ratio of
losses to premiums earned in the reinsurance business discussed on page 47.
*  gecs provision for losses on financing receivables was $2.0 billion in 2000,
compared with $1.7 billion in 1999 and $1.6 billion in 1998. these provisions
principally related to private-label credit cards, bank credit cards,
personal loans and auto loans and leases in the consumer services operations,
all of which are discussed on page 48 under financing receivables. the
provisions throughout the three-year period reflected higher average
receivable balances, changes in the mix of business, and the effects of lower
average consumer delinquency rates.
*  gecs other costs and expenses were $22.8 billion in 2000, an increase from
$19.4 billion in 1999 and $16.4 billion in 1998. the increase in 2000
reflected increased costs associated with acquired businesses and portfolios,
the charges discussed previously for wards, and the decision to rationalize
certain operations discussed in the analysis of all other gecs operating
activities. the 1999 increase reflected increased costs associated with
acquired businesses and portfolios, higher investment levels and increases in
insurance commissions.
financing spreads (the excess of yields over interest rates on borrowings)
increased slightly during 2000, as the improvement in yields outpaced increases
in borrowing rates. financing spreads in 1999 were relatively flat compared with
1998 as yields and borrowing rates decreased to a similar extent.
revenues and net earnings from operating activities within the gecs segment
for the past three years are summarized and discussed below.
consumer services revenues increased 28% in 2000 and 6% in 1999, and net
earnings increased 47% in 2000 and 35% in 1999. growth in revenues and net
income in 2000 resulted from higher premium and investment income at ge
financial assurance (gefa), the consumer savings and insurance business, which
experienced profitable growth from both acquisitions and volume. revenues and
net earnings also increased as a result of acquisition and volume growth at card
services and global consumer finance, partially offset by losses at mortgage
services, which stopped accepting new business during 2000. the growth in
revenues and net earnings during 1999 was led by global consumer finance and
improved results at gefa, partially offset by the effects of asset reductions in
card services. the portfolio at auto financial services (afs) began to run off
in 1999 and continued in 2000, resulting in a significant decline in revenues;
during 2000, afs stopped accepting new business.
equipment management revenues declined 4% in 2000, following a 3% increase in
1999, as higher revenues from ge capital aviation services (gecas), transport
international pool, ge capital modular space and americom, the satellite
services business, were more than offset by lower revenues at it solutions. the
increase in 1999 reflected acquisitions in the corporate auto fleet management
operations and higher revenues at gecas, largely offset by decreases in sales
f-15
annual report page 47
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gecs revenues and net earnings from operating activities
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(in millions)                                     2000        1999        1998
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
revenues
consumer services                             $ 23,893    $ 18,705    $ 17,621
equipment management                            14,747      15,383      14,926
mid-market financing                             5,483       4,634       3,676
specialized financing                            5,648       4,603       3,368
specialty insurance                             11,878      10,643       8,829
all other                                        4,528       1,781         274
--------------------------------------
total revenues                                $ 66,177    $ 55,749    $ 48,694
==============================================================================
net earnings
consumer services                             $  1,671    $  1,140    $    845
equipment management                               833         683         806
mid-market financing                               730         597         471
specialized financing                            1,503       1,244         745
specialty insurance                                879       1,167       1,115
all other                                         (424)       (388)       (186)
--------------------------------------
total net earnings                            $  5,192    $  4,443    $  3,796
==============================================================================
volume at the remaining equipment management businesses. net earnings increased
22% in 2000, following a 15% decrease in 1999. the increase in 2000 reflected
volume growth at gecas, transport international pool and ge capital modular
space, favorable tax effects and a higher level of asset gains, partially offset
by lower results at it solutions. the decrease in net earnings in 1999 reflected
lower results at it solutions and the european equipment management businesses,
which more than offset growth at gecas and americom.
mid-market financing revenues increased 18% in 2000, following a 26% increase
in 1999, while net earnings grew 22% and 27%, respectively. favorable tax
effects and asset growth from originations were the most significant
contributing factors to results in 2000, while asset growth from both
acquisitions and originations was the most significant contributing factor in
1999.
specialized financing revenues rose 23% and 37%, while net earnings increased
21% and 67% in 2000 and 1999, respectively. revenues and net earnings growth in
2000 was principally the result of origination growth across all businesses
within specialized financing. revenues and net earnings growth in 1999 was
principally the result of gains on equity investments led by ge equity,
commercial finance and real estate. ge equity experienced a high level of gains
on sales of equity investments during 1999 and early 2000.
specialty insurance revenues increased 12% and 21% in 2000 and 1999,
respectively, primarily resulting from premium growth throughout the period and
higher premium income in 1999 from acquisitions. net realized investment gains
amounted to $639 million, $811 million and $574 million in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively. investment income increased slightly in 2000, as higher interest
income more than offset a decrease in net realized investment gains at ge global
insurance (the parent of employers reinsurance).
net income decreased 25% in 2000, following a 5% increase in 1999. the
decrease in 2000 was attributable to deterioration of underwriting results at ge
global insurance, reflecting higher property and casualty-related losses
(principally as a result of adverse development relating to prior-year loss
events, including large loss events) and the continued effects of low premiums
in the property and casualty insurance/reinsurance industry. losses in 1999 were
significantly affected by a number of large loss events. large loss events are
individual events that, after specific reinsurance recoveries and related
premium adjustments, affect ge global insurance operations by $2 million or
more, and include losses from earthquakes, aviation and railroad accidents, fire
damage, and weather-related damage from hurricanes, tornadoes, wind and ice.
large loss events for ge global insurance occurring in 2000, 1999 and 1998
resulted in losses in those years of approximately $250 million, $510 million
and $150 million, respectively. a portion of the 2000 and 1999 losses were
recovered under aggregate risk coverage obtained in the ordinary course of the
reinsurance business. overall insurance losses for specialty insurance were
partially mitigated by favorable experience in the mortgage insurance business,
particularly in 1999.
all other gecs operating activities included the results of wards from august
2, 1999, through december 28, 2000. the increase in revenues in 2000 also
included a pre-tax gain of $1,366 million from sale of gecs investment in common
stock of painewebber. the net loss of $424 million for 2000 comprised the
painewebber after-tax gain of $848 million, after-tax charges of $537 million
related to wards and after-tax strategic rationalization costs of $347 million,
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gecs net earnings
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$5.19    $4.44    $3.80   $3.26     $2.82
================================================================================
f-16
annual report page 48
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
consolidated international revenues
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
international operations              $45.82   $38.16   $33.76  $29.33    $25.45
exports                                 7.14     7.51     8.75    8.91      7.58
================================================================================
primarily for asset write-downs, employee severance and lease termination. these
strategic rationalization costs consisted of $107 million related to consumer
services, $191 million related to equipment management and $49 million related
to specialized financing.
financing receivables is the largest category of assets for gecs and
represents one of its primary sources of revenues. the portfolio of financing
receivables, before allowance for losses, increased to $147.3 billion at the end
of 2000 from $137.9 billion at the end of 1999, as discussed in the following
paragraphs. the related allowance for losses at the end of 2000 amounted to $4.0
billion ($3.7 billion at the end of 1999), representing management's best
estimate of probable losses inherent in the portfolio.
in gecs financing receivables, "nonearning" receivables are those that are 90
days or more delinquent (or for which collection has otherwise become doubtful)
and "reduced-earning" receivables are commercial receivables whose terms have
been restructured to a below-market yield.
consumer financing receivables, primarily credit card and personal loans and
auto loans and leases, were $48.8 billion at year-end 2000, a decrease of $3.5
billion from year-end 1999. credit card and personal receivables increased $0.2
billion, primarily from origination volume, partially offset by sales and
securitizations and the net effects of foreign currency translation. auto
receivables decreased $3.7 billion, primarily as a result of the run-off of the
liquidating auto financial services portfolio and the net effects of foreign
currency translation. nonearning consumer receivables at year-end 2000 were $1.1
billion, about 2.3% of outstandings, compared with $0.9 billion, about 1.8% of
outstandings at year-end 1999. write-offs of consumer receivables increased to
$1.3 billion from $1.2 billion for 1999, reflecting shifts in the mix of
products and global businesses. consistent with industry trends, consumer
delinquency rates increased somewhat toward the end of 2000 from the unusually
low levels earlier in the year but were below year-end 1999 levels.
other financing receivables, which totaled $98.5 billion at december 31,
2000, consisted of a diverse commercial, industrial and equipment loan and lease
portfolio. this portfolio increased $12.9 billion during 2000, reflecting
increased originations and acquisition growth, partially offset by sales and
securitizations and the net effects of foreign currency translation. related
nonearning and reduced-earning receivables were $0.9 billion, about 1.0% of
outstandings at year-end 2000, compared with $0.9 billion, about 1.1% of
outstandings at year-end 1999.
gecs loans and leases to commercial airlines amounted to $15.3 billion at the
end of 2000, up from $11.8 billion at the end of 1999. gecs commercial aircraft
positions also included financial guarantees, funding commitments and aircraft
orders as discussed in note 18.
international operations
estimated results of international activities include the results of ge and gecs
operations located outside the united states plus all u.s. exports. certain gecs
operations that cannot meaningfully be associated with specific geographic areas
are classified as "other international" for this purpose.
international revenues in 2000 were $53.0 billion (41% of consolidated
revenues), compared with $45.7 billion in 1999 and $42.5 billion in 1998. the
chart above left depicts the growth in international revenues over the past five
years.
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
consolidated international revenues
by region
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
europe                                $26.67   $25.82   $24.35  $20.63    $18.03
pacific basin                          15.19    10.19     8.06    7.98      7.57
americas                                7.68     6.73     6.91    6.20      4.71
other                                  3.411     2.94     3.19    3.43      2.72
================================================================================
f-17
annual report page 49
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
consolidated international revenues
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(in millions)                                   2000          1999          1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
europe                                       $24,144       $22,919       $21,665
pacific basin                                 12,921         7,879         5,166
americas                                       5,912         5,229         5,030
other                                          2,842         2,136         1,895
-----------------------------------
45,819        38,163        33,756
exports from the u.s. to
external customers                          7,138         7,513         8,751
-----------------------------------
$52,957       $45,676       $42,507
================================================================================
ge international revenues were $26.7 billion in 2000, an increase of $2.7
billion over 1999, which was $0.3 billion lower than in 1998. over the
three-year period, international revenues were slightly less than half of total
revenues. the increase in such revenues during 2000 was attributable to sales
growth in operations based outside the united states, partially offset by a 5%
decrease in u.s. exports, primarily at power systems. revenues from operations
based outside the united states grew 19% to $19.5 billion in 2000. european
revenues were 8% higher in 2000, led by increases at power systems and plastics.
pacific basin revenues were 39% higher in 2000, reflecting double-digit growth
at power systems, medical systems and plastics. revenues from the americas
(north and south america, except for the united states) increased 17%,
reflecting double-digit growth in both canadian and latin american operations.
gecs international revenues were $26.3 billion in 2000, an increase of 21%
from $21.7 billion in 1999. revenues in the pacific basin almost doubled in
2000, principally because of growth in japan, the result of the purchase by ge
financial assurance of the insurance policies and related assets of toho mutual
life insurance company (toho). "other international" revenues increased 27% in
2000, largely a result of higher revenues at ge capital aviation services
(gecas). overall, these increases reflect the continued expansion of gecs as a
global provider of a wide range of financial services.
consolidated international operating profit was $6.8 billion in 2000, an
increase of 21% over 1999, which was 9% higher than in 1998. additional
information about operating profit by region is provided in note 29.
total assets of international operations were $159.4 billion in 2000 (37% of
consolidated assets), an increase of 13% over 1999. the increase in 2000
reflected strong growth at gecs in the pacific basin, particularly in japan,
resulting from the acquisition of toho discussed previously. gecs also achieved
significant asset growth at gecas, which is classified as "other international."
the international activities of ge and gecs span all global regions and
primarily encompass manufacturing for local and export markets, import and sale
of products produced in other regions, leasing of aircraft, sourcing for ge
plants domiciled in other global regions and provision of financial services
within these regional economies. thus, when countries or regions experience
currency and/or economic stress, ge may have increased exposure to certain risks
but also may have new profit opportunities. potential increased risks include,
among other things, higher receivables delinquencies and bad debts, delays or
cancellation of sales and orders principally related to power and aircraft
equipment, higher local currency financing costs and a slowdown in established
financial services activities. new profit opportunities include, among other
things, lower costs of goods sourced from countries with weakened currencies,
more opportunities for lower cost outsourcing, expansion of industrial and
financial services activities through purchases of companies or assets at
reduced prices and lower u.s. debt financing costs.
financial results of ge's international activities reported in u.s. dollars
are affected by currency exchange. a number of techniques are used to manage the
effects of currency exchange, including selective borrowings in local currencies
and selective hedging of significant cross-currency transactions. principal
currencies are the major european currencies, including the euro, as well as the
japanese yen and the canadian dollar. certain of ge's operations in europe will
need to be fully euro-capable as of january 1, 2002. ge is taking appropriate
actions to meet that requirement and no adverse consequences are expected.
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
consolidated total assets
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
united states                        $277.82  $263.78  $227.11 $206.46   $189.43
international                         159.19   141.26   128.82   97.55     82.97
================================================================================
f-18
annual report page 50
management's discussion of financial resources and liquidity
overview
this discussion of financial resources and liquidity addresses the statement of
financial position (page 36), statement of changes in share owners' equity (page
34) and the statement of cash flows (page 38).
gecs is not a "captive finance company" or a vehicle for "off-balance-sheet
financing" for ge. only a small portion of gecs business is directly related to
other ge operations. the fundamental differences between ge and gecs are
reflected in the measurements commonly used by investors, rating agencies and
financial analysts. these differences will become clearer in the discussion that
follows with respect to the more significant items in the financial statements.
statement of financial position
because ge and gecs share certain significant elements of their statements of
financial position--property, plant and equipment, and borrowings, for
example--the following discussion addresses significant captions in the
"consolidated" statement. within the following discussions, however, distinction
is drawn between ge and gecs activities in order to permit meaningful analysis
of each individual statement.
investment securities for each of the past two years comprised mainly
investment-grade debt securities held by ge financial assurance and the
specialty insurance businesses of gecs in support of obligations to annuitants
and policyholders. ge investment securities were $1.0 billion at year-end 2000,
a decrease of $0.3 billion from 1999, reflecting decreases in the fair value of
equity investment securities partially offset by additional investments. gecs
investment securities were $90.3 billion in 2000, compared with $80.5 billion in
1999. the increase of $9.8 billion resulted from the addition of securities from
acquired companies, investment of premiums received and increases in the fair
value of debt securities, partially offset by the disposition of gecs investment
in common stock of painewebber and a decrease in the fair value of certain
equity securities, consistent with market conditions. see note 10 for further
information.
current receivables for ge were $9.7 billion at the end of 2000, an increase of
$1.0 billion from year-end 1999, and included $6.3 billion due from customers at
the end of 2000, which was $0.5 billion higher than the amount due at the end of
1999. turnover of customer receivables from sales of goods and services was 10.0
in 2000, compared with 9.4 in 1999. other current receivables are primarily
amounts that did not originate from sales of ge goods or services, such as
advances to suppliers in connection with large contracts.
inventories for ge were $7.1 billion at december 31, 2000, up $1.3 billion from
the end of 1999. ge inventory turnover was 8.5 in 2000, an increase from 8.3 in
1999. acquisitions of inventories in business combinations and volume growth
more than offset the positive effects of inventory management programs
throughout the period. last-in, first-out (lifo) revaluations decreased $82
million in 2000, compared with decreases of $84 million in 1999 and $87 million
in 1998. included in these changes were decreases of $6 million, $4 million and
$29 million in 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively, that resulted from lower lifo
inventory levels. there were net cost decreases in each of the last three years.
inventories (at fifo) and customer receivables from sales of goods or
services are two key components of ge's working capital turnover measurement.
working capital turnover was 24.0 in 2000, compared with 11.5 in 1999,
principally reflecting effects of increased progress collections throughout the
period.
gecs inventories were $666 million and $1,209 million at december 31, 2000
and 1999, respectively. the decrease in 2000 primarily relates to the
deconsolidation of wards because of its bankruptcy filing.
financing receivables of gecs were $143.3 billion at year-end 2000, net of
allowance for doubtful accounts, up $9.1 billion over 1999. these receivables
are discussed on page 48 and in notes 13 and 14.
insurance receivables of gecs were $23.8 billion at year-end 2000, an increase
of $4.8 billion that was primarily attributable to acquisitions.
other receivables of gecs, which consist of trade receivables, accrued
investment income, operating lease receivables and a variety of sundry items,
were $13.3 billion and $15.1 billion at december 31, 2000 and 1999,
respectively. the decrease of $1.8 billion primarily resulted from the planned
run-off of assets from the 1999 acquisition of japan leasing corporation.
property, plant and equipment (including equipment leased to others) was $40.0
billion at december 31, 2000, down $1.0 billion from 1999. ge property, plant
and equipment consists of investments for its own productive use, whereas the
largest element for gecs is in equipment provided to third parties on operating
leases. details by category of investment are presented in note 16.
f-19
annual report page 51
ge total expenditures for plant and equipment during 2000 totaled $2.5
billion, compared with $2.0 billion in 1999. total expenditures for the past
five years were $11.3 billion, of which 39% was investment for growth through
new capacity and product development; 32% was investment in productivity through
new equipment and process improvements; and 29% was investment for such other
purposes as improvement of research and development facilities and safety and
environmental protection.
gecs additions to property, plant and equipment (including equipment leased
to others), were $11.4 billion during 2000 ($13.5 billion during 1999),
primarily reflecting acquisitions of transportation equipment.
intangible assets were $27.4 billion at year-end 2000, up from $26.0 billion at
year-end 1999. ge intangibles increased to $12.4 billion from $11.3 billion at
the end of 1999, principally as a result of goodwill related to acquisitions,
the largest of which were harmon industries and oec medical systems, partially
offset by amortization. gecs intangibles increased $0.3 billion to $15.0
billion, reflecting goodwill and other intangibles associated with acquisitions,
the largest of which was the acquisition of the insurance policies and related
assets of toho mutual life insurance company by ge financial assurance,
partially offset by amortization.
all other assets totaled $73.9 billion at year-end 2000, an increase of $8.9
billion from the end of 1999. ge other assets increased $3.2 billion,
principally reflecting an increase in the prepaid pension asset, higher costs
associated with increased volume of long-term service agreements and additions
to capitalized software. gecs other assets increased $5.7 billion as a result of
additional investments in real estate ventures and associated companies, and
increases in "separate accounts" (see note 18), partially offset by decreases in
assets acquired for resale, which reflected sales and securitizations in excess
of originations.
consolidated borrowings aggregated $201.3 billion at december 31, 2000, compared
with $201.8 billion at the end of 1999. the major debt-rating agencies evaluate
the financial condition of ge and of ge capital (the major public borrowing
entity of gecs) differently because of their distinct business characteristics.
using criteria appropriate to each and considering their combined strength,
those major rating agencies continue to give the highest ratings to debt of both
ge and ge capital.
ge has committed to contribute capital to ge capital in the event of either a
decrease below a specified level in ge capital's ratio of earnings to fixed
charges, or a failure to maintain a specified debt-to-equity ratio in the event
certain ge capital preferred stock is redeemed. ge also has guaranteed
subordinated debt of gecs with a face amount of $1.0 billion at december 31,
2000 and 1999. management believes the likelihood that ge will be required to
contribute capital under either the commitments or the guarantee is remote.
ge total borrowings were $1.8 billion at year-end 2000 ($0.9 billion
short-term, $0.9 billion long-term), a decrease of $1.2 billion from year-end
1999. ge total debt at the end of 2000 equaled 3.3% of total capital, down from
6.4% at the end of 1999.
gecs total borrowings were $205.4 billion at december 31, 2000, of which
$124.0 billion is due in 2001 and $81.4 billion is due in subsequent years.
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge working capital turnover
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
23.98    11.52     9.22    7.42      6.30
================================================================================
comparable amounts at the end of 1999 were $200.0 billion in total, $129.2
billion due within one year and $70.8 billion due thereafter. a large portion of
gecs borrowings ($94.5 billion and $96.6 billion at the end of 2000 and 1999,
respectively) was issued in active commercial paper markets that management
believes will continue to be a reliable source of short-term financing. most of
this commercial paper was issued by ge capital. the average remaining terms and
interest rates of ge capital commercial paper were 45 days and 6.43% at the end
of 2000, compared with 53 days and 5.82% at the end of 1999. the ge capital
ratio of debt to equity was 7.53 to 1 at the end of 2000 and 8.44 to 1 at the
end of 1999.
f-20
annual report page 52
interest rate and currency risk management is important in the normal
operations of ge and gecs. more detailed information about these financial
instruments, as well as the strategies and policies for their use, is provided
in notes 1, 19 and 30.
the u.s. securities and exchange commission requires that registrants provide
information about potential effects of changes in interest rates and currency
exchange. although the rules offer alternatives for presenting this information,
none of the alternatives is without limitations. the following discussion is
based on so-called "shock tests," which model effects of interest rate and
currency shifts on the reporting company. shock tests, while probably the most
meaningful analysis permitted, are constrained by several factors, including the
necessity to conduct the analysis based on a single point in time and by their
inability to include the complex market reactions that normally would arise from
the market shifts modeled. while the following results of shock tests for
changes in interest rates and currency exchange rates may have some limited use
as benchmarks, they should not be viewed as forecasts.
*  one means of assessing exposure to interest rate changes is a duration-based
analysis that measures the potential loss in net earnings resulting from a
hypothetical increase in interest rates of 100 basis points across all
maturities (sometimes referred to as a "parallel shift in the yield curve").
under this model, it is estimated that, all else constant, such an increase,
including repricing effects in the securities portfolio, would reduce the
2001 net earnings of gecs based on year-end 2000 positions by approximately
$124 million; the pro forma effect for ge was insignificant. based on
positions at year-end 1999, the pro forma effect on 2000 net earnings of such
an increase in interest rates was estimated to be approximately $105 million
for gecs and $13 million for ge.
*  as shown in the chart to the right, the geographic distribution of ge and
gecs operations is diverse. one means of assessing exposure to changes in
currency exchange rates is to model effects on reported earnings using a
sensitivity analysis. year-end 2000 consolidated currency exposures,
including financial instruments designated and effective as hedges, were
analyzed to identify ge and gecs assets and liabilities denominated in other
than their relevant functional currency. net unhedged exposures in each
currency were then remeasured assuming a 10% decrease (substantially greater
decreases for hyperinflationary currencies) in currency exchange rates
compared with the u.s. dollar. under this model, it is estimated that, all
else constant, such a decrease would have an insignificant effect on the 2001
net earnings of ge and gecs based on year-end 2000 positions. based on
conditions at year-end 1999, the effect on 2000 net earnings of such a
decrease in exchange rates was estimated to be insignificant for ge and gecs.
insurance liabilities, reserves and annuity benefits were $106.2 billion, $19.4
billion higher than in 1999. the increase was primarily attributable to the
addition of liabilities from acquisitions, increases in separate accounts, and
growth in guaranteed investment contracts. for additional information on these
liabilities, see note 20.
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
total assets of international operations
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
europe                                $80.28   $83.36   $84.52  $66.74    $55.19
pacific basin                          42.28    28.21    18.43    8.88      8.12
americas                               15.33    13.29    11.25    8.62      7.23
other                                  21.29    16.40    14.63   13.31     12.43
================================================================================
statement of changes in share owners' equity
share owners' equity increased $7,935 million to $50,492 million at year-end
2000. the increase was largely attributable to net earnings during the period of
$12,735 million, partially offset by dividends of $5,647 million.
currency translation adjustments reduced equity by $1,204 million in 2000.
changes in the currency translation adjustment reflect the effects of changes in
currency exchange rates on ge's net investment in non-u.s. subsidiaries that
have functional currencies other than the u.s. dollar. the decrease during 2000
largely reflected continued weakening in the euro. accumulated currency
translation adjustments affect net earnings only when all or a portion of an
affiliate is disposed of.
f-21
annual report page 53
statement of cash flows
because cash management activities of ge and gecs are separate and distinct, it
is more useful to review their cash flows separately.
ge cash and equivalents aggregated $7.2 billion at the end of 2000, up from $2.0
billion at year-end 1999. during 2000, ge generated a record $15.4 billion in
cash from operating activities, a 31% increase over 1999. the increase reflected
improvements in earnings and working capital, the latter principally from
progress collections. the 2000 cash generation provided the necessary resources
to purchase $2.2 billion of ge common stock under the share repurchase program,
to pay $5.4 billion in dividends to share owners, to invest $2.5 billion in
plant and equipment and to make $1.2 billion in acquisitions.
operating activities are the principal source of ge's cash flows. over the
past three years, operating activities have provided more than $37 billion of
cash. the principal application of this cash was distributions of approximately
$22 billion to share owners, both through payment of dividends ($13.9 billion)
and through the share repurchase program ($7.7 billion) described below. other
applications included investment in plant and equipment ($6.6 billion) and
acquisitions ($4.2 billion).
under the share repurchase program initiated in december 1994, ge has
purchased more than $17 billion of ge stock--over 950 million shares through
2000. in december 1999, ge's board of directors increased the amount authorized
from $17 billion to $22 billion. funds used for the share repurchase are
expected to be generated largely from operating cash flow.
based on past performance and current expectations, in combination with the
financial flexibility that comes with a strong balance sheet and the highest
credit ratings, management believes that ge is in a sound position to complete
the share repurchase program, to grow dividends in line with earnings, and to
continue making selective investments for long-term growth. expenditures for
plant and equipment are expected to be about $2.9 billion in 2001, principally
for productivity and growth.
gecs cash and equivalents aggregated $6.1 billion at the end of 2000, down from
$6.9 billion at year-end 1999 principally as a result of liquidation of
short-term investments, partially offset by $13.2 billion of cash acquired in
connection with the acquisition of the insurance policies and related assets of
the toho mutual life insurance company. the cash acquired with toho is shown as
cash from financing activities. paydown of the acquired toho insurance policies
($4.4 billion in 2000) appears as a usage under the caption "insurance
liabilities and reserves" and was a primary cause of the decrease in gecs cash
from operating activities in 2000.
one of the primary sources of cash for gecs is financing activities involving
the continued rollover of short-term borrowings and appropriate addition of
borrowings with a reasonable balance of maturities. over the past three years,
gecs borrowings with maturities of 90 days or less have increased by $21.5
billion. new borrowings of $135.9 billion having maturities longer than 90 days
were added during those years, while $89.9 billion of such longer-term
borrowings were retired. gecs also generated $35.1 billion from operating
activities.
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge cumulative cash flows
since 1994
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
cash flows from operating activities  $67.73   $52.31   $40.55  $30.52    $21.20
dividends paid                         25.59    20.19    15.61   11.69      8.28
shares repurchased                     18.67    16.44    14.58   10.93      7.44
================================================================================
the principal use of cash by gecs has been investing in assets to grow its
businesses. of the $109.7 billion that gecs invested over the past three years,
$34.7 billion was used for additions to financing receivables; $31.8 billion was
used to invest in new equipment, principally for lease to others; and $28.4
billion was used for acquisitions of new businesses, the largest of which were
japan leasing and the credit card operations of jc penney, both in 1999.
with the financial flexibility that comes with excellent credit ratings,
management believes that gecs should be well positioned to meet the global needs
of its customers for capital and to continue providing ge share owners with good
returns.
f-22
annual report page 54
management's discussion of selected financial data
selected financial data summarized on the following page are divided into three
sections: upper portion--consolidated data; middle portion--ge data that reflect
various conventional measurements for such enterprises; and lower portion--gecs
data that reflect key information pertinent to financial services businesses.
ge's total research and development expenditures were $2,193 million in 2000, up
9% over 1999 and 1998. in 2000, expenditures from ge's own funds were $1,867
million, an increase of 12% over 1999, reflecting continuing research and
development work related to new product, service and process technologies.
product technology efforts in 2000 included continuing development work on the
next generation of gas turbines, further advances in state-of-the-art diagnostic
imaging technologies, and development of more fuel-efficient, cost-effective
aircraft engine designs. services technologies include advances in diagnostic
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
orders backlog
(in billions)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$44.17   $32.42   $28.53  $26.44    $26.19
================================================================================
applications, including remote diagnostic capabilities related to repair and
maintenance of medical equipment, aircraft engines, power generation equipment
and locomotives. process technologies provided improved product quality and
performance and increased capacity for manufacturing engineered materials.
expenditures funded by customers (mainly the u.s. government) were $326 million
in 2000, down $24 million from 1999.
ge's total backlog of firm unfilled orders at the end of 2000 was $44.2 billion,
an increase of 36% over 1999, reflecting strong double-digit growth at power
systems, aircraft engines and medical systems. of the total, $36.7 billion
related to products, of which 71% was scheduled for delivery in 2001. services
orders, included in this reported backlog for only the succeeding 12 months,
were $7.5 billion at the end of 2000. orders constituting this backlog may be
canceled or deferred by customers, subject in certain cases to penalties. see
segment operations beginning on page 43 for further information.
regarding environmental matters, ge's operations, like operations of other
companies engaged in similar businesses, involve the use, disposal and cleanup
of substances regulated under environmental protection laws.
in 2000, ge expended about $48 million for capital projects related to the
environment. the comparable amount in 1999 was $66 million. these amounts
exclude expenditures for remediation actions, which are principally expensed and
are discussed below. capital expenditures for environmental purposes have
included pollution control devices--such as wastewater treatment plants,
groundwater monitoring devices, air strippers or separators, and
incinerators--at new and existing facilities constructed or upgraded in the
normal course of business. consistent with policies stressing environmental
[chart here]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge share price activity
(in dollars)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000     1999     1998    1997      1996
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
high                                  $60.50   $53.17   $34.65  $25.52    $17.69
low                                    41.67    31.42    23.00   15.98     11.58
close                                  47.94    51.58    34.00   24.46     16.48
================================================================================
responsibility, average annual capital expenditures other than for remediation
projects are presently expected to be about $55 million over the next two years.
this level is in line with existing levels for new or expanded programs to build
facilities or modify manufacturing processes to minimize waste and reduce
emissions.
ge also is involved in a sizable number of remediation actions to clean up
hazardous wastes as required by federal and state laws. such statutes require
that responsible parties fund remediation actions regardless of fault, legality
of original disposal or ownership of a disposal site. expenditures for site
remediation actions amounted to approximately $128 million in 2000, compared
with $114 million in 1999. it is presently expected that such remediation
actions will require average annual expenditures in the range of $90 million to
$150 million over the next two years.
f-23
annual report page 55
selected financial data
(dollar amounts in millions;                           --------------------------------------------------
per-share amounts in dollars)                              2000       1999       1998      1997      1996
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
general electric company and consolidated affiliates
revenues                                            $129,853   $111,630   $100,469   $90,840  $ 79,179
net earnings                                          12,735     10,717      9,296     8,203     7,280
dividends declared                                     5,647      4,786      4,081     3,535     3,138
earned on average share owners' equity                  27.5%      26.8%      25.7%     25.0%     24.0%
per share
earnings--diluted                                 $   1.27   $   1.07   $   0.93   $  0.82  $   0.72
earnings--basic                                       1.29       1.09       0.95      0.83      0.73
dividends declared                                    0.57       0.48 2/3   0.41 2/3  0.36      0.31 2/3
stock price range                                   60.50-     53.17-     34.65-    25.52-    17.69-
41.67      31.42      23.00     15.98     11.58
year-end closing stock price                         47.94      51.58      34.00     24.46     16.48
total assets                                            437,006    405,200    355,935   304,012   272,402
long-term borrowings                                     82,132     71,427     59,663    46,603    49,246
shares outstanding--average (in thousands)            9,897,110  9,833,478  9,806,995 9,824,075 9,922,182
share owner accounts--average                           597,000    549,000    534,000   509,000   486,000
=========================================================================================================
ge data
short-term borrowings                               $    940   $  2,245   $  3,466   $ 3,629  $  2,339
long-term borrowings                                     841        722        681       729     1,710
minority interest                                        968        823        816       569       477
share owners' equity                                  50,492     42,557     38,880    34,438    31,125
--------------------------------------------------
total capital invested                            $ 53,241   $ 46,347   $ 43,843   $39,365  $ 35,651
==================================================
return on average total capital invested                27.4%      25.8%      23.9%     23.6%     22.2%
borrowings as a percentage of total capital invested     3.3%       6.4%       9.5%    11.1%      11.4%
working capital (a)                                 $    799   $  3,922   $  5,038   $ 5,990  $  6,598
additions to property, plant and equipment             2,536      2,036      2,047     2,191     2,389
employees at year end
united states                                      131,000    124,000    125,000   128,000   123,000
other countries                                     92,000     86,000     82,000    81,000    65,000
--------------------------------------------------
total employees                                    223,000    210,000    207,000   209,000   188,000
=========================================================================================================
gecs data
revenues                                            $ 66,177   $ 55,749   $ 48,694   $39,931  $ 32,713
net earnings                                           5,192      4,443      3,796     3,256     2,817
share owner's equity                                  23,022     20,321     19,727    17,239    14,276
minority interest                                      3,968      4,391      3,459     3,113     2,530
borrowings from others                               205,371    200,025    172,200   141,263   125,621
ratio of debt to equity at ge capital                 7.53:1     8.44:1     7.86:1    7.45:1    7.84:1
total assets                                        $370,636   $345,018   $303,297   $255,408 $227,419
insurance premiums written                            16,461     13,624     11,865     9,396     8,185
employees at year end
united states (b)                                   37,000     43,000     38,000    37,000    32,000
other countries                                     53,000     57,000     48,000    30,000    19,000
--------------------------------------------------
total employees                                     90,000    100,000     86,000    67,000    51,000
=========================================================================================================
transactions between ge and gecs have been eliminated from the consolidated
information. per-share amounts and share data have been adjusted for the 3-for-1
stock split effective on april 27, 2000.
(a)  working capital is defined as the sum of receivables from the sales of
goods and services plus inventories less trade accounts payable and
progress collections.
(b)  excludes employees of montgomery ward.
================================================================================
f-24
annual report page 56
notes to consolidated financial statements
---------------------------------------------
1 summary of significant accounting policies
---------------------------------------------
consolidation. the consolidated financial statements represent the adding
together of all affiliates--companies that general electric company directly or
indirectly controls. results of associated companies--generally companies that
are 20% to 50% owned and over which general electric company, directly or
indirectly, has significant influence--are included in the financial statements
on a "one-line" basis.
financial statement presentation. financial data and related measurements are
presented in the following categories:
*  ge. this represents the adding together of all affiliates other than general
electric capital services, inc. (gecs), whose operations are presented on a
one-line basis.
*  gecs. this affiliate owns all of the common stock of general electric capital
corporation (ge capital) and ge global insurance holding corporation (ge
global insurance), the parent of employers reinsurance corporation. ge
capital, ge global insurance and their respective affiliates are consolidated
in the gecs columns and constitute its business.
*  consolidated. this represents the adding together of ge and gecs.
the effects of transactions among related companies within and between each of
the above-mentioned groups are eliminated. transactions between ge and gecs are
not material.
certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the 2000
presentation.
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect reported amounts and related disclosures. actual results could differ
from those estimates.
sales of goods and services. a sale is recorded when title passes to the
customer or when services are performed in accordance with contracts. sales
under complex contracts are recorded based on the objectively determined fair
value of each component of the contract, in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles.
gecs revenues from services (earned income). income on all loans is recognized
on the interest method. accrual of interest income is suspended at the earlier
of the time at which collection of an account becomes doubtful or the account
becomes 90 days delinquent. interest income on impaired loans is recognized
either as cash is collected or on a cost-recovery basis as conditions warrant.
financing lease income is recorded on the interest method so as to produce a
level yield on funds not yet recovered. estimated unguaranteed residual values
of leased assets are based primarily on periodic independent appraisals of the
values of leased assets remaining at expiration of the lease terms.
operating lease income is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms
of underlying leases.
origination, commitment and other nonrefundable fees related to fundings are
deferred and recorded in earned income on the interest method. commitment fees
related to loans not expected to be funded and line-of-credit fees are deferred
and recorded in earned income on a straight-line basis over the period to which
the fees relate. syndication fees are recorded in earned income at the time
related services are performed unless significant contingencies exist.
income from investment and insurance activities is discussed on page 57.
depreciation and amortization. the cost of most of ge's manufacturing plant and
equipment is depreciated using an accelerated method based primarily on a
sum-of-the-years digits formula.
the cost of gecs equipment leased to others on operating leases is amortized,
principally on a straight-line basis, to estimated residual value over the lease
term or over the estimated economic life of the equipment. depreciation of
property and equipment used by gecs is recorded on either a sum-of-the-years
digits formula or a straight-line basis over the lives of the assets.
recognition of losses on financing receivables. the allowance for losses on
small-balance receivables reflects management's best estimate of probable losses
inherent in the portfolio determined principally on the basis of historical
experience. for other receivables, principally the larger loans and leases, the
allowance for losses is determined primarily on the basis of management's best
estimate of probable losses, including specific allowances for known troubled
accounts.
all accounts or portions thereof deemed to be uncollectible or to require an
excessive collection cost are written off to the allowance for losses.
small-balance accounts generally are written off when 6 to 12 months delinquent,
although any such balance judged to be uncollectible, such as an account in
bankruptcy, is written down immediately to estimated realizable value.
large-balance accounts are reviewed at least quarterly, and those accounts with
amounts that are judged to be uncollectible are written down to estimated
realizable value.
when collateral is repossessed in satisfaction of a loan, the receivable is
written down against the allowance for losses to estimated fair value of the
asset less costs to sell, transferred to other assets and subsequently carried
at the lower of cost or estimated fair value less costs to sell. this accounting
method has been employed principally for specialized financing transactions.
f-25
annual report page 57
cash and equivalents. debt securities with original maturities of three months
or less are included in cash equivalents unless designated as available for sale
and classified as investment securities.
investment securities. investments in debt and marketable equity securities are
reported at fair value based primarily on quoted market prices or, if quoted
prices are not available, discounted expected cash flows using market rates
commensurate with credit quality and maturity of the investment. substantially
all investment securities are designated as available for sale, with unrealized
gains and losses included in share owners' equity, net of applicable taxes and
other adjustments. unrealized losses that are other than temporary are
recognized in earnings. realized gains and losses are accounted for on the
specific identification method.
inventories. all inventories are stated at the lower of cost or realizable
values. cost for virtually all of ge's u.s. inventories is determined on a
last-in, first-out (lifo) basis. cost of other ge inventories is primarily
determined on a first-in, first-out (fifo) basis.
gecs inventories consist primarily of finished products held for sale. cost
is primarily determined on a fifo basis.
intangible assets. goodwill is amortized over its estimated period of benefit on
a straight-line basis; other intangible assets are amortized on appropriate
bases over their estimated lives. no amortization period exceeds 40 years. when
an intangible asset exceeds associated expected operating cash flows, it is
considered to be impaired and is written down to fair value, which is determined
based on either discounted future cash flows or appraised values.
interest rate and currency risk management. upon adoption of statement of
financial accounting standards no. 133, accounting for derivatives and hedging
activities, on january 1, 2001, certain financial instruments and portions of
other financial instruments will be defined to be derivatives. after that date,
all derivatives will be carried at their fair values, and all changes in fair
values will affect net earnings or share owners' equity immediately.
as a matter of policy, neither ge nor gecs engages in derivatives trading,
derivatives market-making or other speculative activities.
ge and gecs use swaps primarily to optimize funding costs. to a lesser
degree, and in combination with options and limit contracts, gecs uses swaps to
stabilize cash flows from mortgage-related assets.
designated interest rate and currency swaps, forwards and limit contracts
that modify borrowings or certain assets, and forecasted transactions such as
forecasted commercial paper renewals, are accounted for on an accrual basis.
both ge and gecs require all other swaps, as well as futures, options and
currency forwards, to be designated and accounted for as hedges of specific
assets, liabilities or firm commitments; resulting payments and receipts are
recognized contemporaneously with effects of hedged transactions. a payment or
receipt arising from early termination of an effective hedge is accounted for as
an adjustment to the basis of the hedged transaction.
instruments used as hedges must be effective at reducing the risk associated
with the exposure being hedged and must be designated as a hedge at the
inception of the contract. accordingly, changes in market values of hedge
instruments must be highly correlated with changes in market values of
underlying hedged items, both at inception of the hedge and over the life of the
hedge contract.
as a matter of policy, any derivative that is either not designated as a
hedge, or is so designated but is ineffective, is marked to market and
recognized in earnings immediately.
gecs insurance accounting policies. accounting policies for gecs insurance
businesses follow.
premium income. insurance premiums are reported as earned income as follows:
*  for short-duration insurance contracts (including property and casualty,
accident and health, and financial guaranty insurance), premiums are reported
as earned income, generally on a pro-rata basis, over the terms of the
related agreements. for retrospectively rated reinsurance contracts, premium
adjustments are recorded based on estimated losses and loss expenses, taking
into consideration both case and incurred-but-not-reported reserves.
*  for traditional long-duration insurance contracts (including term and whole
life contracts and annuities payable for the life of the annuitant), premiums
are reported as earned income when due.
*  for investment contracts and universal life contracts, premiums received are
reported as liabilities, not as revenues. universal life contracts are
long-duration insurance contracts with terms that are not fixed and
guaranteed; for these contracts, revenues are recognized for assessments
against the policyholder's account, mostly for mortality, contract
initiation, administration and surrender. investment contracts are contracts
that have neither significant mortality nor significant morbidity risk,
including annuities payable for a determined period; for these contracts,
revenues are recognized on the associated investments and amounts credited to
policyholder accounts are charged to expense.
f-26
annual report page 58
deferred policy acquisition costs. costs that vary with and are primarily
related to the acquisition of new and renewal insurance and investment contracts
are deferred and amortized over the respective policy terms. for short-duration
insurance contracts, acquisition costs consist primarily of commissions,
brokerage expenses and premium taxes. for long-duration insurance contracts,
these costs consist primarily of first-year commissions in excess of recurring
renewal commissions, certain variable sales expenses and certain support costs
such as underwriting and policy issue expenses.
*  for short-duration insurance contracts, these costs are amortized pro rata
over the contract periods in which the related premiums are earned.
*  for traditional long-duration insurance contracts, these costs are amortized
over the respective contract periods in proportion to either anticipated
premium income or, in the case of limited-payment contracts, estimated
benefit payments.
*  for investment contracts and universal life contracts, these costs are
amortized on the basis of anticipated gross profits.
periodically, deferred policy acquisition costs are reviewed for recoverability;
anticipated investment income is considered in recoverability evaluations.
present value of future profits. the actuarially determined present value of
anticipated net cash flows to be realized from insurance, annuity and investment
contracts in force at the date of acquisition of life insurance enterprises is
recorded as the present value of future profits and is amortized over the
respective policy terms in a manner similar to deferred policy acquisition
costs. unamortized balances are adjusted to reflect experience and impairment,
if any.
---------------------------------------------
2 ge other income
---------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
(in millions)                                  2000          1999          1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
residual licensing and
royalty income                             $  65         $  67         $ 301
associated companies                           (111)           (1)          (32)
marketable securities and
bank deposits                                 55           105           114
customer financing                               22            17            19
other items                                     467           668           282
----------------------------------
$ 498         $ 856         $ 684
================================================================================
effective january 1, 1999, ge transferred certain licenses and intellectual
property pursuant to an agreement to sell the former rca consumer electronics
business. licensing income from these assets is included under the caption
"residual licensing and royalty income" in the previous table.
other income in 1999 included a gain of $388 million related to the
contribution of certain of nbc's media properties to nbc internet (nbci), a
publicly-traded company, in exchange for a noncontrolling interest in nbci.
assets contributed by nbc included its 100% interest in nbc.com, nbc-in.com and
videoseeker.com as well as a 10% interest in a fourth property, cnbc.com.
---------------------------------------------
3 gecs revenues from services
---------------------------------------------
------------------------------------
(in millions)                                  2000          1999          1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
time sales, loan and
other income (a)                         $22,326       $18,209        $14,682
operating lease rentals                       6,183         6,022          5,402
financing leases                              3,688         3,587          4,267
investment income                             8,479         6,243          5,617
premium and commission
income of insurance
businesses                                16,093        12,948         11,352
------------------------------------
$56,769       $47,009        $41,320
================================================================================
(a) includes gains on sales of financial assets through securitizations of $489
million in 2000, approximately the same as in 1999 and 1998.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
for insurance businesses, the effects of reinsurance on premiums written and
premium and commission income were as follows:
---------------------------------------
(in millions)                                2000           1999           1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
premiums written
direct                                   $  9,390       $  7,382       $  6,237
assumed                                     9,552          8,520          7,470
ceded                                      (2,481)        (2,278)        (1,842)
---------------------------------------
$ 16,461       $ 13,624       $ 11,865
premium and commission
income
direct                                   $  9,026       $  7,002       $  6,063
assumed                                     9,643          8,460          7,151
ceded                                      (2,576)        (2,514)        (1,862)
---------------------------------------
$ 16,093       $ 12,948       $ 11,352
================================================================================
reinsurance recoveries recognized as a reduction of insurance losses and
policyholder and annuity benefits amounted to $3,232 million, $2,648 million and
$1,594 million for the years ended december 31, 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively.
f-27
annual report page 59
---------------------------------------------
4  supplemental cost information
---------------------------------------------
total expenditures for research and development were $2,193 million, $2,017
million and $1,930 million in 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively. the
company-funded portion aggregated $1,867 million in 2000, $1,667 million in 1999
and $1,537 million in 1998.
rental expense under operating leases is shown below.
---------------------------------------
(in millions)                               2000            1999            1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge                                        $  648          $  607          $  568
gecs                                       1,176           1,067             889
================================================================================
at december 31, 2000, minimum rental commitments under noncancelable
operating leases aggregated $2,723 million and $4,726 million for ge and gecs,
respectively. amounts payable over the next five years follow.
------------------------------------------------
(in millions)                   2001       2002       2003       2004       2005
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge                              $498       $413       $334       $277       $243
gecs                             772        689        607        477        366
================================================================================
ge's selling, general and administrative expense totaled $8,392 million in
2000, $7,732 million in 1999 and $7,177 million in 1998. insignificant amounts
of interest were capitalized by ge and gecs in 2000, 1999 and 1998.
---------------------------------------------
5 retiree health and life benefits
---------------------------------------------
ge and its affiliates sponsor a number of retiree health and life insurance
benefit plans ("retiree benefit plans"). principal retiree benefit plans are
discussed below; other such plans are not significant individually or in the
aggregate.
principal retiree benefit plans generally provide health and life insurance
benefits to employees who retire under the ge pension plan (see note 6) with 10
or more years of service. retirees share in the cost of health care benefits.
benefit provisions are subject to collective bargaining. these plans cover
approximately 250,000 retirees and dependents.
the effect on operations of principal retiree benefit plans is shown in the
following table.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
effect on operations
------------------------------
(in millions)                                      2000        1999        1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
expected return on plan assets                    $(178)      $(165)      $(149)
service cost for benefits earned                    165         107          96
interest cost on benefit obligation                 402         323         319
prior service cost                                   49           8           8
net actuarial loss recognized                        40          45          39
------------------------------
total cost                                        $ 478       $ 318       $ 313
================================================================================
funding policy for retiree health benefits is generally to pay covered expenses
as they are incurred. ge funds retiree life insurance benefits at its
discretion.
changes in the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for retiree
benefit plans follow.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation (apbo)
-----------------------
(in millions)                                               2000           1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
balance at january 1                                     $ 4,926        $ 5,007
service cost for benefits earned                             165            107
interest cost on benefit obligation                          402            323
participant contributions                                     25             24
plan amendments                                              948           --
actuarial loss/(gain)                                        534            (62)
benefits paid                                               (578)          (499)
other                                                       --               26
-----------------------
balance at december 31 (a)                               $ 6,422        $ 4,926
================================================================================
(a) the apbo for the health plans was $4,688 million and $3,275 million at
year-end 2000 and 1999, respectively.
================================================================================
changes in the fair value of assets for retiree benefit plans follow.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
fair value of assets
-------------------------
(in millions)                                             2000             1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
balance at january 1                                   $ 2,369          $ 2,121
actual return on plan assets                               (85)             355
employer contributions                                     300              368
participant contributions                                   25               24
benefits paid                                             (578)            (499)
-------------------------
balance at december 31                                 $ 2,031          $ 2,369
================================================================================
plan assets are held in trust and consist mainly of common stock and
fixed-income investments. ge common stock represented 6.9% and 6.2% of trust
assets at year-end 2000 and 1999, respectively.
ge recorded assets and liabilities for retiree benefit plans are as follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
retiree benefit liability/asset
-------------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                 2000             1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation                                  $ 6,422          $ 4,926
deduct unrecognized balances
prior service cost                                     (999)            (100)
net actuarial loss                                     (818)             (61)
fair value of plan assets                               (2,031)          (2,369)
retiree life plans asset                                     8               99
-------------------------
retiree health plans liability                         $ 2,582          $ 2,495
================================================================================
actuarial assumptions used to determine costs and benefit obligations for
principal retiree benefit plans follow.
f-28
annual report page 60
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
actuarial assumptions
----------------------------------
december 31                                  2000           1999          1998
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
discount rate                                 7.5%          7.75%         6.75%
compensation increases                         5.0           5.0           5.0
health care cost trend (a)                    10.0           9.0           7.8
return on assets for the year                  9.5           9.5           9.5
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) for 2000, gradually declining to 5% after 2009.
===============================================================================
increasing or decreasing the health care cost trend rates by one percentage
point would have had an insignificant effect on the december 31, 2000,
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation and the annual cost of retiree
health plans.
experience gains and losses, as well as the effects of changes in actuarial
assumptions and plan provisions, are amortized over the average future service
period of employees.
---------------------------------------------
6 pension benefits
---------------------------------------------
ge and its affiliates sponsor a number of pension plans. principal pension plans
are discussed below; other pension plans are not significant individually or in
the aggregate.
principal pension plans are the ge pension plan and the ge supplementary pension
plan.
the ge pension plan provides benefits to certain u.s. employees based on the
greater of a formula recognizing career earnings or a formula recognizing length
of service and final average earnings. benefit provisions are subject to
collective bargaining. the ge pension plan covers approximately 485,000
participants, including 134,000 employees, 156,000 former employees with vested
rights to future benefits, and 195,000 retirees and beneficiaries receiving
benefits.
the ge supplementary pension plan is a pay-as-you-go plan providing
supplementary retirement benefits primarily to higher-level, longer-service u.s.
employees.
details of the effect on operations of principal pension plans, and the total
effect on cost of postemployment benefit plans, follow.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
effect on operations
--------------------------------
(in millions)                                      2000        1999        1998
--------------------------------
expected return on plan assets                  $ 3,754     $ 3,407     $ 3,024
service cost for benefits earned (a)               (780)       (693)       (625)
interest cost on benefit obligation              (1,966)     (1,804)     (1,749)
prior service cost                                 (237)       (151)       (153)
sfas no. 87 transition gain                         154         154         154
net actuarial gain recognized                       819         467         365
--------------------------------
cost reduction from pension                       1,744       1,380       1,016
--------------------------------
retiree benefit plans (note 5)                     (478)       (318)       (313)
total cost reductions from
postemployment benefit plans                 $ 1,266     $ 1,062     $   703
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) net of participant contributions.
================================================================================
funding policy for the ge pension plan is to contribute amounts sufficient to
meet minimum funding requirements as set forth in employee benefit and tax laws
plus such additional amounts as ge may determine to be appropriate. ge has not
made contributions to the ge pension plan since 1987 because the fully funded
status of the plan precludes a current tax deduction and because any ge
contribution would require payment of excise taxes.
changes in the projected benefit obligation for principal pension plans
follow.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
projected benefit obligation
-------------------------
(in millions)                                              2000            1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
balance at january 1                                   $ 25,522        $ 27,572
service cost for benefits earned (a)                        780             693
interest cost on benefit obligation                       1,966           1,804
participant contributions                                   140             122
plan amendments                                           1,155            --
actuarial loss/(gain) (b)                                   970          (2,790)
benefits paid                                            (1,998)         (1,879)
-------------------------
balance at december 31                                 $ 28,535        $ 25,522
================================================================================
(a) net of participant contributions.
(b) principally associated with discount rate changes.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
changes in the fair value of assets for principal pension plans follow.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
fair value of assets
---------------------------
(in millions)                                            2000              1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
balance at january 1                                 $ 50,243          $ 43,447
actual return on plan assets                            1,287             8,472
employer contributions                                     85                81
participant contributions                                 140               122
benefits paid                                          (1,998)           (1,879)
---------------------------
balance at december 31                               $ 49,757          $ 50,243
================================================================================
plan assets are held in trust and consist mainly of common stock and
fixed-income investments. ge common stock represented 9.2% and 9.8% of trust
assets at year-end 2000 and 1999, respectively.
ge recorded assets and liabilities for principal pension plans are as
follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
prepaid pension asset
---------------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                  2000            1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
fair value of plan assets                              $ 49,757        $ 50,243
add (deduct) unrecognized balances
prior service cost                                     1,617             699
sfas no. 87 transition gain                             --              (154)
net actuarial gain                                   (12,594)        (16,850)
projected benefit obligation                            (28,535)        (25,522)
pension liability                                         1,132             981
---------------------------
prepaid pension asset                                  $ 11,377        $  9,397
================================================================================
f-29
annual report page 61
actuarial assumptions used to determine costs and benefit obligations for
principal pension plans follow.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
actuarial assumptions
----------------------------------
december 31                                   2000           1999          1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
discount rate                                  7.5%          7.75%         6.75%
compensation increases                         5.0            5.0           5.0
return on assets for the year                  9.5            9.5           9.5
================================================================================
experience gains and losses, as well as the effects of changes in actuarial
assumptions and plan provisions, are amortized over the average future service
period of employees.
---------------------------------------------
7 provision for income taxes
---------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(in millions)                                   2000          1999          1998
----------------------------------
ge
current tax expense                           $3,331        $2,555        $2,227
deferred tax expense from
temporary differences                         468           652           590
----------------------------------
3,799         3,207         2,817
----------------------------------
gecs
current tax expense                            1,229           806           815
deferred tax expense from
temporary differences                         683           847           549
----------------------------------
1,912         1,653         1,364
----------------------------------
consolidated
current tax expense                            4,560         3,361         3,042
deferred tax expense from
temporary differences                       1,151         1,499         1,139
----------------------------------
$5,711        $4,860        $4,181
================================================================================
ge includes gecs in filing a consolidated u.s. federal income tax return. the
gecs provision for current tax expense includes its effect on the consolidated
return.
consolidated current tax expense includes amounts applicable to u.s. federal
income taxes of $3,005 million, $1,632 million and $1,459 million in 2000, 1999
and 1998, respectively, and amounts applicable to non-u.s. jurisdictions of
$1,246 million, $1,399 million and $1,335 million in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively. consolidated deferred tax expense related to u.s. federal income
taxes was $1,095 million, $1,475 million and $971 million in 2000, 1999 and
1998, respectively.
deferred income tax balances reflect the impact of temporary differences
between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and
are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually
paid or recovered. see note 22 for details.
except for certain earnings that ge intends to reinvest indefinitely,
provision has been made for the estimated u.s. federal income tax liabilities
applicable to undistributed earnings of affiliates and associated companies. it
is not practicable to determine the u.s. federal income tax liability, if any,
that would be payable if such earnings were not reinvested indefinitely.
consolidated u.s. income before taxes was $12.9 billion in 2000, $11.3
billion in 1999 and $9.7 billion in 1998. the corresponding amounts for
non-u.s.-based operations were $5.5 billion in 2000, $4.3 billion in 1999 and
$3.8 billion in 1998.
a reconciliation of the u.s. federal statutory tax rate to the actual tax
rate is provided below.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
reconciliation of u.s. federal                 consolidated                     ge                        gecs
statutory tax rate to actual rate          ----------------------    -----------------------     ----------------------
2000     1999     1998     2000     1999     1998     2000     1999     1998
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
statutory u.s. federal income tax rate     35.0%    35.0%    35.0%    35.0%    35.0%    35.0%    35.0%    35.0%    35.0%
increase (reduction) in rate
resulting from:
inclusion of after-tax earnings
of gecs in before-tax
earnings of ge                         --       --       --     (11.0)   (11.2)   (11.0)     --       --       --
amortization of goodwill                 1.1      1.1      1.1      0.7      0.8      0.7      1.1      1.0      1.0
tax-exempt income                       (1.5)    (1.7)    (1.8)     --       --       --      (4.0)    (4.4)    (4.7)
tax on international activities
(including foreign sales
corporation benefits)                 (4.9)    (4.2)    (3.0)    (3.0)    (2.6)    (2.7)    (5.8)    (4.8)    (1.3)
all other--net                           1.3      1.0     (0.3)     1.3      1.0      1.3      0.6      0.3     (3.6)
----------------------    -----------------------     ----------------------
(4.0)    (3.8)    (4.0)   (12.0)   (12.0)   (11.7)    (8.1)    (7.9)    (8.6)
----------------------    -----------------------     ----------------------
actual income tax rate                     31.0%    31.2%    31.0%    23.0%    23.0%    23.3%    26.9%    27.1%    26.4%
=======================================================================================================================
f-30
annual report page 62
---------------------------------------------
8 earnings per share information
---------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000                1999                 1998
-----------------   -----------------   -----------------
(in millions; per-share amounts in dollars)        diluted     basic   diluted     basic   diluted     basic
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
consolidated operations
net earnings available to common share owners      $12,735   $12,735   $10,717   $10,717   $ 9,296   $ 9,296
dividend equivalents--net of tax                        11      --           8      --          13      --
-----------------   -----------------   -----------------
net earnings available for per-share calculation   $12,746   $12,735   $10,725   $10,717   $ 9,309   $ 9,296
-----------------   -----------------   -----------------
average equivalent shares
shares of ge common stock outstanding                9,897     9,897     9,833     9,833     9,807     9,807
employee compensation-related shares,
including stock options                             160      --         163      --         183      --
-----------------   -----------------   -----------------
total average equivalent shares                     10,057     9,897     9,996     9,833     9,990     9,807
-----------------   -----------------   -----------------
net earnings per share                             $  1.27   $  1.29   $  1.07   $  1.09   $  0.93   $  0.95
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
share data and per-share amounts have been adjusted for the 3-for-1 stock split
effective on april 27, 2000.
============================================================================================================
---------------------------------------------
9 proposed acquisition
---------------------------------------------
on october 22, 2000, the board of directors of general electric company approved
a definitive agreement by which ge will acquire honeywell international inc.
(honeywell) through a tax-free merger of honeywell with a wholly-owned
subsidiary of ge.
under the terms of the agreement, honeywell share owners will receive 1.055
shares of ge common stock in exchange for each share of honeywell. ge expects to
use approximately 850 million shares to effect the transaction.
completion of the merger is subject to certain remaining conditions, which
include review or approval of the transaction by various governmental
authorities. the merger is expected to be accounted for as a pooling of
interests. honeywell share owners approved the merger in january, and ge and
honeywell are working with regulatory agencies to complete the required reviews
so that the transaction can close as early as possible in 2001.
---------------------------------------------
10 investment securities
---------------------------------------------
2000                                         1999
--------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------
gross        gross                            gross      gross
amortized unrealized   unrealized  estimated  amortized unrealized  unrealized   estimated
december 31 (in millions)                   cost      gains       losses fair value       cost      gains      losses  fair value
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge securities
equity                                  $    316   $    266    $   (146)   $    436   $    149   $    547    $     (1)   $    695
debt--u.s. corporate                         364        209        --           573        430        148        --           578
--------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------
680        475        (146)      1,009        579        695          (1)      1,273
--------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------
gecs securities
debt
u.s. corporate                         39,078        459      (1,282)     38,255     31,512        175      (1,759)     29,928
state and municipal                    13,272        499        (139)     13,632     12,558        141        (452)     12,247
mortgage-backed                        13,683        323        (160)     13,846     12,799        173        (376)     12,596
corporate--non-u.s                     12,640        374        (168)     12,846      9,923        228        (248)      9,903
government--non-u.s                     5,059        104        (108)      5,055      4,675        114         (77)      4,712
u.s. government and federal agency      2,106         15         (42)      2,079      2,481          5        (171)      2,315
equity                                     4,392        703        (478)      4,617      6,420      2,641        (277)      8,784
--------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------
90,230      2,477      (2,377)     90,330     80,368      3,477      (3,360)     80,485
--------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------
consolidated totals                     $ 90,910   $  2,952    $ (2,523)   $ 91,339   $ 80,947   $  4,172    $ (3,361)   $ 81,758
=================================================================================================================================
a substantial portion of mortgage-backed securities shown in the table above are collateralized by u.s. residential
mortgages.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
f-31
annual report page 63
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
contractual maturities of gecs debt securities
(excluding mortgage-backed securities)
-----------------------------
amortized          estimated
(in millions)                                            cost         fair value
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
due in
2001                                               $ 5,002            $ 5,028
2002-2005                                           14,479             14,717
2006-2010                                           17,765             17,789
2011 and later                                      34,909             34,333
================================================================================
it is expected that actual maturities will differ from contractual maturities
because borrowers have the right to call or prepay certain obligations.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
proceeds from sales of investment securities by ge and gecs were $24,748
million in 2000 ($18,521 million in 1999 and $16,707 million in 1998). gross
realized gains were $3,589 million in 2000, including $1,366 million from sale
of gecs investment in common stock of paine webber group, inc. gross realized
gains were $1,430 million in 1999 and $1,126 million in 1998. gross realized
losses were $790 million in 2000 ($484 million in 1999 and $308 million in
1998).
---------------------------------------------
11 ge current receivables
---------------------------------------------
--------------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                 2000             1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
aircraft engines                                      $  1,840         $  1,601
appliances                                                 327              285
industrial products and systems                          1,274            1,163
nbc                                                        384              329
plastics                                                 1,098              953
power systems                                            3,668            3,359
technical products and services                          1,128            1,036
corporate items and eliminations                           358              337
--------------------------
10,077            9,063
less allowance for losses                                 (350)            (320)
--------------------------
$  9,727         $  8,743
================================================================================
receivables balances at december 31, 2000 and 1999, before allowance for
losses, included $6,323 million and $5,832 million, respectively, from sales of
goods and services to customers, and $233 million and $296 million,
respectively, from transactions with associated companies.
current receivables of $227 million at year-end 2000 and
$203 million at year-end 1999 arose from sales, principally of aircraft engine
goods and services, on open account to various agencies of the u.s. government,
which is ge's largest single customer. about 3%, 4% and 4% of ge's sales of
goods and services were to the u.s. government in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively.
---------------------------------------------
12 inventories
---------------------------------------------
------------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                  2000            1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
raw materials and work in process                       $ 4,134         $ 3,438
finished goods                                            3,614           3,054
unbilled shipments                                          243             233
------------------------
7,991           6,725
less revaluation to lifo                                   (845)           (927)
------------------------
7,146           5,798
gecs
finished goods (a)                                          666           1,209
------------------------
$ 7,812         $ 7,007
================================================================================
(a) includes $773 million of retail inventory at year-end 1999 related to wards,
which was deconsolidated in 2000.
================================================================================
lifo revaluations decreased $82 million in 2000, compared with decreases of
$84 million in 1999 and $87 million in 1998. included in these changes were
decreases of $6 million, $4 million and $29 million in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively, that resulted from lower lifo inventory levels. there were net
cost decreases in each of the last three years. as of december 31, 2000, ge is
obligated to acquire certain raw materials at market prices through the year
2008 under various take-or-pay or similar arrangements. annual minimum
commitments under these arrangements are insignificant.
f-32
annual report page 64
---------------------------------------------
13 gecs financing receivables
(investments in time sales, loans
and financing leases)
---------------------------------------------
----------------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                2000              1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
time sales and loans
consumer services                                   $  43,954         $  44,784
specialized financing                                  28,497            24,745
mid-market financing                                   21,506            18,422
equipment management                                    1,385               978
specialty insurance                                        90                28
other                                                     838             1,183
----------------------------
time sales and loans                                   96,270            90,140
----------------------------
investment in financing leases
direct financing leases                                46,186            43,738
leveraged leases                                        4,877             4,045
----------------------------
investment in financing leases                         51,063            47,783
----------------------------
147,333           137,923
less allowance for losses                              (4,034)           (3,708)
----------------------------
$ 143,299         $ 134,215
================================================================================
time sales and loans represents transactions in a variety of forms, including
time sales, revolving charge and credit, mortgages, installment loans,
intermediate-term loans and revolving loans secured by business assets. the
portfolio includes time sales and loans carried at the principal amount on which
finance charges are billed periodically, and time sales and loans carried at
gross book value, which includes finance charges. at year-end 2000 and 1999,
commercial real estate loans and leases of $21,329 million and $15,782 million,
respectively, were included in either financing receivables or gecs insurance
receivables. note 18 contains information on airline loans and leases.
investment in financing leases consists of direct financing and leveraged
leases of aircraft, railroad rolling stock, autos, other transportation
equipment, data processing equipment and medical equipment, as well as other
manufacturing, power generation, commercial real estate, and commercial
equipment and facilities.
as the sole owner of assets under direct financing leases and as the equity
participant in leveraged leases, gecs is taxed on total lease payments received
and is entitled to tax deductions based on the cost of leased assets and tax
deductions for interest paid to third-party participants. gecs is generally
entitled to any residual value of leased assets.
investment in direct financing and leveraged leases represents net unpaid
rentals and estimated unguaranteed residual values of leased equipment, less
related deferred income. gecs has no general obligation for principal and
interest on notes and other instruments representing third-party participation
related to leveraged leases; such notes and other instruments have not been
included in liabilities but have been offset against the related rentals
receivable. the gecs share of rentals receivable on leveraged leases is
subordinate to the share of other participants who also have security interests
in the leased equipment.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
net investment in financing leases
total                   direct
financing leases        financing leases         leveraged leases
--------------------    --------------------    --------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                         2000        1999        2000        1999        2000        1999
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
total minimum lease payments receivable                       $ 74,960    $ 68,158    $ 50,556    $ 47,069    $ 24,404    $ 21,089
less principal and interest on third-party nonrecourse debt    (19,773)    (17,184)       --          --       (19,773)    (17,184)
--------------------    --------------------    --------------------
net rentals receivable                                       55,187      50,974      50,556      47,069       4,631       3,905
estimated unguaranteed residual value of leased assets           7,314       7,157       4,602       4,945       2,712       2,212
less deferred income                                           (11,438)    (10,348)     (8,972)     (8,276)     (2,466)     (2,072)
--------------------    --------------------    --------------------
investment in financing leases (as shown above)                 51,063      47,783      46,186      43,738       4,877       4,045
less amounts to arrive at net investment
allowance for losses                                           (646)       (581)       (558)       (509)        (88)        (72)
deferred taxes                                               (8,408)     (8,593)     (4,496)     (5,087)     (3,912)     (3,506)
--------------------    --------------------    --------------------
net investment in financing leases                            $ 42,009    $ 38,609    $ 41,132    $ 38,142    $    877    $    467
==================================================================================================================================
f-33
annual report page 65
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
contractual maturities                      ------------------------------------
total time sales         net rentals
(in millions)                                  and loans (a)      receivable (a)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
due in
2001                                             $28,870             $16,620
2002                                              21,368              11,885
2003                                              18,140               8,253
2004                                               7,439               5,055
2005                                               5,611               3,173
2006 and later                                    14,842              10,201
------------------------------------
total                                                $96,270             $55,187
================================================================================
(a) experience has shown that a substantial portion of receivables will be paid
prior to contractual maturity, and these amounts should not be regarded as
forecasts of future cash flows.
================================================================================
nonearning consumer receivables were $1,139 million and $930 million at
december 31, 2000 and 1999, respectively, a substantial amount of which were
private-label credit card loans. nonearning and reduced-earning receivables
other than consumer receivables were $949 million and $932 million at year-end
2000 and 1999, respectively.
"impaired" loans are defined by generally accepted accounting principles as
loans for which it is probable that the lender will be unable to collect all
amounts due according to original contractual terms of the loan agreement. that
definition excludes, among other things, leases or large groups of
smaller-balance homogenous loans and therefore applies principally to commercial
loans held by gecs. an analysis of impaired loans follows.
----------------
december 31 (in millions)                                       2000        1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
loans requiring allowance for losses                            $475        $631
loans expected to be fully recoverable                           384         219
----------------
$859        $850
================
allowance for losses                                            $166        $179
average investment during year                                   801         610
interest income earned while impaired (a)                         20          27
================================================================================
(a) principally on the cash basis
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------
14 gecs allowance for losses on financing
receivables
---------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(in millions)                                    2000         1999         1998
------------------------------------
balance at january 1                          $ 3,708      $ 3,223      $ 2,745
provisions charged to operations                2,045        1,671        1,603
net transfers primarily related
to acquisitions and sales                      22          271          386
amounts written off--net                       (1,741)      (1,457)      (1,511)
------------------------------------
balance at december 31                        $ 4,034      $ 3,708      $ 3,223
================================================================================
---------------------------------------------
15 gecs insurance receivables
---------------------------------------------
at year-end 2000 and 1999, this account included reinsurance recoverables of
$8,240 million and $8,138 million and receivables at insurance affiliates of
$15,562 million and $10,831 million, respectively. receivables at insurance
affiliates include premium receivables, investments in whole real estate and
other loans and funds on deposit with reinsurers.
---------------------------------------------
16 property, plant and equipment (including
equipment leased to others)
---------------------------------------------
----------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                    2000           1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
original cost
ge
land and improvements                                  $   544        $   526
buildings, structures and related
equipment                                              6,982          6,674
machinery and equipment                                 20,792         20,849
leasehold costs and manufacturing
plant under construction                               1,871          2,150
----------------------
30,189         30,199
----------------------
gecs
buildings and equipment                                  5,753          7,163
equipment leased to others
aircraft                                              12,888         10,591
vehicles                                               9,872         10,942
railroad rolling stock                                 3,459          3,323
marine shipping containers                             2,196          2,309
other                                                  3,633          3,832
----------------------
37,801         38,160
----------------------
$67,990        $68,359
======================
accumulated depreciation
and amortization
ge                                                     $17,990        $17,818
gecs
buildings and equipment                                2,084          2,127
equipment leased to others                             7,901          7,392
----------------------
$27,975        $27,337
================================================================================
amortization of gecs equipment leased to others was $2,620 million, $2,673
million and $2,185 million in 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively. noncancelable
future rentals due from customers for equipment on operating leases at year-end
2000 totaled $16,034 million and are due as follows: $4,017 million in 2001;
$3,177 million in 2002; $2,407 million in 2003; $1,707 million in 2004; $1,194
million in 2005; and $3,532 million thereafter.
f-34
annual report page 66
---------------------------------------------
17 intangible assets
---------------------------------------------
---------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                     2000          1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
goodwill                                                   $11,962       $10,805
other intangibles                                              462           457
---------------------
12,424        11,262
---------------------
gecs
goodwill                                                    11,550        12,301
present value of future profits (pvfp)                       2,780         1,812
other intangibles                                              687           635
---------------------
15,017        14,748
---------------------
$27,441       $26,010
================================================================================
ge intangible assets are net of accumulated amortization of $3,413 million in
2000 and $2,891 million in 1999. gecs intangible assets are net of accumulated
amortization of $5,815 million in 2000 and $4,233 million in 1999.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
the amount of goodwill amortization included in net earnings (net of income
taxes) in 2000, 1999 and 1998 was $439 million, $395 million and $291 million
for ge and $620 million, $512 million and $408 million for gecs, respectively.
pvfp amortization, which is on an accelerated basis and net of interest, is
projected to range from 17% to 7% of the year-end 2000 unamortized balance for
each of the next five years.
---------------------------------------------
18 all other assets
---------------------------------------------
-------------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                  2000            1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
investments
associated companies (a)                            $  2,670        $  2,678
other                                                    954             741
-------------------------
prepaid pension asset                                    11,377           9,397
long-term receivables, including notes                    1,987           2,024
prepaid broadcasting rights                                 967           1,078
other                                                     6,073           4,887
-------------------------
24,028          20,805
-------------------------
gecs
investments
assets acquired for resale                             1,394           3,406
associated companies (a)                              12,785          11,298
real estate ventures                                   6,496           4,397
other                                                  5,298           4,424
-------------------------
25,973          23,525
separate accounts                                        11,705          10,335
servicing assets (b)                                      1,449           1,707
deferred insurance acquisition costs                      5,815           4,682
other                                                     5,424           4,445
-------------------------
50,366          44,694
-------------------------
eliminations                                               (507)           (518)
-------------------------
$ 73,887        $ 64,981
================================================================================
(a) includes advances.
(b) associated primarily with serviced residential mortgage loans amounting to
$81 billion and $86 billion at december 31, 2000 and 1999, respectively.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
in line with industry practice, sales of commercial jet aircraft engines
often involve long-term customer financing commitments. in making such
commitments, it is ge's general practice to require that it have or be able to
establish a secured position in the aircraft being financed. under such airline
financing programs, ge had issued loans and guarantees (principally guarantees)
amounting to $1,160 million at year-end 2000 and $1,453 million at year-end
1999; and it had entered into commitments totaling $1,476 million and $1,843
million at year-end 2000 and 1999, respectively, to provide financial assistance
on future aircraft engine sales. estimated fair values of the aircraft securing
these receivables and associated guarantees exceeded the related account
balances and guaranteed amounts at december 31, 2000. gecs acts as a lender and
lessor to the commercial airline industry. at december 31, 2000 and 1999, the
balance of such gecs loans, leases and equipment leased to others was $15.3
billion and $11.8 billion, respectively. in addition, at december 31, 2000, gecs
had issued financial guarantees and funding commitments of $601 million ($59
million at year-end 1999) and had placed multi-year orders for various boeing
and airbus aircraft with list prices of approximately $22.9 billion ($9.9
billion at year-end 1999).
at year-end 2000, the national broadcasting company had $7,631 million of
commitments to acquire broadcast material and the rights to broadcast television
programs, including u.s. television rights to future olympic games, and
commitments under long-term television station affiliation agreements that
require payments through the year 2010.
in connection with numerous projects, primarily power generation bids and
contracts, ge had issued various bid and performance bonds and guarantees
totaling $4,599 million at year-end 2000 and $3,794 million at year-end 1999.
separate accounts represent investments controlled by policyholders and are
associated with identical amounts reported as insurance liabilities in note 20.
f-35
annual report page 67
---------------------------------------------
19 borrowings
---------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
short-term borrowings
------------------------------------------------
2000                1999
-----------------------------------------------------      ---------------------
average                   average
december 31 (in millions)         amount     rate (a)       amount     rate (a)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
commercial paper
u.s.                         $     --           --%    $    521         6.54%
non-u.s.                          172         5.77          396         5.02
payable to banks,
principally non-u.s.              527        11.30          629        10.18
current portion of
long-term debt                     71         7.90          123         7.27
other                                170                       576
------------------------------------------------
940                     2,245
------------------------------------------------
gecs
commercial paper
u.s                            77,525         6.67       84,702         6.07
non-u.s                        16,965         5.46       11,909         4.19
current portion of
long-term debt                 19,283         5.95       22,902         5.59
other                             10,219                     9,746
------------------------------------------------
123,992                   129,259
------------------------------------------------
eliminations                      (5,752)                   (1,158)
------------------------------------------------
$119,180                  $130,346
================================================================================
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
long-term borrowings
---------------------     ----------------------
average
december 31 (in millions)       rate (a)  maturities         2000         1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
industrial development/
pollution control bonds          4.65%   2003-2027     $    334      $   328
payable to banks,
principally non-u.s.             6.07    2002-2006          255          156
other (b)                                                      252          238
----------------------
841          722
----------------------
gecs
senior notes                        5.59    2002-2055       80,383       69,770
subordinated notes (c)              7.88    2006-2035          996          996
----------------------
81,379       70,766
----------------------
eliminations                                                   (88)         (61)
----------------------
$ 82,132      $71,427
================================================================================
(a)  based on year-end balances and local currency interest rates, including the
effects of interest rate and currency swaps, if any, directly associated
with the original debt issuance.
(b)  a variety of obligations having various interest rates and maturities,
including certain borrowings by parent operating components and affiliates.
(c)  guaranteed by ge.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
borrowings of ge and gecs are addressed at right from two
perspectives--liquidity and interest rate risk management. additional
information about borrowings and associated swaps can be found in note 30.
liquidity requirements of ge and gecs are principally met through the credit
markets. maturities of long-term borrowings (including the current portion)
during the next five years follow.
---------------------------------------------------
(in millions)                   2001       2002       2003       2004       2005
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge                           $    71    $    92    $    20    $   211    $    15
gecs                          19,283     20,089     16,231     11,330      7,086
================================================================================
committed credit lines of $4.2 billion had been extended to ge by 24 banks at
year-end 2000. substantially all of ge's credit lines are available to gecs and
its affiliates in addition to their own credit lines.
at year-end 2000, gecs and its affiliates held committed lines of credit
aggregating $28.1 billion, including $12.2 billion of revolving credit
agreements pursuant to which it has the right to borrow funds for periods
exceeding one year. amounts drawn by gecs under these lines at december 31,
2000, were not significant. both ge and gecs compensate certain banks for credit
facilities in the form of fees, which were insignificant in each of the past
three years.
interest rate risk is managed by gecs in light of the anticipated behavior,
including prepayment behavior, of assets in which debt proceeds are invested. a
variety of instruments, including interest rate and currency swaps and currency
forwards, are employed to achieve management's interest rate objectives.
effective interest rates are lower under these "synthetic" positions than could
have been achieved by issuing debt directly.
the following table shows gecs borrowing positions considering the effects of
swaps.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gecs effective borrowings (including swaps)
-----------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                    2000           1999
-----------------------
short-term                                               $ 80,162       $ 74,347
=======================
long-term (including current portion)
fixed rate (a)                                        $ 98,905       $ 90,361
floating rate                                           26,304         35,317
-----------------------
total long-term                                          $125,209       $125,678
================================================================================
(a)  includes the notional amount of long-term interest rate swaps that
effectively convert the floating-rate nature of short-term borrowings to
fixed rates of interest.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
at december 31, 2000, swap maturities ranged from 2001 to 2048, and average
interest rates for fixed-rate borrowings (including "synthetic" fixed-rate
borrowings) were 5.92% (5.63% at year-end 1999).
f-36
annual report page 68
---------------------------------------------
20 gecs insurance liabilities, reserves and
annuity benefits
---------------------------------------------
-----------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                    2000           1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
investment contracts and universal
life benefits                                         $ 33,232       $ 30,448
life insurance benefits (a)                                32,288         18,460
unpaid claims and claims adjustment
expenses (b)                                            22,886         21,473
unearned premiums                                           6,039          6,060
separate accounts (see note 18)                            11,705         10,335
-----------------------
$106,150       $ 86,776
================================================================================
(a)  life insurance benefits are accounted for mainly by a net-level-premium
method using estimated yields generally ranging from 2% to 9% in 2000 and
from 5% to 9% in 1999.
(b)  principally property and casualty reserves; includes amounts for both
reported and incurred-but-not-reported claims, reduced by anticipated
salvage and subrogation recoveries. estimates of liabilities are reviewed
and updated continually, with changes in estimated losses reflected in
operations.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
when gecs cedes insurance to third parties, it is not relieved of its primary
obligation to policyholders. losses on ceded risks give rise to claims for
recovery; allowances are established for such receivables from reinsurers.
the insurance liability for unpaid claims and claims adjustment expenses
related to policies that may cover environmental and asbestos exposures is based
on known facts and an assessment of applicable law and coverage litigation.
liabilities are recognized for both known and unasserted claims (including the
cost of related litigation) when sufficient information has been developed to
indicate that a claim has been incurred and a range of potential losses can be
reasonably estimated. developed case law and adequate claim history do not exist
for certain claims principally due to significant uncertainties as to both the
level of ultimate losses that will occur and what portion, if any, will be
deemed to be insured amounts.
a summary of activity affecting unpaid claims and claims adjustment expenses
follows.
------------------------------------
(in millions)                                  2000          1999          1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
balance at january 1--gross                $ 21,473      $ 19,611      $ 14,654
less reinsurance recoverables                (4,832)       (3,483)       (2,246)
------------------------------------
balance at january 1--net                    16,641        16,128        12,408
claims and expenses incurred
current year                               9,718         6,917         6,330
prior years                                  607           248          (162)
claims and expenses paid
current year                              (3,704)       (2,508)       (2,400)
prior years                               (6,572)       (5,162)       (3,692)
claim reserves related to
acquired companies                           488           929         3,476
other                                           231            89           168
------------------------------------
balance at december 31--net                  17,409        16,641        16,128
add reinsurance recoverables                  5,477         4,832         3,483
------------------------------------
balance at december 31--gross              $ 22,886      $ 21,473      $ 19,611
================================================================================
prior-year claims and expenses incurred in the preceding table resulted
principally from settling claims established in earlier accident years for
amounts that differed from expectations.
financial guarantees and credit life risk of insurance affiliates are
summarized below.
--------------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                  2000            1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
guarantees, principally on municipal
bonds and structured finance issues                $ 194,061       $ 177,840
mortgage insurance risk in force                         68,112          59,798
credit life insurance risk in force                      19,910          26,427
less reinsurance                                        (42,143)        (37,992)
--------------------------
$ 239,940       $ 226,073
================================================================================
---------------------------------------------
21 ge all other liabilities
---------------------------------------------
this caption includes noncurrent compensation and benefit accruals at year-end
2000 and 1999 of $6,268 million and $5,839 million, respectively. also included
are amounts for deferred incentive compensation, deferred income, product
warranties and a variety of sundry items.
ge is involved in numerous remediation actions to clean up hazardous wastes
as required by federal and state laws. liabilities for remediation costs at each
site are based on management's best estimate of undiscounted future costs,
excluding possible insurance recoveries. when there appears to be a range of
possible costs with equal likelihood, liabilities are based on the lower end of
such range. uncertainties about the status of laws, regulations, technology and
information related to individual sites make it difficult to develop a
meaningful estimate of the reasonably possible aggregate environmental
remediation exposure. however, even in the unlikely event that remediation costs
amounted to the high end of the range of costs for each site, the resulting
additional liability would not be material to ge's financial position, results
of operations or liquidity.
---------------------------------------------
22 deferred income taxes
---------------------------------------------
aggregate deferred income tax amounts are summarized below.
-----------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                   2000            1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
assets
ge                                                       $ 6,131         $ 5,808
gecs                                                       7,309           5,528
-----------------------
13,440          11,336
-----------------------
liabilities
ge                                                         6,583           6,091
gecs                                                      15,547          14,483
-----------------------
22,130          20,574
-----------------------
net deferred income tax liability                        $ 8,690         $ 9,238
================================================================================
f-37
annual report page 69
principal components of the net deferred income tax balances for ge and gecs
are as follows:
----------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                   2000           1999
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
provisions for expenses (a)                              $(4,392)       $(4,203)
retiree insurance plans                                     (904)          (839)
prepaid pension asset                                      3,982          3,289
depreciation                                                 944            922
other--net                                                   822          1,114
----------------------
452            283
----------------------
gecs
financing leases                                           8,408          8,593
operating leases                                           3,301          2,840
allowance for losses                                      (1,684)        (1,379)
insurance reserves                                        (1,270)        (1,052)
amt credit carryforwards                                    (671)        (1,185)
other--net                                                   154          1,138
----------------------
8,238          8,955
----------------------
net deferred income tax liability                        $ 8,690        $ 9,238
===============================================================================
(a)  represents the tax effects of temporary differences related to expense
accruals for a wide variety of items, such as employee compensation and
benefits, interest on tax deficiencies, product warranties and other
provisions for sundry losses and expenses that are not currently
deductible.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------
23 gecs minority interest in equity of
consolidated affiliates
---------------------------------------------
minority interest in equity of consolidated gecs affiliates includes preferred
stock issued by ge capital and by affiliates of ge capital. the preferred stock
pays cumulative dividends at variable rates. value of the preferred shares is
summarized below.
-----------------------
december 31 (in millions)                                  2000             1999
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge capital                                               $2,600           $2,600
ge capital affiliates                                     1,066            1,421
================================================================================
dividend rates in local currency on the preferred stock ranged from 4.15% to
6.82% during 2000 and from 0.6% to 6.1% during 1999.
---------------------------------------------
24 restricted net assets of gecs affiliates
---------------------------------------------
certain gecs consolidated affiliates are restricted from remitting funds to gecs
in the form of dividends or loans by a variety of regulations, the purpose of
which is to protect affected insurance policyholders, depositors or investors.
at year-end 2000, net assets of regulated gecs affiliates amounted to $32.3
billion, of which $26.8 billion was restricted.
at december 31, 2000 and 1999, the aggregate statutory capital and surplus of
the insurance businesses totaled $16.2 billion and $14.5 billion, respectively.
accounting practices prescribed by statutory authorities are used in preparing
statutory statements.
---------------------------------------------
25 share owners' equity
---------------------------------------------
---------------------------------
(in millions)                                      2000        1999        1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
common stock issued                            $    669    $    594    $    594
=================================
accumulated nonowner
changes other than earnings
balance at january 1                           $   (744)   $  1,664    $  1,340
unrealized gains (losses) on
investment securities--net
of deferred taxes of $686,
$(614) and $430                                1,363      (1,132)        795
currency translation
adjustments--net of deferred
taxes of $(312), $(100) and $(13)             (1,204)       (632)         60
reclassification adjustments--
net of deferred taxes of $(1,031),
$(349) and $(291)                             (1,915)       (644)       (531)
---------------------------------
balance at december 31                         $ (2,500)   $   (744)   $  1,664
=================================
other capital
balance at january 1                           $ 10,790    $  6,808    $  4,434
gains on treasury stock
dispositions (a)                               4,480       3,982       2,374
adjustment for stock split                          (75)       --          --
---------------------------------
balance at december 31                         $ 15,195    $ 10,790    $  6,808
=================================
retained earnings
balance at january 1                           $ 54,484    $ 48,553    $ 43,338
net earnings                                     12,735      10,717       9,296
dividends (a)                                    (5,647)     (4,786)     (4,081)
---------------------------------
balance at december 31                         $ 61,572    $ 54,484    $ 48,553
=================================
common stock held in treasury
balance at january 1                           $ 22,567    $ 18,739    $ 15,268
purchases (a)                                     5,342       7,488       6,475
dispositions (a)                                 (3,465)     (3,660)     (3,004)
---------------------------------
balance at december 31                         $ 24,444    $ 22,567    $ 18,739
================================================================================
(a)  total dividends and other transactions with share owners reduced equity by
$3,044 million, $4,632 million and $5,178 million in 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
in december 1999, ge's board of directors increased the authorization to
repurchase company common stock to $22 billion and authorized the program to
continue through 2002. funds used for the share repurchase will be generated
largely from free cash flow. through year-end 2000, over 950 million shares
having an aggregate cost of more than $17 billion had been repurchased under
this program and placed in treasury.
common shares issued and outstanding are summarized in the following table.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
shares of ge common stock
-------------------------------------------
december 31 (in thousands)                 2000            1999            1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
issued                               11,145,212      11,145,054      11,142,205
in treasury                          (1,213,206)     (1,290,526)     (1,328,317)
-------------------------------------------
outstanding                           9,932,006       9,854,528       9,813,888
================================================================================
f-38
annual report page 70
in april 2000, share owners authorized (a) an increase in the number of
authorized shares of common stock from 4,400,000,000 shares each with a par
value of $0.16 to 13,200,000,000 shares each with a par value of $0.06 and (b)
the split of each unissued and issued common share, including shares held in
treasury, into three shares of common stock each with a par value of $0.06. all
share data and per-share amounts have been adjusted to reflect this change.
ge has 50 million authorized shares of preferred stock ($1.00 par value), but
no such shares have been issued.
the effects of translating to u.s. dollars the financial statements of
non-u.s. affiliates whose functional currency is the local currency are included
in share owners' equity. asset and liability accounts are translated at year-end
exchange rates, while revenues and expenses are translated at average rates for
the period.
---------------------------------------------
26 other stock-related information
---------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
stock option activity
---------------------------------
average per share
shares      ------------------
subject      exercise    market
(shares in thousands)                          to option         price     price
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
balance at december 31, 1997                     416,709        $10.01   $ 24.46
options granted                                23,122         26.62     26.62
options exercised                             (71,866)         6.92     28.15
options terminated                             (8,181)        14.82        --
---------------------------------
balance at december 31, 1998                     359,784         11.59     34.00
options granted                                51,281         37.93     37.93
options exercised                             (61,679)         7.82     39.42
options terminated                             (8,012)        21.15        --
---------------------------------
balance at december 31, 1999                     341,374         16.01     51.58
options granted                                46,278         47.84     47.84
options exercised                             (44,758)         8.82     53.00
options terminated                             (9,715)        28.47        --
---------------------------------
balance at december 31, 2000                     333,179         21.03     47.94
================================================================================
share data have been adjusted for the 3-for-1 stock split effective on april 27,
2000.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
stock option plans, stock appreciation rights (sars), restricted stock and
restricted stock units are described in ge's current proxy statement. with
certain restrictions, requirements for stock option shares can be met from
either unissued or treasury shares.
at year-end 2000, there were 131 thousand sars outstanding at an average
exercise price of $7.68. there were 33.1 million restricted stock shares and
restricted stock units outstanding at year-end 2000.
there were 487.1 million and 423.1 million additional shares available for
grants of options, sars, restricted stock and restricted stock units at december
31, 2000 and 1999, respectively. under the 1990 long-term incentive plan, 0.95%
of the company's issued common stock (including treasury shares) as of the first
day of each calendar year during which the plan is in effect becomes available
for granting awards in such year. any unused portion, in addition to shares
allocated to awards that are canceled or forfeited, is available for later
years.
outstanding options and sars expire on various dates through december 15,
2010. restricted stock grants vest on various dates up to normal retirement of
grantees.
the following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding at
december 31, 2000.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
stock options outstanding
(shares in thousands)
outstanding                       exercisable
--------------------------------       -----------------
average                 average
exercise                             average    exercise                exercise
price range              shares     life (a)       price        shares     price
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$  5.31- 8.50            75,459          2.4      $ 7.39        75,459    $ 7.39
8.51-13.23            73,172          3.9        9.15        73,172      9.15
13.48-23.04            57,608          5.9       16.45        40,764     15.89
24.08-35.79            56,694          7.7       29.39        12,580     26.88
35.88-57.31            70,246          9.2       45.06         2,582     41.84
--------------------------------------------------------
total                   333,179          5.7       21.03       204,557     11.35
================================================================================
at year-end 1999, options with an average exercise price of $9.13 were
exercisable on 206 million shares; at year-end 1998, options with an average
exercise price of $8.03 were exercisable on 218 million shares.
(a) average contractual life remaining in years.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
stock options expire 10 years from the date they are granted; options vest
over service periods that range from one to five years.
disclosures required by statement of financial accounting standards no. 123,
accounting for stock-based compensation, are as follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
option value information (a)
-------------------------------
(in dollars)                                      2000       1999          1998
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
fair value per option (b)                       $15.76     $11.23         $6.33
valuation assumptions
expected option term (years)                    6.4        6.5           6.2
expected volatility                            27.1%      23.7%         21.7%
expected dividend yield                         1.2%       1.3%          1.8%
risk-free interest rate                         6.4%       5.8%          4.9%
================================================================================
(a) weighted averages of option grants during each period.
(b) estimated using black-scholes option pricing model.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
pro forma effects
december 31 (in millions;                ---------------------------------------
per-share amounts in dollars)                  2000           1999          1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
net earnings                             $   12,502     $   10,572     $   9,196
earnings per share--diluted                    1.24           1.06          0.92
--basic                      1.26           1.08          0.94
================================================================================
f-39
annual report page 71
---------------------------------------------
27 supplemental cash flows information
---------------------------------------------
changes in operating assets and liabilities are net of acquisitions and
dispositions of principal businesses.
"payments for principal businesses purchased" in the statement of cash flows
is net of cash acquired and includes debt assumed and immediately repaid in
acquisitions.
"all other operating activities" in the statement of cash flows consists
primarily of adjustments to current and noncurrent accruals and deferrals of
costs and expenses, increases and decreases in progress collections, adjustments
for gains and losses on assets, increases and decreases in assets held for sale,
and adjustments to assets.
noncash transactions include the following: in 2000, the acquisition of
harmon industries for shares of ge common stock valued at $346 million; in 1999,
ge's contribution of certain media properties in exchange for a noncontrolling
interest in nbci, a publicly-traded company (described in note 2); and in 1998,
the acquisition of marquette medical systems for shares of ge common stock
valued at $829 million.
certain supplemental information related to ge and gecs cash flows is shown
below.
--------------------------------
for the years ended december 31 (in millions)                                                      2000        1999        1998
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
purchases and sales of ge shares for treasury
open market purchases under share repurchase program                                       $  (2,226)   $ (1,866)   $ (3,646)
other purchases                                                                               (3,116)     (5,622)     (2,829)
dispositions (mainly to employee and dividend reinvestment plans)                              5,811       6,486       3,656
---------------------------------
$     469    $ (1,002)   $ (2,819)
=================================
gecs
financing receivables
increase in loans to customers                                                             $(100,938)   $(95,201)   $(75,840)
principal collections from customers--loans                                                   87,432      86,379      65,573
investment in equipment for financing leases                                                 (15,454)    (18,173)    (20,299)
principal collections from customers--financing leases                                         7,873      13,634      15,467
net change in credit card receivables                                                         (9,394)    (10,740)     (4,705)
sales of financing receivables                                                                14,405      11,473      13,805
---------------------------------
$ (16,076)   $(12,628)    $(5,999)
=================================
all other investing activities
purchases of securities by insurance and annuity businesses                                $ (35,911)   $(26,271)   $(23,897)
dispositions and maturities of securities by insurance and annuity businesses                 25,960      23,979      20,639
proceeds from principal business dispositions                                                   (605)        279        --
other                                                                                         (1,617)     (6,270)     (8,122)
---------------------------------
$ (12,173)   $ (8,283)   $(11,380)
=================================
newly issued debt having maturities longer than 90 days
short-term (91 to 365 days)                                                                $  12,782    $ 15,799    $  5,881
long-term (longer than one year)                                                              32,297      30,082      33,453
proceeds--nonrecourse, leveraged lease debt                                                    1,808       1,724       2,106
---------------------------------
$  46,887    $ 47,605    $ 41,440
=================================
repayments and other reductions of debt having maturities longer than 90 days
short-term (91 to 365 days)                                                                $ (27,777)   $(21,211)   $(25,901)
long-term (longer than one year)                                                              (3,953)     (5,447)     (4,739)
principal payments--nonrecourse, leveraged lease debt                                           (177)       (266)       (387)
---------------------------------
$ (31,907)   $(26,924)   $(31,027)
=================================
all other financing activities
proceeds from sales of investment contracts                                                $   8,826    $  7,236    $  5,149
redemption of investment contracts                                                            (9,061)     (7,127)     (5,533)
preferred stock issued by gecs affiliates                                                       --           513         270
cash received upon assumption of toho mutual life insurance company insurance liabilities     13,177        --          --
---------------------------------
$  12,942    $    622    $   (114)
===============================================================================================================================
f-40
annual report page 72
---------------------------------------------
28 operating segments
---------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
revenues
for the years ended december 31
total revenues              intersegment revenues              external revenues
----------------------------    ---------------------------    -----------------------------
(in millions)                          2000       1999      1998       2000      1999      1998        2000       1999      1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
aircraft engines                 $10,779    $10,730  $ 10,294    $   687    $  477     $ 292     $10,092   $ 10,253  $ 10,002
appliances                         5,887      5,671     5,619          5         4        12       5,882      5,667     5,607
industrial products and systems   11,848     11,555    11,222        428       530       479      11,420     11,025    10,743
nbc                                6,797      5,790     5,269         --        --        --       6,797      5,790     5,269
plastics                           7,776      6,941     6,633         24        17        20       7,752      6,924     6,613
power systems                     14,861     10,099     8,500        144       169       170      14,717      9,930     8,330
technical products and services    7,915      6,863     5,323         19        15        14       7,896      6,848     5,309
eliminations                      (2,075)    (1,767)   (1,401)    (1,307)   (1,212)     (987)       (768)      (555)     (414)
----------------------------    ---------------------------    -----------------------------
total ge segment revenues       63,788     55,882    51,459         --        --        --      63,788     55,882    51,459
corporate items                      517        619       771         --        --        --         517        619       771
gecs net earnings                  5,192      4,443     3,796         --        --        --       5,192      4,443     3,796
----------------------------    ---------------------------    -----------------------------
total ge revenues               69,497     60,944    56,026         --        --        --      69,497     60,944    56,026
gecs segment revenues                66,177     55,749    48,694         --        --        --      66,177     55,749    48,694
eliminations                         (5,821)    (5,063)   (4,251)        --        --        --      (5,821)    (5,063)   (4,251)
----------------------------    ---------------------------    -----------------------------
consolidated revenues               $129,853  $111,630  $100,469    $    --    $   --     $  --    $129,853   $111,630  $100,469
================================================================================================================================
ge revenues include income from sales of goods and services to customers and
other income. sales from one company component to another generally are priced
at equivalent commercial selling prices.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
assets                           property, plant and equipment    depreciation and amortization
additions (including equipment   (including goodwill and
leased to others)                other intangibles)
at december 31                   for the years ended december 31  for the years ended december 31
-----------------------------    ---------------------------      ---------------------------
(in millions)                          2000       1999      1998       2000      1999      1998        2000       1999      1998
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
aircraft engines                $  9,816   $  9,204  $  9,075    $   416   $   368   $   480      $  330     $  382    $  398
appliances                         2,775      2,463     2,436        213       151       150         142        147       137
industrial products and systems    7,869      6,740     6,466        522       423       428         425        433       440
nbc                                4,965      5,243     3,264         99        94       105         120        126       127
plastics                           9,561      9,261     9,813        546       462       722         549        561       591
power systems                     11,618      9,865     7,299        657       514       248         306        285       215
technical products and services    6,016      5,048     3,858        211       164       254         219        230       143
-----------------------------    ---------------------------    -----------------------------
total ge segments               52,620     47,824    42,211      2,664     2,176     2,387       2,091      2,164     2,051
investment in gecs                23,022     20,321    19,727         --        --        --          --         --        --
corporate items and
eliminations (a)               21,123     14,438    12,732         55        58       156         157        155       241
-----------------------------    ---------------------------    -----------------------------
total ge                        96,765     82,583    74,670      2,719     2,234     2,543       2,248      2,319     2,292
gecs segment                        370,636    345,018   303,297     11,434    15,432     8,110       5,488      4,372     3,568
eliminations                        (30,395)   (22,401)  (22,032)        --        --        --          --         --        --
-----------------------------    ---------------------------    -----------------------------
consolidated totals                $437,006   $405,200  $355,935    $14,153   $17,666   $10,653      $7,736     $6,691    $5,860
================================================================================================================================
additions to property, plant and equipment include amounts relating to principal
businesses purchased.
(a)  depreciation and amortization includes $64 million of unallocated rca
goodwill amortization in 2000, 1999 and 1998 that relates to nbc.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
basis for presentation. the company's operating businesses are organized based
on the nature of products and services provided. certain ge businesses do not
meet the definition of a reportable operating segment and have been aggregated.
the industrial products and systems segment consists of industrial systems,
lighting, transportation systems and ge supply. the technical products and
services segment consists of medical systems and global exchange services.
segment accounting policies are the same as policies described in note 1.
details of segment profit by operating segment can be found on page 44 of
this report. a description of operating segments for general electric company
and consolidated affiliates is provided on the facing page.
f-41
annual report page 73
aircraft engines. jet engines and replacement parts and repair and
maintenance services for all categories of commercial aircraft (short/medium,
intermediate and long-range); for a wide variety of military aircraft, including
fighters, bombers, tankers and helicopters; and for executive and commuter
aircraft. products and services are sold worldwide to airframe manufacturers,
airlines and government agencies. also includes aircraft engine derivatives,
used as marine propulsion and industrial power sources; the latter is also
reported in power systems.
appliances. major appliances and related services for products such as
refrigerators, freezers, electric and gas ranges, dishwashers, clothes washers
and dryers, microwave ovens, room air conditioners and residential water system
products. products and services are sold in north america and in global markets
under various ge and private-label brands. distributed to both retail outlets
and direct to consumers, mainly for the replacement market, and to building
contractors and distributors for new installations.
industrial products and systems. lighting products (including a wide variety of
lamps, lighting fixtures, wiring devices and quartz products); electrical
distribution and control equipment (including power delivery and control
products such as transformers, meters, relays, capacitors and arresters);
transportation systems products (including diesel-electric locomotives, transit
propulsion equipment and motorized wheels for off-highway vehicles); electric
motors and related products; a broad range of electrical and electronic
industrial automation products (including drive systems); installation,
engineering and repair services, which includes management and technical
expertise for large projects such as process control systems; and ge supply, a
network of electrical supply houses. markets are extremely diverse. products and
services are sold to commercial and industrial end users, including utilities,
to original equipment manufacturers, to electrical distributors, to retail
outlets, to railways and to transit authorities. increasingly, products and
services are developed for and sold in global markets.
nbc. principal businesses are the furnishing of u.s. network television services
to more than 220 affiliated stations, production of television programs,
operation of 13 vhf and uhf television broadcasting stations, operation of four
cable/satellite networks around the world, and investment and programming
activities in the internet, multimedia and cable television.
plastics. high-performance engineered plastics used in applications such as
automobiles and housings for computers and other business equipment; abs resins;
silicones; superabrasive industrial diamonds; and laminates. products are sold
worldwide to a diverse customer base consisting mainly of manufacturers.
power systems. power plant products and services, including design,
installation, operation and maintenance services. markets and competition are
global. gas turbines and aircraft engine derivatives and related services are
sold separately and as part of packaged power plants for electric utilities,
independent power producers and for industrial cogeneration and mechanical drive
applications. steam turbine-generators and related services are sold to electric
utilities and, for cogeneration, to industrial and other power customers. also
includes nuclear reactors and fuel and support services for ge's new and
installed boiling water reactors and equipment to support the distribution of
oil and gas products.
technical products and services. medical imaging systems such as magnetic
resonance (mr) and computed tomography (ct) scanners, x-ray, nuclear imaging and
ultrasound, as well as diagnostic cardiology and patient monitoring devices;
related services, including equipment monitoring and repair, computerized data
management and customer productivity services. products and services are sold
worldwide to hospitals and medical facilities. also includes a full range of
computer-based information and data interchange services for both internal and
external use to commercial and industrial customers.
gecs. the operating activities of the gecs segment follow.
consumer services--private-label credit card loans, personal loans, time
sales and revolving credit and inventory financing for retail merchants, auto
leasing and consumer savings and insurance services.
equipment management--leases, loans, sales and asset management services for
portfolios of commercial and transportation equipment, including aircraft,
trailers, auto fleets, modular space units, railroad rolling stock, data
processing equipment, containers used on ocean-going vessels, and satellites.
mid-market financing--loans, financing and operating leases and other
services for middle-market customers, including manufacturers, distributors and
end users, for a variety of equipment that includes vehicles, corporate
aircraft, data processing equipment, medical and diagnostic equipment, and
equipment used in construction, manufacturing, office applications, electronics
and telecommunications activities.
specialized financing--loans and financing leases for major capital assets,
including industrial facilities and equipment, and energy-related facilities;
commercial and residential real estate loans and investments; and loans to and
investments in public and private entities in diverse industries.
specialty insurance--u.s. and international multiple-line property and
casualty reinsurance; certain directly written specialty insurance and life
reinsurance; financial guaranty insurance, principally on municipal bonds and
structured finance issues and private mortgage insurance.
very few of the products financed by gecs are manufactured by ge.
f-42
annual report page 74
------------------------------------------------
29 geographic segment information (consolidated)
------------------------------------------------
the table below presents data by geographic region.
revenues and operating profit shown below are classified according to their
country of origin (including exports from such areas). revenues classified under
the caption "united states" include royalty and licensing income from non-u.s.
sources.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
revenues
for the years ended december 31
total revenues                 intersegment revenues             external revenues
--------------------------------    -----------------------------   ----------------------------
(in millions)                   2000        1999        1998       2000       1999       1998       2000      1999      1998
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
united states               $ 90,981    $ 78,970    $ 71,799    $ 3,518    $ 2,690    $ 2,608   $ 87,463  $ 76,280  $ 69,191
europe                        24,144      22,919      21,665      1,212      1,081        837     22,932    21,838    20,828
pacific basin                 12,921       7,879       5,166      1,218        924        951     11,703     6,955     4,215
other (a)                      8,754       7,365       6,925        999        808        690      7,755     6,557     6,235
intercompany eliminations     (6,947)     (5,503)     (5,086)    (6,947)    (5,503)    (5,086)      --        --        --
--------------------------------    -----------------------------   ----------------------------
total                       $129,853    $111,630    $100,469    $  --      $  --      $  --     $129,853  $111,630  $100,469
============================================================================================================================
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
operating profit (b)               assets                           long-lived assets (c)
for the years ended december 31    at december 31                   at december 31
-------------------------------   ------------------------------    ---------------------------
(in millions)                   2000        1999        1998       2000       1999       1998       2000      1999      1998
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
united states                $15,455     $13,391     $11,319   $277,818   $264,129   $227,311    $19,180   $21,612   $18,048
europe                         2,062       1,886       2,393     80,282     83,358     84,518      5,870     6,101     6,334
pacific basin                  1,754       1,092         431     42,281     28,214     18,427      1,936     2,017     1,326
other (a)                      1,406         909         810     36,804     29,687     25,878     13,076    11,329    10,057
intercompany eliminations          9          11          (9)      (179)      (188)      (199)       (47)      (37)      (35)
-------------------------------   ------------------------------    ---------------------------
total                        $20,686     $17,289     $14,944   $437,006   $405,200   $355,935    $40,015   $41,022   $35,730
============================================================================================================================
(a)  includes the americas other than the united states and operations that
cannot meaningfully be associated with specific geographic areas (for
example, commercial aircraft leased by ge capital aviation services).
(b)  excludes gecs income taxes of $1,912 million, $1,653 million and $1,364
million in 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively, which are included in the
measure of segment profit reported on page 44.
(c)  property, plant and equipment (including equipment leased to others).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------
30 additional information about financial
instruments
---------------------------------------------
this note contains estimated fair values of certain financial instruments to
which ge and gecs are parties. apart from certain borrowings by ge and gecs and
certain marketable securities, relatively few of these instruments are actively
traded. thus, fair values must often be determined by using one or more models
that indicate value based on estimates of quantifiable characteristics as of a
particular date. because this undertaking is, by its nature, difficult and
highly judgmental, for a limited number of instruments, alternative valuation
techniques may have produced disclosed values different from those that could
have been realized at december 31, 2000 or 1999. assets and liabilities that, as
a matter of accounting policy, are reflected in the accompanying financial
statements at fair value are not included in the following disclosures; such
items include cash and equivalents, investment securities and separate accounts.
a description of how values are estimated follows.
borrowings. based on quoted market prices or market comparables. fair values of
interest rate and currency swaps on borrowings are based on quoted market prices
and include the effects of counterparty creditworthiness.
time sales and loans. based on quoted market prices, recent transactions and/or
discounted future cash flows, using rates at which similar loans would have been
made to similar borrowers.
investment contract benefits. based on expected future cash flows, discounted at
currently offered discount rates for immediate annuity contracts or cash
surrender values for single premium deferred annuities.
financial guarantees and credit life. based on future cash flows, considering
expected renewal premiums, claims, refunds and servicing costs, discounted at a
market rate.
all other instruments. based on comparable transactions, market comparables,
discounted future cash flows, quoted market prices, and/or estimates of the cost
to terminate or otherwise settle obligations to counterparties.
f-43
annual report page 75
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
financial instruments
2000                                      1999
--------------------------------------  ----------------------------------------
assets (liabilities)                     assets (liabilities)
----------------------------            ------------------------------
carrying estimated fair value           carrying  estimated fair value
notional    amount -------------------- notional    amount  --------------------
december 31 (in millions)                    amount     (net)      high       low    amount     (net)      high       low
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ge
investment related
investments and notes receivable         $   (a)  $  2,012  $  2,060  $  2,026   $   (a)   $ 1,700  $  1,739  $  1,684
cancelable interest rate swap              1,046         6         4         4     1,046        11        22        22
borrowings and related instruments
borrowings (b) (c)                          (a)     (1,781)   (1,781)   (1,781)      (a)    (2,967)   (2,966)   (2,966)
interest rate swaps                          786       --       (38)       (38)    1,408       --         30        30
currency swaps                               172       --        (4)        (4)      879       --        (17)      (17)
recourse obligations for receivables sold       589       (42)      (42)      (42)      555       (36)      (36)      (36)
financial guarantees                          2,345       --        --        --      2,710       --        --        --
other firm commitments
forwards and options                       6,961       37        30         30     6,764        16       (30)      (30)
financing commitments                      1,492       --        --        --      1,858       --        --        --
gecs
assets
time sales and loans                         (a)    92,912    93,539    92,360       (a)    87,013    87,004    85,504
integrated swaps                          22,911       (44)     (771)     (771)   15,933        18        59        59
purchased options                          9,832       105       164       164     8,949        60       174       174
mortgage-related positions
mortgage purchase commitments              --        --        --        --        669       --        --        --
mortgage sale commitments                  --        --        --        --      1,452       --          4         4
mortgages acquired for resale              (a)     1,267     1,250     1,245      (a)      2,522     2,516     2,488
options, including "floors"             21,984       202       208       208    23,929        76        56        56
interest rate swaps and futures          2,798        29        38        38     4,054       --        (67)      (67)
other financial instruments                  (a)    10,940    11,130    11,102       (a)     5,347     5,322     5,292
liabilities
borrowings and related instruments
borrowings (b) (c)                        (a)   (205,371) (207,670) (207,670)      (a)  (200,025) (198,798) (198,798)
interest rate swaps                     52,681       --       (208)     (208)   56,339       --        (99)      (99)
currency swaps                          24,314       --       (957)     (957)   22,744       --     (1,425)   (1,425)
currency forwards                       27,902       --        381       381    26,806       --       (459)     (459)
investment contract benefits                 (a)   (27,575)  (26,144)  (26,144)      (a)   (24,943)  (24,420)  (24,420)
insurance--financial guarantees
and credit life                       239,940    (2,759)   (2,797)   (2,910)  226,073    (2,757)   (2,797)   (2,909)
credit and liquidity support--
securitizations                        37,667      (630)     (630)     (630)   34,389      (489)     (489)     (489)
performance guarantees (d)                 7,895       --        --        --      3,472       (56)      (56)      (56)
other financial instruments                2,982    (1,184)   (1,114)   (1,114)    2,545    (1,473)   (1,444)   (1,444)
other firm commitments
currency forwards                          1,585         8        47        47     3,778       (14)      (41)      (41)
currency swaps                               647       292       275       275       767       238       200       200
ordinary course of business
lending commitments                      9,450       --        --        --      7,822       --        --        --
unused revolving credit lines
commercial                              11,278       --        --        --     11,440       --        --        --
consumer--principally credit cards     188,421       --        --        --    151,651       --        --        --
===========================================================================================================================
(a)  not applicable.
(b)  includes effects of interest rate and currency swaps, which also are listed separately.
(c)  see note 19.
(d)  includes letters of credit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
additional information about certain financial instruments in the table above
follows.
currency forwards, swaps and options are employed by ge and gecs to manage
exposures to changes in currency exchange rates associated with commercial
purchase and sale transactions and by gecs to optimize borrowing costs as
discussed in note 19. these financial instruments generally are used to fix the
cash flow variability of local currency costs or selling prices denominated in
currencies other than the functional currency. currency exposures that result
from net investments in affiliates are managed principally by funding assets
denominated in local currency with debt denominated in those same currencies. in
certain circumstances, net investment exposures are managed using currency
forwards and currency swaps.
f-44
annual report page 76
options and instruments containing option features that behave based on limits
("caps," "floors" or "collars") on interest rate and equity movements are used
primarily to manage risks in certain investments as well as risks in certain
gecs business activities, such as mortgage servicing and annuities.
swaps of interest rates and currencies are used by ge and gecs to optimize
funding costs for a particular funding strategy (see note 19). a cancelable
interest rate swap was used by ge to hedge an investment position. interest rate
swaps, along with purchased options and futures, are used by gecs to establish
specific hedges of mortgage-related assets. credit risk of these positions is
evaluated by management under the credit criteria discussed below. as part of
its ongoing activities, gecs also enters into swaps that are integrated into
investments in or loans to particular customers. such integrated swaps not
involving assumption of third-party credit risk are evaluated and monitored like
their associated investments or loans and are not therefore subject to the same
credit criteria that would apply to a stand-alone position.
counterparty credit risk--risk that counterparties will be financially unable to
make payments according to the terms of the agreements--is the principal risk
associated with swaps, purchased options and forwards. gross market value of
probable future receipts is one way to measure this risk, but is meaningful only
in the context of net credit exposure to individual counterparties. at december
31, 2000 and 1999, this gross market risk amounted to $2.9 billion and $2.0
billion, respectively. aggregate fair values that represent associated probable
future obligations, normally associated with a right of offset against probable
future receipts, amounted to $3.7 billion at year-end 2000 and $3.6 billion at
year-end 1999.
except as noted above for positions that are integrated into financings, all
swaps, purchased options and forwards are carried out within the following
credit policy constraints.
*  once a counterparty exceeds credit exposure limits (see table below), no
additional transactions are permitted until the exposure with that
counterparty is reduced to an amount that is within the established limit.
open contracts remain in force.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
counterparty credit criteria
----------------------------
credit rating
----------------------------
moody's    standard & poor's
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
term of transaction
between one and five years                           aa3                  aa-
greater than five years                              aaa                  aaa
credit exposure limits
up to $50 million                                    aa3                  aa-
up to $75 million                                    aaa                  aaa
================================================================================
*  all swaps are executed under master swap agreements containing mutual credit
downgrade provisions that provide the ability to require assignment or
termination in the event either party is downgraded below a3 or a-.
more credit latitude is permitted for transactions having original maturities
shorter than one year because of their lower risk.
---------------------------------------------
31 quarterly information (unaudited)
---------------------------------------------
first quarter    second quarter     third quarter      fourth quarter
(dollar amounts in millions;             ----------------- ----------------- -----------------  -----------------
per-share amounts in dollars)                2000     1999     2000     1999     2000     1999     2000      1999
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
consolidated operations
net earnings                             $  2,592  $ 2,155 $  3,378    2,820 $  3,180 $  2,653  $ 3,585  $  3,089
earnings per share--diluted                  0.26     0.22     0.34     0.28     0.32     0.27     0.36      0.31
--basic                    0.26     0.22     0.34     0.29     0.32     0.27     0.36      0.31
selected data
ge
sales of goods and services             14,370   11,796   16,414   13,966   15,578   13,228   17,445    16,655
gross profit from sales                  4,520    3,667    5,372    4,545    4,675    4,091    5,693     5,043
gecs
total revenues                          15,681   12,383   16,470   13,378   16,444   14,002   17,582    15,986
operating profit                         1,746    1,400    1,697    1,461    2,020    1,745    1,641     1,490
net earnings                             1,210    1,032    1,277    1,092    1,478    1,262    1,227     1,057
=================================================================================================================
for ge, gross profit from sales is sales of goods and services less costs of
goods and services sold. for gecs, operating profit is "earnings before income
taxes."
earnings-per-share amounts for each quarter are required
to be computed independently. as a result, their sum does not equal the total
year earnings-per-share amounts for diluted earnings per share in 2000 and 1999,
and for basic earnings per share in 2000. per-share amounts have been adjusted
for the 3-for-1 stock split effective on april 27, 2000.
