10-k
frm10k.htm
form 10-k
united states securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2003
or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from ___________to ___________
_____________________________
commission file number 1-35
_____________________________
general electric company
(exact name of registrant as specified in charter)
new york
14-0689340
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or
organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
3135 easton turnpike, fairfield, ct
06828-0001
203/373-2211
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(telephone no.)
securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange
on which registered
common stock, par value $0.06 per share
new york stock exchange
boston stock exchange
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed
all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes
no
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be
contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k
or any amendment to this form 10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an
accelerated filer (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the act). yes
no
.
the aggregate market value of the outstanding common equity
of the registrant as of the last business day of the registrant's most recently
completed second fiscal quarter was $287.3 billion. affiliates of the company
beneficially own, in the aggregate, less than one-tenth of one percent of such
shares. there were 10,078,668,998 shares of voting common stock with a par value
of $0.06 outstanding at february 13,2004.
documents incorporated by reference
the annual report to shareowners for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 2003 is incorporated by reference in parts i, ii and iii to the
extent described therein. the definitive proxy statement relating to the
registrant's annual meeting of shareowners, to be held april 28, 2004, is
incorporated by reference in part iii to the extent described therein.
(1)
table of contents
table of contents
page
part i
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5.
market for the registrant's common equity and related
stockholder matters
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition
and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form
8-k
signatures
(2)
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
general
unless otherwise indicated by the context, we use the terms
"ge," "gecs" and "ge capital" on the basis of consolidation described in note 1
to the consolidated financial statements on page 76 of the 2003 annual report to
shareowners of general electric company (the company). the financial section of
such annual report to shareowners (pages 41 through 115 of that document) is
described in part iv item 15(a)(1) and set forth in exhibit 13 of this 10-k
report and is an integral part hereof. references in parts i and ii of this 10-k
report are to the page numbers of the 2003 annual report to shareowners. also,
unless otherwise indicated by the context, "general electric" means the parent
company, general electric company.
general electric's address is 1 river road, schenectady, ny
12345-6999; we also maintain executive offices at 3135 easton turnpike,
fairfield, ct 06828-0001.
ge is one of the largest and most diversified industrial
corporations in the world. we have engaged in developing, manufacturing and
marketing a wide variety of products for the generation, transmission,
distribution, control and utilization of electricity since our incorporation in
1892. over the years, we have developed or acquired new technologies and
services that have broadened considerably the scope of our activities.
our products include major appliances; lighting products;
industrial automation products; medical diagnostic imaging equipment; motors;
electrical distribution and control equipment; locomotives; power generation and
delivery products; nuclear power support services and fuel assemblies;
commercial and military aircraft jet engines; chemicals for treatment of water
and process systems; and engineered materials, such as plastics, silicones and,
through the fourth quarter of 2003, superabrasive industrial diamonds.
our services include product services; electrical product
supply houses; electrical apparatus installation, engineering, repair and
rebuilding services; and through the third quarter of 2002, computer related
information services. through our affiliate, the national broadcasting company,
inc., we deliver network television services, operate television stations, and
provide cable, internet and multimedia programming and distribution services.
through another affiliate, general electric capital services, inc., we offer a
broad array of financial and other services including consumer financing,
commercial and industrial financing, real estate financing, asset management and
leasing, mortgage services, consumer savings and insurance services, and
specialty insurance and reinsurance.
in virtually all of our global business activities, we
encounter aggressive and able competition. in many instances, the competitive
climate is characterized by changing technology that requires continuing
research and development, as well as customer commitments. with respect to
manufacturing operations, we believe that, in general, we are one of the leading
firms in most of the major industries in which we participate. the nbc
television network is one of four major u.s. commercial broadcast television
networks. it also competes with syndicated broadcast television programming and
cable and satellite television programming activities. the businesses in which
gecs engages are subject to competition from various types of financial
institutions, including commercial banks, thrifts, investment banks,
broker-dealers, credit unions, leasing companies, consumer loan companies,
independent finance companies, finance companies associated with manufacturers,
and insurance and reinsurance companies.
(3)
table of contents
this document contains "forward-looking statements" within
the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995.
forward-looking statements may be identified by words such as "expects,"
"anticipates," "intends," "plans," "believes," "seeks," "estimates," "will" or
words of similar meaning and include, but are not limited to, statements about
the expected future business and financial performance of ge. forward-looking
statements are based on management's current expectations and assumptions, which
are inherently subject to uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that
are difficult to predict. actual outcomes and results may differ materially from
these expectations and assumptions due to changes in global political, economic,
business, competitive, market, regulatory and other factors. we undertake no
obligation to publicly update or review any forward-looking information, whether
as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise.
our consolidated international revenues increased to $60.8
billion in 2003, compared with $53.4 billion in 2002 and $51.9 billion in 2001.
operating segments
segment revenue and profit information is presented on page
48 of the 2003 annual report to shareowners. additional financial data and
commentary on recent financial results for operating segments are provided on
pages 49-55 of that report and in note 27 (pages 102 and 103) to the
consolidated financial statements.
operating businesses that are reported as segments include
aircraft engines, commercial finance, consumer finance, consumer products,
equipment management, industrial products and systems, insurance, medical
systems, nbc, plastics, power systems, specialty materials and transportation
systems. there is appropriate elimination of the net earnings of gecs and the
immaterial effect of transactions between segments to arrive at total
consolidated data. a summary description of each of our operating segments
follows.
aircraft engines
aircraft engines (8.0%, 8.4% and 9.0% of consolidated
revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) produces, sells and services jet
engines, turboprop and turbo shaft engines, and related replacement parts for
use in military and commercial aircraft. our military engines are used in a wide
variety of aircraft that includes fighters, bombers, tankers, helicopters and
surveillance aircraft. the cfm56, produced by cfm international, a company
jointly owned by ge and snecma moteurs of france, and ge's cf6 and ge90 engines
power aircraft in all categories of large commercial aircraft: short/medium,
intermediate and long-range. applications for the cfm56 engine include:
boeing's 737-300/-400/-500 series, the next generation 737-600/-700/-800/-900
series, and the 737 business jet; airbus' a318, a319, a320, a321 and
a340-200/-300 series; and military aircraft such as the kc-135r, e/ke-3 and e-6.
the cf6 family of engines powers intermediate and long-range aircraft such as
boeing's 747, 767, dc-10 and md-11 series, as well as airbus' a300, a310 and
a330 series. the ge90 engine is used to power boeing's 777 series twin-engine
aircraft. the gp7000, designed and marketed in a joint venture with the pratt &
whitney division of united technologies corporation, is offered on airbus' a380.
we produce jet engines, such as the cf34, for executive
aircraft and regional commuter aircraft, including bombardier's challenger 604
and crj200/700/900 series of aircraft and embraer's 170 and 190 series of
aircraft. a new version of the cf34, the cf34-10a, is currently being developed
to power china's future arj21 regional aircraft. we also manufacture aircraft
engine derivatives used for marine propulsion and industrial power generation
sources, the latter of which is also reported as part of the power systems
segment. maintenance, component repair and overhaul services (mro), including
sales of replacement parts, are provided for many models
(4)
table of contents
of engines, including engines manufactured by competitors, and
represent a significant portion of this segment's profits. in december 2003, we
completed the acquisition of the non-destructive testing (ndt) business of
agfa-gevaert. this business has been combined with aircraft engines ndt business
to offer radiographic, ultrasonic, eddy current and other inspection solutions
that test the structure and tolerance of materials without damaging them.
the worldwide competition in aircraft jet engines and mro
(including parts sales) is intense. both u.s. and export markets are important.
product development cycles are long and product quality and efficiency are
critical to success. research and development expenditures, both
customer-financed and internally funded, are important in this segment. focused
intellectual property strategies and protection of key aircraft engine design,
manufacture, repair and product upgrade technologies are also important.
potential sales for any engine are limited by, among other
things, its technological lifetime, which may vary considerably depending upon
the rate of advance in the state of the art, by the small number of potential
customers and by the limited number of relevant airframe applications. aircraft
engine orders tend to follow military and commercial airline procurement cycles,
although cycles for military and commercial engine procurement are different.
procurements of military jet engines are affected by changes in global political
and economic factors.
in line with industry practice, airframe manufacturers
support their sales of commercial jet aircraft from time to time with long-term
financing commitments to customers, and engine manufacturers are often asked to
participate in such financings. in making such commitments, it is our policy to
establish a secured position in the aircraft being financed. under such airline
financing programs, we had issued guarantees amounting to $0.4 billion at
year-end 2003, and had entered into commitments totaling $1.2 billion to provide
financial assistance on future sales of aircraft equipped with our engines. our
guarantees and commitments are secured by individual aircraft or pools of
aircraft engines related to the specific financing arrangement. when particular
guarantees exceed the value of the associated security, we consider credit risk
of the customer and provide for estimated losses. at december 31, 2003, the
total estimated fair value of aircraft securing these guarantees exceeded the
guaranteed amounts, net of the associated allowance for losses. see page 49 of
the 2003 annual report to shareowners for information about orders and backlog.
aircraft engines is headquartered in evendale, ohio and has
operations in north america, europe, asia and south america.
commercial finance
commercial finance (14.1%, 13.4% and 12.5% of consolidated
revenues in 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively) offers an array of financial
services worldwide. with particular expertise in the mid-market segment, we
offer loans, leases, and other financial services to customers, including
manufacturers, distributors and end-users for a variety of equipment and major
capital assets including industrial facilities and equipment, energy-related
facilities, commercial and residential real estate, vehicles, aircraft, and
equipment used in construction, manufacturing, data processing and office
applications, electronics and telecommunications, and healthcare. we acquired
the commercial inventory financing business of deutsche financial services and
the structured finance business of abb in 2002 and most of the commercial
lending business of transamerica finance corporation in january 2004.
we operate in a highly competitive environment and are
subject to competition from a variety of financial institutions including
commercial banks, investment banks, leasing companies, financing companies
associated with
(5)
table of contents
manufacturers, and independent finance companies. industry
participants compete on the basis of interest rates and fees as well as deal
structures and credit terms. profitability is affected not only by broad
economic conditions that impact customer credit quality and the availability and
cost of capital, but also by successful management of credit risk, operating
risk and market risks such as interest rate and currency exchange risk.
important factors to continued success include maintaining strong risk
management systems, customer and industry specific knowledge, diverse
portfolios, service and distribution channels, strong collateral and asset
management knowledge, deal structuring expertise and the reduction of costs
through technology and productivity.
commercial finance headquarters are in stamford,
connecticut with offices throughout the united states and in canada, latin
america, europe, and asia pacific. our activities are conducted through the
principal businesses described below.
real estate
real estate funds the direct acquisition, refinancing and
renovation of real estate assets, and purchases equity investments in real
estate properties. our loans generally are intermediate-term senior and
subordinated fixed and floating-rate and are secured by existing
income-producing commercial properties. our business also includes the
origination and term securitization within one year of low loan to value loans.
we invest in and provide restructuring financing for portfolios of real estate,
mortgage loans, limited partnerships and tax-exempt bonds. additionally, we
invest in equity positions in a diversified portfolio of real estate assets via
direct real estate ownership and joint venture interests. property types include
multi-family housing, self-storage facilities, warehouses, parking facilities,
retail centers, senior assisted living facilities and office properties.
aviation services
aviation services is a global commercial aviation financial
services business that offers a broad range of financial products to airlines,
aircraft operators, owners, lenders and investors. financial products include
leases, aircraft purchasing and trading, loans, engine/spare parts financing,
pilot training, fleet planning and financial advisory services.
commercial aviation is an industry in which we have a
significant ongoing interest. as has been widely reported, this industry has
been under pressure, but has undertaken steps to reduce unused capacity and
align costs. consequently, during 2003, major united states and european
airlines achieved moderate improvements in operations including traffic,
revenues and load factors. aviation services, which owned 1,239 commercial
aircraft at december 31, 2003, had 1,236 on lease despite pressure on the
industry. regional jets, with capacity for 50-90 passengers, have had a
significant effect on the commercial aviation industry in recent years. these
jets have enabled airlines to replace less efficient equipment, both turboprop
and older, narrow-bodied jets. at december 31, 2003, our fleet included 278
regional jets, diversifying total aircraft holdings. we believe that we continue
to offer a suitable range of equipment that is attractive to the industry.
commercial equipment financing
commercial equipment financing finances manufacturing
equipment, facilities, construction and office equipment, corporate aircraft,
franchises, trucks and trailers and a wide variety of other equipment. we also
furnish customers with direct-source tax-exempt finance programs, as well as
lease and sale/leaseback offerings. customers include manufacturers,
distributors, dealers, end-users, and municipalities. we also maintain an asset
management operation that redeploys off lease and repossessed equipment and
other assets.
(6)
table of contents
corporate financial services
corporate financial services provides equity, revolving and
term debt used by customers to finance acquisitions, business expansion,
refinancings, recapitalizations and other special situations. customers are
owners, managers and buyers of both public and private companies, principally
manufacturers, distributors, retailers and diversified service providers. our
industry specialists concentrate on the retail, and media and communications
industries. we also provide senior debt, subordinated debt and bridge financing
to buyout and private equity firms.
structured finance
structured finance provides equity, debt and structured
investments to its customers, primarily in the global energy,
telecommunications, industrial and transportation sectors. financial services
and products include corporate finance, acquisition finance and project finance.
products include a variety of debt and equity instruments, as well as structured
transactions, including leases and partnerships.
vendor financial services
vendor financial services provides financial services to
equipment manufacturers and dealers/distributors in a variety of industries
including office equipment, industrial equipment, information technology
equipment, motor sports and marine equipment, recreational vehicles and
telecommunications equipment. we offer distribution financing programs, sales
financing and trade payables services, including inventory financing, accounts
receivable financing, formula based lending, private label financing, rental
finance, and warranty and collateral management services.
healthcare financial services
healthcare financial services is exclusively directed to
the special needs of the global healthcare industry. we bring a comprehensive
set of financial products and services to that market, including financing for
equipment, information technology systems, real estate, acquisitions,
recapitalizations, turnarounds, and working capital needs. we also provide
tax-exempt financing for non-profit hospitals, vendor financing programs for
medical equipment suppliers, and equity capital for medical real estate
investments. we serve healthcare companies of all sizes across a wide range of
sectors. customers include hospitals and health systems; physician practices;
outpatient diagnostic and treatment centers; skilled nursing and assisted living
facilities; medical device manufacturers, life science companies, and other
suppliers of products and services to the healthcare sector.
consumer finance
consumer finance (9.6%, 7.8% and 7.5% of consolidated
revenues in 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively) is a leading provider of credit
products and services to consumers, retailers and auto dealers in 38 countries.
we offer a broad range of financial products, including private-label credit
cards, personal loans, bank cards, auto loans, leases and inventory financing,
residential mortgages, corporate travel and purchasing cards, debt
consolidation, home equity loans, and credit insurance. we acquired first
national bank and the retail sales finance unit of conseco finance corp. in 2003
as part of our continued global expansion.
our operations are subject to a variety of bank and
consumer protection regulations, including data privacy. further, a number of
countries have ceilings on rates chargeable to consumers in financial service
transactions. we are subject to competition from various types of financial
institutions including commercial banks, leasing companies, consumer loan
companies, independent finance companies, manufacturers' captive finance
companies,
(7)
table of contents
and insurance companies. industry participants compete on the
basis of price, servicing capability, promotional marketing, risk management,
and cross selling. the markets in which we operate are also subject to the risks
of declining retails sales, changes in interest and currency exchange rates, and
increases in personal bankruptcy filings.
consumer finance headquarters are in stamford, connecticut
and our operations are located principally in the united states, and in europe,
asia, latin and south america, australia and new zealand.
consumer finance's activities are conducted through the
principal businesses described below.
global consumer finance
global consumer finance is a leading provider of financial
products and services to retailers, auto dealers, and consumers outside of north
america. we provide private-label credit cards and proprietary credit services
to retailers in europe, asia pacific and, to a lesser extent, latin and south
america. we also provide a variety of direct-to-consumer credit programs such as
personal loans, bank cards, auto loans and leases, residential mortgages, debt
consolidation, home equity loans and the distribution of credit insurance. our
customers include retailers such as tesco, coles myer and wal-mart.
card services
card services is a leading provider of sales financing
services to north american retailers in a broad range of consumer industries.
product offerings include customized private-label credit card solutions for
retailers such as jcpenney, exxonmobil, wal-mart, sam's club, macy's and
lowe's. product offerings also include personal loans, home equity loans,
business credit services, and corporate travel and purchasing cards.
consumer products
consumer products (6.2%, 6.4% and 6.7% of consolidated
revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) manufactures and/or markets major
appliances and a wide range of lighting products for global markets. both
operations are leaders in technology and product innovation in their industries.
major appliances include refrigerators, electric and gas cooking products,
microwave ovens, freezers, dishwashers, clothes washers and dryers,
water-softening and filtering products, and room air conditioning equipment.
these are sold under hotpoint, ge, profile, monogram, and smartwater
brands, as well as under private brands for retailers and others. ge microwave
ovens, gas and electric ranges, room air conditioners, water-softening and
filtering products, freezers and some refrigerators are sourced from suppliers,
while investment in ge-owned facilities is focused on refrigerators,
dishwashers, electric ranges and home laundry equipment. a large portion of
appliance sales is for replacement of installed units. such sales are affected
through a variety of retail outlets. the other principal channel consists of
residential building contractors who install appliances in new dwellings. we
also manufacture approximately 6,000 various lamp products for commercial,
industrial and consumer markets. product families include incandescent, reveal,
halogen, high-intensity discharge, fluorescent, stage/studio, miniature/sealed
beam, projection, automotive and leds (light-emitting diodes). the business also
manufactures outdoor lighting fixtures and systems for commercial, industrial
and sports lighting applications. ge has an extensive u.s. product services
network that provides repair services, extended service plans, warranty
administration and risk management services.
demand for appliances is influenced by economic trends,
such as increases or decreases in consumer disposable income, availability of
credit and housing construction. competition is very active in all products and
(8)
table of contents
services and comes from a number of principal manufacturers and
suppliers. an important factor is the degree of product differentiation achieved
through innovation and new product features. other significant factors include
product quality and cost, brand recognition, customer responsiveness and
appliance service capability.
consumer products is headquartered in louisville, kentucky,
and has operations in north america, europe, asia and south america.
equipment management
equipment management (3.5%, 3.6% and
3.9% of consolidated revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) helps
customers manage, finance and operate a wide variety of business equipment
worldwide. we provide rentals, leases, sales, asset management services and
loans for portfolios of commercial and transportation equipment, including
tractors, trailers, auto fleets, railroad rolling stock, intermodal shipping
containers and modular space units.
our operations are conducted in
highly competitive markets. economic conditions, geographic location, pricing
and equipment availability are important factors in this business. future
success will depend upon the ability to maintain a large and diverse customer
portfolio, optimize asset mix, maximize asset utilization and effectively manage
credit risk. in addition, we seek to understand and deliver unique product and
service offerings to our customers in the most efficient and cost effective
manner. in september 2003, we acquired the assets of citicapital fleet services.
equipment management headquarters are
in stamford, connecticut with offices throughout north america, europe and asia
pacific.
industrial products and systems
industrial products and systems (6.3%, 5.6% and 5.3% of
consolidated revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) is composed of
industrial systems and ge supply. products and services provided by each of the
businesses in this segment are sold primarily to industrial customers, including
original equipment manufacturers, industrial end users, utilities, electrical
contractors, as well as to distributors. these businesses compete against a
variety of both u.s. and non-u.s. manufacturers and service providers.
markets for industrial products and services are diverse,
global and highly price competitive. the aggregate level of economic activity in
markets for such products and services generally lag overall economic slowdowns
as well as subsequent recoveries. in the united states, industrial markets are
undergoing significant structural changes reflecting, among other factors,
increased international competition and pressures to modernize productive
capacity. a description of products and services provided by industrial systems
and ge supply follows.
industrial systems includes electric motors and related
products and services for the appliance, commercial, industrial, heating, air
conditioning, automotive and utility markets; power delivery and control
products such as circuit breakers, transformers, electricity meters, relays,
capacitors, uninterruptible power supplies for critical processes, and arresters
sold for installation in commercial, industrial and residential facilities;
electrical and electronic industrial automation products, including drive
systems, for metal and paper processing, mining, utilities and marine
applications. product services include engineering, management and technical
expertise for power plants and other large projects; maintenance, inspection,
repair and rebuilding of electrical apparatus produced by ge and others; and
on-site engineering and upgrading of already installed products sold by ge and
others. other product
(9)
table of contents
services include the integration of software with hardware
(principally motors, drives and programmable controls) into customized systems
solutions for customers in the semiconductor, water treatment, pulp and paper,
and petroleum industries.
in recent years, our business has expanded into measurement
and sensing equipment and subsystems used for sensing temperature, humidity, and
pressure; and security equipment and systems, including card access systems,
video and sensor monitoring equipment and integrated facility monitoring
systems. through a 50-50 joint venture (ge fanuc automation corporation), which
has two operating subsidiaries (one in north america and the other in europe),
we offer a wide range of high-technology industrial automation systems and
equipment, including computer numerical controls and programmable logic
controls.
industrial systems is headquartered in plainville,
connecticut and operates in north america, europe, south america and asia.
ge supply is a full-line, international distributor of
electrical products, aerospace parts, power generation products and lighting
equipment and supplies from ge and other leading manufacturers. we serve
electrical contractors, industrial and commercial users, engineer constructors,
original equipment manufacturers, utilities and the aerospace industry. ge
supply headquarters are in shelton, connecticut. our operating units which
include ge supply, ge structured services and ge supply logistics, have more
than 150 branch offices and five distribution hubs throughout the u.s., mexico,
south america, ireland, the middle east and southeast asia.
insurance
insurance (19.5%, 17.6% and 18.9% of consolidated revenues
in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) offers a broad range of insurance and
investment products that help consumers create and preserve personal wealth,
protect assets and enhance their life styles. for lenders and investors, it
protects against the risks of default on low-down-payment mortgages. for
businesses, we provide reinsurance and primary commercial insurance products to
insurance companies, fortune 100 companies, self-insurers and healthcare
providers. through december 2003, for state and local governments and other
public entities, we offered financial guarantees for a variety of debt
securities.
in november 2003, ge announced its intent for an initial
public offering of a new company, genworth financial, inc. (genworth),
comprising most of our life and mortgage insurance businesses. ge plans to sell
approximately one-third of genworth's equity in the ipo, and we expect (subject
to market conditions) to reduce our ownership over the next three years as
genworth transitions to full independence. we commenced the ipo process in
january 2004 and expect to complete the ipo in the first half of the year,
subject to market conditions and receipt of various regulatory approvals.
insurance headquarters are in richmond, virginia with
offices in the united states and in canada, europe, latin america, australia and
asia pacific.
our activities are conducted through the principal
businesses described below.
ge financial assurance
ge financial assurance provides a wide variety of
insurance, protection and asset management products to help consumers achieve
financial security at every stage of life. our strategy is to provide dependable
products to address consumer needs for wealth accumulation, retirement income,
personal protection, and wealth transfer. we
(10)
table of contents
distribute these products through a family of regulated
insurance affiliates. our principal product lines in north america are annuities
(deferred and immediate, fixed and variable); life insurance (universal, term,
ordinary and group); guaranteed investment contracts (including funding
agreements); long-term care insurance; supplementary accident and health
insurance; and consumer club memberships. principal european product lines and
services are payment protection insurance (designed to protect consumers' loan
repayment obligations) and personal investment products. product distribution in
north america and europe is accomplished primarily through four channels:
intermediaries (brokerage general agencies, banks and securities brokerage and
financial planning firms); dedicated sales forces and financial advisors;
worksite distribution; and direct and affinity marketing. during 2003,
(consistent with ge's announced intent to redirect capital to different lines of
business) ge financial assurance sold its japanese life insurance business.
consolidation in the financial services industry will
create fewer but larger competitors. we believe the principal competitive
factors in the sale of our products are product features, price, commission
structure, marketing and distribution arrangements, brand, reputation, financial
strength ratings and service. we believe that we are well positioned in the
current competitive environment and will benefit from a number of significant
demographic, governmental and market trends, including an aging united states
population with growing retirement income needs, and an increasing life and
lifestyle protection gap.
many of our activities are regulated by a variety of
insurance and other regulators.
mortgage insurance
mortgage insurance offers mortgage insurance products that
facilitate homeownership by enabling borrowers to buy homes with
low-down-payment mortgages. these products also aid financial institutions in
managing their capital efficiently by reducing the capital required for
low-down-payment mortgages. we also have leading mortgage insurance operations
in canada, australia and the u.k. and a growing presence in continental europe.
the mortgage insurance industry is sensitive to the
interest rate environment and housing market conditions. the mortgage insurance
industry is intensely competitive as excess market capacity seeks to underwrite
business being generated from a consolidating customer base. in addition,
considerable influence is exerted on the industry by two government-sponsored
enterprises, which buy the majority of the loans insured by mortgage insurers.
during 2003, general electric mortgage insurance
corporation (gemico), requested that its financial strength ratings be lowered
from aaa/aaa to aa/aa2 positioning our united states business to operate at
lower capital levels. this change improves mortgage insurance's capital
efficiency and return on equity while retaining a conservative risk-to-capital
ratio.
ge global insurance holding (employers reinsurance corporation)
through our principal insurance and reinsurance company
affiliates  employers reinsurance corporation, ge reinsurance corporation, the
ge frankona group and the medical protective corporation  we write
substantially all lines of reinsurance (where the insured party is another
insurance company) and select lines of direct property and casualty insurance
(where the insured party is a non-insurance company or an individual).
(11)
table of contents
the reinsurance operations include the reinsurance of
property and casualty risks written by more than 1,000 insurers around the
world. direct insurance operations are focused on niche lines of business,
principally medical malpractice coverage for physicians and dentists, medical
professional liability for hospitals, errors and omissions coverage for
insurance agents and brokers, professional liability insurance for attorneys,
excess indemnity for self-insurers of medical benefits and excess workers'
compensation for self-insurers. the life reinsurance affiliates are engaged in
the reinsurance of life insurance products, including term, whole and universal
life, annuities, certain health-related coverages and the provision of financial
reinsurance to life insurers. during 2003, we announced our intent to scale back
on life reinsurance operations to improve overall returns, we ceased writing new
life reinsurance business in the united states and sold our united states life
reinsurance businesserc life reinsurance corporation.
in our opinion, we compete in the reinsurance marketplace
principally on the basis of our expertise, relationships, financial strength,
price and creativity in developing customized solutions to customer needs.
within the direct insurance marketplace, we believe we compete principally on
the basis of our product offerings, established relationships with customers and
key distribution partners, price and ease of doing business.
employers reinsurance corporation is one of the largest
competitors in its marketplace. our property and casualty reinsurance operations
are ranked fifth in the world in terms of net premiums written and we compete
with the world's largest reinsurers as well as dozens of smaller niche
competitors. our life reinsurance operations are ranked in the top four life
reinsurers in the world.
maintaining strong financial strength ratings is an
important factor in remaining competitive in both the reinsurance and direct
insurance markets in which we compete. during 2003, certain external credit
rating agencies announced the lowering of financial strength ratings with
respect to ge global insurance holding and subsidiaries, citing poor recent
operating performance as the principal factor. rating agencies took similar
actions to lower the ratings of many insurers and reinsurers in recent years.
debt ratings for ge global insurance holding affect $1.7 billion of outstanding
debt. while these ratings were lowered in 2003, they remain investment grade. we
do not believe these actions will materially affect ge global insurance holding
liquidity or capital resources or the ability to write future business.
medical systems
medical systems (7.6%, 6.8% and 6.7% of consolidated
revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) includes magnetic resonance (mr)
scanners, computed tomography (ct) scanners, positron emission tomography (pet)
scanners, x-ray, patient monitoring, diagnostic cardiology, nuclear imaging,
ultrasound, bone densitometry, anesthesiology and oxygen therapy devices,
neonatal and critical care technology and other diagnostic and therapy
equipment, and product services sold to hospitals and medical facilities
worldwide. product services include remote diagnostic and repair services for
medical equipment manufactured by ge and by others, as well as computerized data
management and customer productivity services. in 2003, we acquired
instrumentarium and entered into an agreement to acquire amersham plc, a world
leader in diagnostic imaging agents and in life sciences.
medical systems competes against a variety of u.s. and
non-u.s. manufacturers and services operations. technological competence and
innovation, excellence in design, high product performance, quality of services
and competitive pricing are among the key factors affecting competition for
these products and services. throughout the world, we play a critical role in
delivering new technology to improve patient outcomes and productivity tools to
(12)
table of contents
help control healthcare costs. for information about orders and
backlog, see page 53 of the annual report to shareowners.
medical systems is headquartered in waukesha, wisconsin and
operates in north america, europe, asia, australia and south america.
nbc
nbc (5.1%, 5.4% and 4.6% of consolidated revenues in 2003,
2002 and 2001, respectively) is principally engaged in the broadcast of network
television services to affiliated television stations within the united states;
the production of live and recorded television programs; the operation, under
licenses from the federal communications commission (fcc), of television
broadcasting stations; the ownership of four cable/satellite networks around the
world, and investment and programming activities in multimedia, the internet and
cable television. the nbc television network is one of four major u.s.
commercial broadcast television networks and serves more than 230 affiliated
stations within the united states. at december 31, 2003, we owned and/or
operated 29 vhf and uhf television stations including those located in
birmingham, al; los angeles, ca; san diego, ca; hartford, ct; miami, fl;
chicago, il; new york, ny; raleigh-durham, nc; columbus, oh; philadelphia, pa;
providence, ri; dallas, tx; and washington, dc. broadcasting operations,
including the nbc television network, telemundo and owned stations are subject
to fcc regulation. our operations include investment and programming activities
in cable television, principally through cnbc, msnbc, cnbc europe, and cnbc
asia; equity investments in arts and entertainment, the history channel,
valuevision, inc., and a non-voting interest in paxson communications
corporation. in 2002 we acquired the cable network bravo. our strategic alliance
with dow jones merged the european and asian business news services of dow jones
with those of cnbc to form cnbc europe and cnbc asia and, in addition, permits
us to use dow jones editorial resources in the united states. in 2002, we
acquired spanish language broadcaster, telemundo. we have entered into long-term
arrangements with triple crown productions that gives us exclusive american
broadcast rights to the kentucky derby, the preakness stakes and the belmont
stakes through 2005; and the national association for stock car auto racing
(nascar) which in conjunction with turner broadcasting system, inc., gives us
the exclusive television rights to 20 nascar races per network per year through
2006. the business has entered into a long-term arrangement with the united
states golf association (usga) that gives us exclusive national over-the-air
broadcast rights to the usga's major golf championships through the year 2005.
we also have secured exclusive united states television rights to the 2004,
2006, 2008, 2010, 2012 olympic games.
in 2003, ge entered into a definitive agreement to merge
nbc and vivendi universal entertainment. the new company to be called nbc
universal, will be approximately 80% owned by ge and approximately 20% owned by
vivendi universal s.a., and/or its subsidiaries.
nbc is headquartered in new york, new york.
plastics
plastics (3.9%, 4.0% and 4.2% of consolidated revenues in
2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) includes high-performance plastics used by
compounders, molders and major original equipment manufacturers for use in a
variety of applications, including fabrication of automotive parts, computer
enclosures, compact disks and optical-quality media, major appliance parts,
telecommunications equipment and construction materials. market opportunities
for many of these products are created by substituting resins for other
materials, which can provide
(13)
table of contents
customers with productivity through improved material
performance at lower system costs. these materials are sold to a diverse
worldwide customer base, mainly manufacturers. our business has a significant
operating presence around the world and participates in numerous manufacturing
and distribution joint ventures.
the plastics business environment is characterized by
technological innovation and heavy capital investment. being competitive
requires emphasis on efficient manufacturing process implementation and
significant resources devoted to market and application development. competitors
include large, technology-driven suppliers of the same, as well as other
functionally equivalent, materials. the business is highly cyclical and is
extremely sensitive to variations in price and in the availability of raw
materials, such as cumene, benzene and methanol. availability of manufacturing
capacity from the business or its competitors and anticipation of new product or
material performance requirements are key factors affecting competition.
application development and associated technology assistance create incremental
market demand. in addition, product and manufacturing process patents establish
barriers to entry in many product lines.
plastics headquarters are in pittsfield, massachusetts and
operates in north america, asia, europe and south america.
power systems
power systems (13.8%, 17.3% and 16.0% of consolidated
revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001) serves power generation, industrial, government
and other customers worldwide with products and services related to energy
production, distribution and management. in 2003, we made several acquisitions,
including jenbacher a.g. of austria. these acquisitions continue to improve our
ability to serve our global customers and further add to the portfolio of
complete solutions for the energy industry. the acquisition of jenbacher a.g.
added reciprocating gas engines to the portfolio. we offer wind turbines as part
of our renewable energy portfolio, which also includes hydropower and geothermal
technology. the business also packages aircraft engine derivatives for use as
industrial power sources. this activity is also reported in the aircraft engines
segment. gas turbines and generators are used principally in power plants for
generation of electricity and for industrial cogeneration and mechanical drive
applications. our oil and gas business offers advanced technology turbomachinery
products and services for production, lng, transportation, storage, refineries,
petrochemical and distribution systems. with the acquisition of pii, the
business acquired leading technology in total pipeline integrity solutions
including analysis and pipeline asset management. steam turbines and generators
are sold to the electric utility industry and to private industrial customers
for cogeneration applications. nuclear reactors, fuel and support services for
both new and installed boiling water reactors are also a part of this segment. a
complete portfolio of aftermarket services, including equipment upgrades,
contractual services agreements, repairs, equipment installation, monitoring and
diagnostics, asset management and performance optimization tools, remote
performance testing and dln tuning provides customers total solutions to meet
their needs. we continue to invest in advanced technology development that will
provide more value to our customers and more efficient solutions that comply
with today's strict environmental regulations.
worldwide competition for power generation products and
services is intense. demand for most power generation products and services is
global and, as a result, is sensitive to the economic and political environment
of each country in which the business participates, and to regional load growth
requirements and demand side management. in addition, internationally, the
influence of available fuels and related prices has a large impact on demand.
for information about orders and backlog, see page 53 of the annual report to
shareowners.
(14)
table of contents
power systems, headquartered in atlanta, georgia, operates
in north america, europe, south america and asia.
specialty materials
specialty materials (2.3%, 1.8% and 1.4% of consolidated
revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) has a broad product offering,
servicing diverse industries, including automotive, cosmetics, semiconductors,
oil drilling, petrochemical, consumer and telecommunications. we manufacture and
sell high performance specialty materials including silicones, polymer
additives, high purity quartzware and industrial grade and until the sale of the
superabrasives business in late 2003, gem quality diamonds. we also provide and
sell engineered chemicals and treatment services to water and process systems.
specialty materials products are used by compounders, molders and major original
equipment manufacturers in a variety of applications, including fabrication of
automotive parts, medical parts, electronics equipment, semi-conductor equipment
and construction tools. market opportunities for many of these products are
created by substituting specialty materials for other materials, providing
customers with productivity through improved material performance at lower
system costs. water treatment programs are sold to process system facilities in
industrial, commercial and institutional applications. the portfolio of products
and services are sold to a diverse worldwide customer base. we have a
significant operating presence around the world and participate in several
manufacturing and distribution joint ventures. in july 2003, we completed the
acquisition of osi specialties, a leading, global supplier of silanes, specialty
silicones and urethane additives. also, in 2003, we completed the divestiture of
our specialty chemicals and superabrasives units.
our business environment is characterized by technological
innovation and heavy capital investment. being competitive requires emphasis on
efficient manufacturing process implementation and significant resources devoted
to market and application development. competitors include large,
technology-driven suppliers of the same, and other functionally equivalent
materials.
specialty materials is headquartered in wilton, connecticut
and has operations in north america, europe, asia and south america.
transportation systems
transportation systems (1.9%, 1.8%
and 1.9% of consolidated revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) is one
of the world's leading suppliers to the railroad, transit, and mining
industries, providing freight and passenger locomotives, motorized drive systems
for mining trucks and drills, diesel engines for marine and stationary markets,
electrical propulsion and control systems for rapid transit cars, railway
signaling and communications systems, value added services, and information
technology solutions.
product services include maintenance and repair of
locomotives, locomotive components, and communications and logistics systems for
locomotive and train control. ge locomotives currently operate in more than 50
countries worldwide. information about transportation systems orders and backlog
is provided on page 54 of the 2003 annual report to shareowners.
transportation systems headquarters are in erie, pennsylvania.
transportation systems operates in north america, europe and south america.
(15)
table of contents
all other gecs
all other gecs (1.2%, 2.0% and 3.8%
of consolidated revenues in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively) includes
activities and businesses that we do not measure within one of the four other
financial services segments. a description of all other gecs principal
businesses follows.
it solutions
it solutions is a provider of a broad
array of information technology services and products, including full life cycle
services that provide customers with cost-effective control and management of
their information systems. services offered include remote
network/server/security monitoring and management, client support covering asset
management, help desk and desk side support, as well as program management and
professional services for the security, network, server and storage
environments. products offered include desktop personal computers, client server
systems, unix systems, local and wide area network hardware, and software. it
solutions serves commercial, educational and governmental customers in the
united states and canada. during 2003, it solutions sold its business units in
europe.
competition in information technology
services and products is very active and comes from a number of principal
manufacturers and other distributors and resellers. markets for services and
products are highly price competitive. additionally, many information technology
product manufacturers are bypassing traditional information technology resellers
in favor of direct manufacturer relationships with the ultimate end-users. it
solutions' headquarters are in erlanger, kentucky.
ge equity
ge equity manages equity investments in early-stage, early
growth, pre-ipo companies. this portfolio consists primarily of direct
investments in convertible preferred and common stocks in both public and
private companies; we also participate in certain investment limited
partnerships. the portfolio includes investments in the technology and
communications, media and entertainment, business services, financial services
and healthcare sectors. the portfolio is geographically diversified with
investments located throughout the united states, as well as in europe, asia and
latin america.we ceased making new investments in 2002 but continue to provide
financial support to companies in our portfolio which will be managed for
maximum value over time, eventually liquidating. headquarters are in stamford,
connecticut.
american communications
american communications (americom)
engaged primarily as a satellite service supplier to a diverse array of
customers, including the broadcast and cable tv industries, as well as broadcast
radio. it also supplied integrated communications services for government and
commercial customers. americom also operated communications satellites and
maintained a supporting network of earth stations, central terminal offices, and
telemetry, tracking and control facilities. in 2001 we exchanged our satellite
operations, comprising the stock of americom and other related assets and
liabilities, for a combination of cash and 31% of the publicly-traded stock of
ses global, a leading satellite company, in order to create the world's largest
satellite services provider. our investment in ses global is accounted for on
the equity method within commercial finance.
(16)
table of contents
geographic data, exports from the u.s. and total international
operations
geographic data (based on the location of the company
operation supplying goods or services and including exports from the u.s. to
unaffiliated customers) are reported in note 27 to consolidated financial
statements on pages 102 and 103 of the 2003 annual report to shareowners.
additional financial data about our exports from the u.s.
and total international operations are provided on pages 55-56 of the 2003
annual report to shareowners.
orders backlog
see pages 49, 53, 54 and 67 of the 2003 annual report to
shareowners for information about our backlog of unfilled orders.
research and development
total expenditures for research and development were $2,656
million in 2003. total expenditures had been $2,631 million in 2002 and $2,349
million in 2001. of these amounts, $2,103 million in 2003 was ge-funded ($2,215
million in 2002 and $1,980 million in 2001); and $553 million in 2003 was funded
by customers ($416 million in 2002 and $369 million in 2001), principally the
u.s. government. aircraft engines accounts for the largest share of ge's
research and development expenditures from both ge and customer funds. medical
systems and power systems made other significant expenditures of ge and customer
research and development funds.
approximately 13,800 person-years of scientist and
engineering effort were devoted to research and development activities in 2003,
with about 90% of the time involved primarily in ge-funded activities.
environmental matters
see pages 56-57 and 97 of the 2003 annual report to
shareowners for a discussion of environmental matters.
employee relations
at year-end 2003, general electric company and consolidated
affiliates employed 305,000 persons, of whom approximately 155,000 were employed
in the united states. for further information about employees, see page 66 of
the 2003 annual report to shareowners.
approximately 23,300 ge manufacturing and service employees
in the united states are represented for collective bargaining purposes by a
total of approximately 150 different local collective bargaining groups. a
majority of such employees are represented by union locals that are affiliated
with, and bargain in conjunction with, the international union of electronic,
electrical, salaried, machine and furniture workers (iue/cwa-afl-cio). during
2003, general electric company negotiated four-year contracts with unions
representing a substantial majority of those united states employees who are
represented by unions. most of these contracts will terminate in june 2007. nbc
is party to approximately 120 labor agreements covering about 2,100 staff
employees (and a large number of freelance employees) in the united states.
these agreements are with various labor unions, expire at various dates and are
generally for a term ranging from three to five years.
(17)
table of contents
executive officers
see part iii, item 10 of this 10-k report for information
about executive officers of the registrant.
other
because of the diversity of our products and services, as
well as the wide geographic dispersion of our production facilities, we use
numerous sources for the wide variety of raw materials needed for our
operations. we have not been adversely affected by the inability to obtain raw
materials.
we own, or hold licenses to use, numerous patents. new
patents are continuously being obtained through our research and development
activities as existing patents expire. patented inventions are used both within
the company and licensed to others, but no operating segment is substantially
dependent on any single patent or group of related patents.
agencies of the u.s. government constitute our largest
single customer. an analysis of sales of goods and services as a percentage of
revenues follows:
% of consolidated revenues
% of ge revenues
total sales to u.s. government agencies
%
%
%
%
%
%
aircraft engines defense-related sales
ge is a trademark and service mark of general electric
company; nbc is a trademark and service mark of national broadcasting company,
inc.; and msnbc is a trademark and service mark of msnbc cable, llc. ge90 and
cf34 are trademarks of general electric company. cfm56 is a trademark of cfm
international, a 50/50 joint company between snecma moteurs of france and
general electric company.
our annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form
10-q, current reports on form8-k, and amendments to those reports are
available, without charge, on our website,
www.ge.com/en/company/investor/secfilings.htm, as soon as reasonably practicable
after they are filed electronically with the sec. copies are also available,
without charge, from ge corporate investor communications, 3135 easton turnpike,
fairfield, ct 06828.
item 2. properties
manufacturing operations are carried out at approximately
188 manufacturing plants located in 36 states in the united states and puerto
rico and at 250 manufacturing plants located in 35 other countries.
item 3. legal proceedings
we are not involved in any material pending legal
proceedings.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
not applicable.
(18)
table of contents
part ii
item 5. market for the registrant's common equity and related
stockholder matters
with respect to "market information", in the united states,
ge common stock is listed on the new york stock exchange (its principal market)
and on the boston stock exchange. ge common stock also is listed on the stock
exchange, london and on euronext paris. trading, as reported on the new york
stock exchange, inc., composite transactions tape, and dividend information
follows:
common stock market price
dividends
(in dollars)
high
low
declared
fourth quarter
$31.30
$27.37
$.20
third quarter
32.42
26.90
.19
second quarter
31.66
25.50
.19
first quarter
28.00
21.30
.19
fourth quarter
$27.98
$21.40
$.19
third quarter
32.98
23.02
.18
second quarter
37.80
27.42
.18
first quarter
41.84
34.49
.18
as of december 31, 2003, there were about 670,000
shareowner accounts of record.
the remaining information called for by this item relating
to "securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans" is
reported in note 25 on pages 99-100 of the annual report to shareowners for the
fiscal year ended december 31, 2003.
item 6. selected financial data
reported as data for revenues; net earnings; net earnings
per share (basic and diluted); dividends declared; dividends declared per share;
long-term borrowings; and total assets appearing on page 66 of the 2003 annual
report to shareowners for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2003.
item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations
reported on pages 44-47 and 49-69 (and graphs on pages 44,
45, 47, 55, 56 and 61) of the annual report to shareowners for the fiscal year
ended december 31, 2003.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk
reported on page 60 of the annual report to shareowners for
the fiscal year ended december 31, 2003.
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
see index under item 15.
(19)
table of contents
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item 9a. controls and procedures
under the direction of our chief executive officer and
chief financial officer, we evaluated our disclosure controls and procedures and
internal control over financial reporting and concluded that (i) our disclosure
controls and procedures were effective as of december 31, 2003 and (ii) no
change in internal control over financial reporting occurred during the quarter
ended december 31, 2003 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, such internal control over financial reporting.
(20)
table of contents
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
executive officers of the registrant (as of march 1, 2004)
name
position
age
date assumed
executive
officer position
jeffrey r. immelt
chairman of the board and chief executive officer
january 1997
philip d. ameen
vice president and comptroller
april 1994
ferdinando beccalli
president and chief executive officer, ge europe
september 2003
charlene t. begley
vice president, ge transportation systems
january 2003
david l. calhoun
senior vice president, ge aircraft engines
june 1995
james p. campbell
senior vice president, ge consumer products
april 2001
william h. cary
vice president, corporate investor relations
march 2003
kathryn a. cassidy
vice president and ge treasurer
march 2003
william j. conaty
senior vice president, human resources
october 1993
dennis d. dammerman
vice chairman of the board and executive officer
march 1984
brackett b. denniston
vice president and general counsel
february 2004
scott c. donnelly
senior vice president, global research
august 2000
shane fitzsimons
vice president, financial planning and analysis
february 2004
michael d. fraizer
senior vice president, ge insurance and ge financial
september 2002
yoshiaki fujimori
senior vice president, ge asia
june 2001
arthur h. harper
senior vice president, ge equipment management
september 2002
benjamin w. heineman, jr.
senior vice president, law and public affairs and secretary
september 1987
joseph m. hogan
senior vice president, ge medical systems
november 2000
robert a. jeffe
senior vice president, corporate business development
december 2001
john krenicki, jr.
senior vice president, ge plastics
march 2000
michael a. neal
senior vice president, ge commercial finance
september 2002
david r. nissen
senior vice president, ge consumer finance
september 2002
james a. parke
senior vice president, and chief financial officer,
september 2002
ge capital
ronald r. pressman
senior vice president, employers reinsurance corporation
september 2002
gary m. reiner
senior vice president, chief information officer
january 1991
john g. rice
senior vice president, ge power systems
september 1997
keith s. sherin
senior vice president, finance, and chief financial officer
january 1999
lloyd g. trotter
senior vice president, ge industrial systems
november 1992
william a. woodburn
senior vice president, ge specialty materials
june 2001
robert c. wright
vice chairman of the board and executive officer
july 2000
all executive officers are elected by the board of
directors for an initial term which continues until the board meeting
immediately preceding the next annual statutory meeting of shareowners, and
thereafter are elected for one-year terms or until their successors have been
elected. all executive officers have been executives of ge for the last five
years except robert a. jeffe. mr. jeffe was a managing director of credit suisse
first boston prior to joining ge in 2001.
(21)
table of contents
the policies comprising ge's code of conduct are set forth
in the company's integrity manual, integrity: the spirit and the
letter of our commitment. these policies satisfy the sec's requirements for
a "code of ethics," and apply to all directors, officers and employees. the
integrity manual is published on the integrity section of the company's website
at www.ge.com. the board will not permit any waiver of any ethics policy
for any director or executive officer.
the remaining information called for by this item is
incorporated by reference to "election of directors"
in the definitive proxy statement relating to the registrant's annual meeting of
shareowners to be held
april 28, 2004.
item 11. executive compensation
incorporated by reference to "information relating to
directors, nominees and executive officers," "contingent long-term performance
incentive awards," "summary compensation table," "stock options and stock
appreciation rights" and "retirement benefits" in the definitive proxy statement
relating to the registrant's annual meeting of shareowners to be held april 28,
2004.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management
incorporated by reference to "information relating to
directors, nominees and executive officers" and "proposal to add a revenue
measurement to executive officer performance goals to long-term performance
awards" in the registrant's definitive proxy statement relating to its annual
meeting of shareowners to be held april 28, 2004.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
incorporated by reference to "information relating to
directors, nominees and executive officers" in the registrant's definitive proxy
statement relating to its annual meeting of shareowners to be held april 28,
2004.
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
incorporated by reference to "independent auditor" in the
registrant's definitive proxy statement relating to its annual meeting of
shareowners to be held april 28, 2004.
(22)
table of contents
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules and reports on
form 8-k
(a) 1. financial statements applicable to general electric
company and consolidated affiliates are contained on the page(s) indicated in
the ge annual report to shareowners for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2003,
a copy of which is attached as exhibit 13.
annual
report
page(s)
statement of earnings for the years ended december 31, 2003,
2002 and 2001
consolidated statement of changes in shareowners' equity
for the years ended december 31, 2003, 2002 and 2001
statement of financial position at december 31, 2003 and
statement of cash flows for the years ended december 31,
2003,
2002 and 2001
independent auditors' report
other financial information:
notes to consolidated financial statements
76-111
operating segment information
48-55
102-103
112-113
geographic segment information
55-56 and 102-103
operations by quarter (unaudited)
(a) 2. the schedules listed in reg. 210.5-04 have been
omitted because they are not applicable or the required information is shown in
the consolidated financial statements or notes thereto.
(a) 3. exhibit index
(3) the certificate of incorporation, as amended, and
by-laws, as amended, of general electric company are incorporated by
reference to exhibit (3) of general electric's current report on form 8-k
dated april 27, 2000.
4(a) amended and restated general electric capital
corporation (gecc) standard global multiple series indenture provisions
dated as of february 27, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(a) to
gecc's registration statement on form s-3, file no. 333-59707).
4(b) third amended and restated indenture dated as of
february 27, 1997 between gecc and jpmorgan chase bank (formerly known as
the chase manhattan bank), as successor trustee (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 4(c) to gecc's registration statement on form s-3, file no.
333-59707).
(23)
table of contents
4(c) first supplemental indenture dated as of may 3,
1999, supplemental to third amended and restated indenture dated as of
february 27, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(dd) to gecc's
post-effective amendment no. 1 to registration statement on form s-3, file
no. 333-76479).
4(d) second supplemental indenture dated as of july 2,
2001, supplemental to third amended and restated indenture dated as of
february 27, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4 (f) to gecc's
post-effective amendment no.1 to registration statement on form s-3, file
no. 333-40880).
4(e) third supplemental indenture dated as of november
22, 2002, supplemental to third amended and restated indenture dated as of
february 27, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(cc) to gecc's
post-effective amendment no. 1 to the registration statement on form s-3,
file no. 333-100527).
4(f) senior note indenture dated as of january 1, 2003,
between ge and the bank of new york, as trustee for the senior debt
securities. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(a) to ge's current
report on form 8-k filed on january 29, 2003, file no. 1-35).
4(g) form of global medium-term note, series a, fixed
rate registered note (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(m) to gecc's
registration statement on form s-3, file no. 333-100527).
4(h) form of global medium-term note, series a,
floating rate registered note (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4(n) to
the gecc's registration statement on form s-3, file no. 333-100527).
4(i) form of libor floating rate note (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 4 of general electric's current report on form 8-k
dated october 29, 2003).
4(j) agreement to furnish to the securities and
exchange commission upon request a copy of instruments defining the rights
of holders of certain long-term debt of the registrant and consolidated
subsidiaries.*
(10) all of the following exhibits consist of executive
compensation plans or arrangements:
(a) general electric incentive compensation plan,
as amended effective july 1, 1991 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(a) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1991).
(b) general electric insurance plan for directors
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(i) to general electric annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year
ended december 31, 1980).
(c) general electric financial planning program, as
amended through september 1993 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(h) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1993).
(24)
table of contents
(d) general electric supplemental life insurance
program, as amended february 8, 1991 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(i) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission
file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1990).
(e) general electric directors' retirement and
optional life insurance plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(l)
to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file number
1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1986).
(f) general electric 1987 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(k) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1987).
(g) general electric 1991 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(n) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1990).
(h) general electric 1994 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(o) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1993).
(i) general electric directors' charitable gift
plan, as amended through december 2002 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(i) to general electric report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2002).
(j) general electric leadership life insurance
program, effective january 1, 1994 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(r) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1993).
(k) general electric 1996 stock option plan for
non-employee directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit a to the
general electric proxy statement for its annual meeting of shareowners
held on april 24, 1996).
(l) general electric 1995 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(t) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1995).
(m) general electric 1996 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(v) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1996).
(n) general electric 1997 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(t) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1997).
(25)
table of contents
(o) general electric 1990 long term incentive plan
as restated and amended effective august 1, 1997 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10(u) to general electric annual report on form
10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december
31, 1997).
(p) general electric deferred compensation plan for
directors, as amended december 19, 1997 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10(v) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission
file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1997).
(q) general electric 1999 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(v) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1998).
(r) general electric 1999 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(v) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 1999).
(s) general electric 2000 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(u) to general electric
annual report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal
year ended december 31, 2000).
(t) general electric supplementary pension plan, as
amended effective july 1, 2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10(v) to general electric annual report on form 10-k (commission file
number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2000).
(u) form of ge executive life insurance agreement
provided to ge officers, as revised september 2000 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10(w) to general electric annual report on form
10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december
31, 2000).
(v) general electric 2001 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(x) to general electric
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year
ended december 31, 2001).
(w) general electric non-employee director fee plan
(formerly the deferred compensation plan for directors), as amended
through january 2003. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(w) to
general electric report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for
the fiscal year ended december 31, 2002).
(x) general electric 2003 executive deferred salary
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(x) to general electric
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year
ended december 31, 2002).
(y) amendment no. 1 to general electric 1990 long
term incentive plan as restated and amended effective august 1, 1997
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10(y) to general electric report
on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 2002).
(26)
table of contents
(11) statement re computation of per share earnings.**
(12) computation of ratio of earnings to fixed
charges.*
(13) ge's 2003 annual report to shareowners, certain
sections of which have been incorporated herein by reference.*
(21) subsidiaries of registrant.*
(23) consent of independent auditors incorporated by
reference in each prospectus constituting part of the registration
statements on form s-3 (registration nos. 33-50639, 33-39596, 33-39596-01,
33-29024, 333-59671, 333-96571, 333-104526 and 333-110771), on form s-4
(registration no. 333-107556) and on form s-8 (registration nos. 333-01953,
333-42695, 333-74415, 333-83164, 333-98877, 333-94101, 333-65781, 333-88233,
333-57734, 333-99671 and 333-102111).*
(24) power of attorney.*
31(a) certification pursuant section 302 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.*
31(b) certification pursuant to section 302 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.*
(32) certification pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350,
as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.*
99(a)income maintenance agreement, dated march 28,
1991, between the registrant and general electric capital corporation
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 28(a) to general electric annual
report on form 10-k (commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended
december 31, 1990).
99(b)undertaking for inclusion in registration
statements on form s-8 of general electric company (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 99(b) to general electric annual report on form 10-k
(commission file number 1-35) for the fiscal year ended december 31, 1992).
99(c)letter, dated february 4, 1999, from dennis d.
dammerman of general electric company to denis j. nayden of general electric
capital corporation pursuant to which general electric company agrees to
provide additional equity to general electric capital corporation in
conjunction with certain redemptions by general electric capital corporation
of shares of its variable cumulative preferred stock. (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 99 (g) to general electric capital corporation's
post-effective amendment no. 1 to registration statement on form s-3, file
no. 333-59707).
*filed electronically herewith.
**information required to be presented in exhibit 11 is
now provided in note 8 to the 2003 annual report to shareowners in
accordance with the provisions of fasb statement of financial accounting
standards (sfas) no. 128, earnings per share.
(27)
table of contents
(b)reports on form 8-k during the quarter ended
december 31, 2003.
a form 8-k was filed on november 19, 2003, announcing
the issuance of a press release concerning management's intention to
pursue an initial public offering of a new company named genworth
financial, inc. that will comprise most of the company's life and
mortgage insurance operations. the company also announced the issuance
of a press release setting forth ge's earnings outlook for the fourth
quarter of 2003 and for 2004 and 2005.
a form 8-k was filed on october 29, 2003, concerning an
underwriting agreement covering the issuance and sale of libor floating
rate notes.
a form 8-k was filed on october 10, 2003, announcing the
issuance of press releases concerning (i)the signing of a definitive
agreement for the merger of nbc with vivendi universal entertainment and
(ii)setting forth ge's third quarter 2003 earnings and (iii) relating
to the company entering into an agreement through which ge will acquire
amersham plc.
(28)
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section 13 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this annual
report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2003, to be signed on
its behalf by the undersigned, and in the capacities indicated, thereunto duly
authorized in the town of fairfield and state of connecticut on the 1st
day of march 2004.
general electric company
(registrant)
by
/s/ keith s. sherin
keith s. sherin
senior vice president, finance, and
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
(29)
table of contents
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of
the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signer
title
date
/s/ keith s. sherin
principal financial officer
march 1, 2004
keith s. sherin
senior vice president, finance,
and chief financial officer
/s/ philip d. ameen
principal accounting officer
march 1, 2004
philip d. ameen
vice president and comptroller
jeffrey r. immelt*
chairman of the board of directors
(principal executive officer)
james i. cash, jr.*
director
dennis d. dammerman*
director
ann m. fudge*
director
claudio x. gonzalez*
director
andrea jung*
director
alan g. lafley
director
kenneth g. langone*
director
ralph s. larsen*
director
rochelle b. lazarus*
director
sam nunn*
director
roger s. penske
director
andrew c. sigler*
director
robert j. swieringa*
director
douglas a. warner iii*
director
robert c. wright*
director
a majority of the board of directors
*by
/s/ robert e. healing
robert e. healing
attorney-in-fact
march 1, 2004
(30)
