10-k
l32996ae10vk.htm
the procter & gamble company   10-k
the procter & gamble company   10-k
table of contents
the procter & gamble company
and subsidiaries
annual report on form 10-k
to the
securities and exchange commission
for the
year ended june 30, 2008
******************************************
table of contents
united states securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k
(mark one)
annual report on form 10-k pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008
or
o
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file no.1-434
the procter & gamble company
one procter & gamble plaza, cincinnati, ohio 45202
telephone (513)983-1100
irs employer identification no.31-0411980
state of incorporation: ohio
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, without par value
new york, paris
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of
the securities act. yes  no o
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or
15(d) of the act. yes o no
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months
(or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has
been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days. yes  no o
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation
s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge,
in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k. o
indicate by check
mark whether the
registrant is a
large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer,  a non-accelerated
filer, or a
smaller reporting company.
see the definitions of large accelerated
filer, accelerated
filer
and smaller reporting company in
rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):
large accelerated filer
accelerated filer
o
non-accelerated filer o
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
smaller reporting company
o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the
exchange act). yes o no
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates amounted to $226billion on
december31, 2007.
there were 3,034,310,829 shares of common stock outstanding as of july31, 2008.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008 are
incorporated by reference into parti, partii and partiv of this report to the extent described
herein.
portions of the proxy statement for the 2008 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by
reference into partiii of this report to the extent described herein.
table of contents
part i
item1. business
item1a. risk factors
item1b. unresolved staff comments
item2. properties
item3. legal proceedings
item4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6. selected financial data
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8. financial statements and supplementary data
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a. controls and procedures
item9b. other information
part iii
item10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11. executive compensation
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13. certain relationships and related transactions
item14. principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item15. exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
exhibit index
ex-10.1
ex-10.2
ex-10.3
ex-10.5
ex-10.6
ex-10.10
ex-10.14
ex-11
ex-12
ex-13
ex-21
ex-23
ex-31
ex-32
ex-99.1
table of contents
part i
item1. business.
additional information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to
managements discussion and analysis, which appears on pages 39-55; note 1, summary of significant
accounting policies, which appears on pages 60-63; note 2, acquisitions, which appears on page 63;
and note 12, segment information, which appears on pages 74-75 of the annual report to shareholders
for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008. unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms the
company, p&g, we, our or us as used herein refers to the procter & gamble company (the
registrant) and its subsidiaries.
the procter & gamble company is focused on providing branded consumer goods products of
superior quality and value to improve the lives of the worlds consumers. the company was
incorporated in ohio in 1905, having been built from a business founded in 1837 by william procter
and james gamble. today, we market our products in more than 180 countries.
throughout this form 10-k, we incorporate by reference information from other documents filed
with the securities and exchange commission (sec).
the companys annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q and current reports
on form 8-k are filed electronically with the sec. the sec maintains an internet site that
contains these reports at: http://www.sec.gov. you can also access these reports through links
from our website at: www.pg.com/investors/sectionmain.shtml.
copies of these reports are also available, without charge, by contacting the procter & gamble
company, shareholder services department, p.o. box 5572, cincinnati, ohio 45201-5572.
financial information about segments
in fiscal year 2008, the company was organized into three global business units: beauty;
health & well-being; and household care. we had six reportable segments under u.s. gaap: beauty;
grooming; health care; snacks, coffee and pet care; fabric care and home care; and baby care and
family care. many of the factors necessary for an understanding of these businesses are similar.
operating margins of the individual businesses vary slightly due to the nature of materials and
processes used to manufacture the products, the capital intensity of the businesses and differences
in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales. net sales growth by
business is also expected to vary slightly due to the underlying growth of the markets of each
business and products. while none of our reportable segments are highly seasonal, components
within certain of our reportable segments, such as batteries (fabric care and home care),
appliances (grooming) and prestige fine fragrances (beauty) are seasonal. in addition,
anticipation or occurrence of natural disasters, such as hurricanes, can drive unusually high
demand for batteries.
additional information about our businesses can be found in managements discussion and
analysis, pages 39-55, and note 12, segment information, which appears on pages 74-75 of the annual
report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008.
table of contents
narrative description of business
business model. our business model relies on the continued growth and success of existing
brands and products, as well as the creation of new products. the markets and industry segments in
which we offer our products are highly competitive. our products are sold in over 180 countries
around the world primarily through mass merchandisers, grocery stores, membership club stores, drug
stores and in high-frequency stores, the neighborhood stores which serve many consumers in
developing markets. we work collaboratively with our customers to improve the in-store presence of
our products and win the first moment of truth  when a consumer is shopping in the store. we
must also win the second moment of truth  when a consumer uses the product, evaluates how well
it met his or her expectations and whether it was a good value. we believe we must continue to
provide new, innovative products and branding to the consumer in order to grow our business.
research and product development activities, designed to enable sustained organic growth, continued
to carry a high priority during the past fiscal year. while many of the benefits from these
efforts will not be realized until future years, we believe these activities demonstrate our
commitment to future growth.
key product categories. in 2008, one product category accounted for 10% or more of
consolidated net sales. the laundry category constituted approximately 16% of net sales for fiscal
years 2008, 2007 and 2006.
key customers. our customers include mass merchandisers, grocery stores, membership club
stores, drug stores and high-frequency stores. sales to wal-mart stores, inc. and its affiliates
represent approximately 15% of our total revenue in 2008, 2007 and 2006. no other customer
represents more than 10% of our net sales. our top ten customers account for approximately 31% of
our total unit volume in 2008, compared to 30% of total unit volume in 2007 and 31% in 2006. the
nature of our business results in no material backlog orders or contracts with the government. we
believe our practices related to working capital items for customers and suppliers are consistent
with the industry segments in which we compete.
sources and availability of materials. almost all of the raw and packaging materials used by
the company are purchased from others, some of whom are single-source suppliers. we produce raw
materials, primarily chemicals, for further use in the manufacturing process. in addition, fuel,
natural gas and derivative products are important commodities used in our plants, products and in
the trucks used to deliver our products to customers. the prices we pay for materials and other
commodities are subject to fluctuation. when prices for these items change, we may or may not pass
on the change to our customers, depending on the magnitude and expected duration of the change.
the company purchases a substantial variety of other raw and packaging materials, no one of which
is material to our business taken as a whole.
trademarks and patents. we own or have licenses under patents and registered trademarks which
are used in connection with our activity in all businesses. some of these patents or licenses
cover significant product formulation and processes used to manufacture our products. the
trademarks are important to the overall marketing and branding of our products.
all major products and trademarks in each business are registered. in part, our success can be
attributed to the existence and continued protection of these trademarks, patents and licenses.
table of contents
competitive condition. the markets in which our products are sold are highly competitive. our
products compete against similar products of many large and small companies, including well-known
global competitors. we market our products with advertising, promotions and other vehicles to
build awareness of our brands in conjunction with an extensive sales force. we believe this
combination provides the most efficient method of marketing for these types of products. product
quality, performance, value and packaging are also important competitive factors.
research
and development expenditures. research and development
expenditures enable us to
develop technologies and obtain patents across all categories in order to meet the needs and
improve the lives of our consumers. total research and development expenses were $2,226million in
2008, $2,112million in 2007 and $2,075million in 2006.
expenditures for environmental compliance. expenditures for compliance with federal, state and
local environmental laws and regulations are fairly consistent from year to year and are not
material to the company. no material change is expected in fiscal year 2009.
employees. the company has approximately 138,000 employees.
financial information about foreign and domestic operations
net sales in the united states account for approximately 40% of total net sales. no other
individual country had net sales exceeding 10% of total net sales. operations outside the united
states are generally characterized by the same conditions discussed in the description of the
business above and may also be affected by additional factors including changing currency values,
different rates of inflation, economic growth and political and economic uncertainties and
disruptions. our sales by geography for the fiscal years ended june30 were as follows:
north america
%
%
%
western europe
%
%
%
northeast asia
%
%
%
developing markets
%
%
%
developing markets include latin america, central & eastern europe/middle east and africa,
greater china, and asean/australasia/india.
net sales and assets in the united states and internationally were as follows (in millions):
net sales (for the year ended june 30)
assets (as of june 30)
united states
$
33,005
$
31,946
$
29,462
$
73,751
$
73,527
$
75,444
international
50,498
44,530
38,760
70,241
64,487
60,251
table of contents
development of the business
the discussion below provides insight to the general development of our business, including
the material acquisitions and disposition of assets over the past five years.
gillette acquisition. on october1, 2005, we completed the acquisition of the gillette
company. pursuant to the acquisition agreement, which provided for the exchange of 0.975 shares
of the procter & gamble company common stock, on a tax-free basis, for each share of the gillette
company, we issued 962million shares of the procter & gamble company common stock. we also issued
79million stock options in exchange for the gillette companys outstanding stock options. under
the purchase method of accounting, the total consideration was approximately $53.43billion
including common stock, the fair value of vested stock options and acquisition costs.
the acquisition of the gillette company provided us with global market leadership in male
grooming, selected female grooming products, alkaline batteries and in manual and power
toothbrushes. total sales for the gillette company during its most recent pre-acquisition year
ended december31, 2004 were $10.5billion.
in order to obtain regulatory approval of the transaction, we were required to divest certain
overlapping businesses. we completed the divestiture of the spinbrush toothbrush business,
rembrandt (a gillette oral care product line) and right guard and other gillette deodorant brands
during the fiscal year ended june30, 2006.
juice divestiture. in august2004 the company completed the divestiture of its juice business.
wella acquisition. in september2003, the company acquired a controlling interest in wella.
through a stock purchase agreement with the majority shareholders of wella and a tender offer made
on the remaining shares, we acquired approximately 81% of the outstanding wella shares (99% of the
voting class shares and 45% of the preference shares). in june2004, a companys subsidiary and
wella entered into a domination and profit transfer agreement (the domination agreement). under
the domination agreement, we are entitled to exercise full operating control and receive 100% of
the future earnings of wella. as consideration for the domination agreement, we agreed to pay the
remaining shareholders of wella a guaranteed annual dividend payment. alternatively, the remaining
wella shareholders could have elected to tender their shares to the company for an agreed price.
the fair value of the total guaranteed annual dividend payments was $1.11billion, which is the
approximate cost if all remaining shares were tendered. during the year ended june30, 2006, a
portion of the remaining shares were tendered, resulting in a $944million reduction in our
liability under the domination agreement. in december2005, the wella shareholder meeting approved
the squeeze-out of the remaining shareholders. upon the registration of the squeeze-out in the
commercial register on november12, 2007, the remaining shares of the minority shareholders were
transferred to the company in exchange for a pre-determined cash consideration. while the
domination agreement transaction, including the guaranteed dividend payment and the cash offer, as
well as
the squeeze-out transaction, including the cash consideration, have been challenged by the
former minority shareholders, the company now owns 100% of the wella stock.
table of contents
the total purchase price for wella, including acquisition costs and the costs of the
guaranteed dividend and squeeze-out payments, was $6.27billion based on exchange rates at the
acquisition dates. the acquisition was financed by a mixture of available cash balances, debt and
the liability recorded under the domination agreement.
hutchison acquisition. in june2004, we purchased the remaining 20% stake of our china venture
from our partner, hutchison whampoa china ltd. (hutchison), giving us full ownership of our
operations in china. the net purchase price was $1.85billion, which is the purchase price of
$2.00billion net of minority interest and certain obligations that were eliminated as a result of
the transaction. the acquisition was funded by debt.
item1a. risk factors.
we discuss our expectations regarding future performance, events and outcomes, such as our
business outlook and objectives in this form 10-k, the annual report to shareholders, quarterly
reports, press releases and other written and oral communications. all statements, except for
historical and present factual information, are forward-looking statements and are based on
financial data and business plans available only as of the time the statements are made, which may
become out of date or incomplete. we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements
as a result of new information, future events, or other factors. forward-looking statements are
inherently uncertain, and investors must recognize that events could significantly differ from our
expectations.
the following discussion of risk factors identifies the most significant factors that may
adversely affect our business, operations, financial position or future financial performance.
this information should be read in conjunction with managements discussion and analysis (md&a) and
the consolidated financial statements and related notes incorporated by reference into this report.
the following discussion of risks is not all inclusive but is designed to highlight what we
believe are important factors to consider when evaluating our expectations. these factors could
cause our future results to differ from those in the forward-looking statements and from historical
trends.
a material change in consumer demand for our products could have a significant impact on our
business.
we are a consumer products company and rely on continued global demand for our brands and
products. to achieve business goals, we must develop and sell products that appeal to consumers.
this is dependent on a number of factors including our ability to develop effective sales,
advertising and marketing programs in an increasingly fragmented media environment. we expect to
achieve our financial targets, in part, by shifting our portfolio towards faster growing, higher
margin businesses. if demand and growth rates fall substantially below expected levels or our
market share declines significantly in these businesses, our results could be negatively impacted.
this could occur due to unforeseen negative economic or political events or to changes in consumer
trends and habits. in addition, our continued success is dependent on leading-edge innovation,
with respect to both products and operations. this means we must be able to obtain patents that
lead to the development of products that appeal to our consumers across the world.
the ability to achieve our business objectives is dependent on how well we can respond to our local
and global competitors.
table of contents
across all of our categories, we compete against a wide variety of global and local
competitors. as a result, there are ongoing competitive product and pricing pressures in the
environments in which we operate, as well as challenges in maintaining profit margins. to address
these challenges, we must be able to successfully respond to competitive factors, including
pricing, promotional incentives and trade terms, as well as technological advances and patents
granted to competition.
our ability to successfully integrate key acquisitions, such as gillette, could impact our business
results.
since our goals include a growth component tied to acquisitions, we must be able to
successfully manage and integrate key acquisitions, such as the acquisition of the gillette
company. specifically, we must be able to integrate acquisitions without any significant
disruption to our ability to manage and execute business plans on our base businesses. in
addition, our financial results could be adversely impacted if we are not able to deliver the
expected cost and growth synergies associated with our acquisitions.
our businesses face cost pressures which could affect our business results.
our costs are subject to fluctuations, particularly due to changes in commodity prices, raw
materials, cost of labor, foreign exchange and interest rates. our costs in 2008 were impacted by
higher commodity costs and this trend is likely to continue in 2009. therefore, our success is
dependent, in part, on our continued ability to manage these fluctuations through pricing actions,
cost savings projects (including outsourcing projects), sourcing decisions and certain hedging
transactions. in the manufacturing and general overhead areas, we need to maintain key
manufacturing and supply arrangements, including any key sole supplier and sole manufacturing plant
arrangements.
we face risks associated with significant international operations.
we conduct business across the globe with a significant portion of our sales outside the
united states. we expect to achieve our financial targets, in part, by achieving disproportionate
growth in developing regions. should growth rates or our market share fall substantially below
expected levels in these regions, our results could be negatively impacted. in addition, economic
changes, terrorist activity and political unrest may result in business interruption, inflation,
deflation or decreased demand for our products. our success will depend, in part, on our ability
to manage continued global political and/or economic uncertainty, especially in our significant
geographical markets, as well as any political or economic disruption due to terrorist and other
hostile activities.
our business is subject to regulation in the u.s. and abroad.
changes in laws, regulations and the related interpretations may alter the environment in
which we do business. this includes changes in environmental, competitive and product-related
laws, as well as changes in accounting standards and taxation requirements. accordingly, our
ability to manage regulatory, tax and legal matters (including product liability, patent, and
intellectual property matters), and to resolve pending legal matters without significant
liability, including the competition law and antitrust investigations described in parti, item3
of this form
10-k, which could require the company to take significant reserves or pay significant fines
during a reporting period, may materially impact our results.
if the reputation of one or more of our leading brands erodes significantly, it could have a
material impact on our financial results.
table of contents
our companys financial success is directly dependent on the success of our brands,
particularly our billion-dollar brands. the success of these brands can suffer if our marketing
plans or product initiatives do not have the desired impact on a brands image or its ability to
attract consumers. further, our companys results could be negatively impacted if one of our
leading brands suffers a substantial impediment to its reputation due to real or perceived quality
issues.
a material change in customer relationships or in customer demand for our products could have a
significant impact on our business.
our success is dependent on our ability to successfully manage relationships with our retail
trade customers. this includes our ability to offer trade terms that are acceptable to our
customers and are aligned with our pricing and profitability targets. our business could suffer if
we cannot reach agreement with a key customer based on our trade terms and principles. further,
there is a continuing trend towards retail trade consolidation and this leads to more complex work
across broader geographic boundaries for both us and key retailers. this can be particularly
difficult when major customers are addressing local trade pressures or local law and regulation
changes. further, our business would be negatively impacted if a key customer were to significantly
reduce the range or inventory level of our products.
item1b. unresolved staff comments.
none.
item2. properties.
in the united states, we own and operate 39 manufacturing facilities located in 23 different
states. in addition, we own and operate 103 manufacturing facilities in 42 other countries. many
of the domestic and international facilities produce products for multiple businesses. beauty
products are manufactured at 42 of these locations; grooming products are manufactured at 13 of
these locations; fabric care and home care products at 49; baby care and family care products at
29; pet care, snacks and coffee products at 15; and health care products at 37. management
believes that the companys production facilities are adequate to support the business efficiently
and that the properties and equipment have been well maintained.
item3. legal proceedings.
the company is subject, from time to time, to certain legal proceedings and claims arising out
of our business, which cover a wide range of matters, including antitrust and trade regulation,
product liability, advertising, contracts, environmental issues, patent and trademark matters, and
taxes.
recently, the company has become subject to a variety of investigations into potential
competition law violations in the european union. in july2006, french authorities, in connection
with an inquiry into potential competition law violations in france, entered the premises of two of
the companys french subsidiaries and seized a variety of documents. in april2008, uk authorities
initiated an investigation concerning potential antitrust violations in the uk involving one of the
companys subsidiaries. in june2008, european commission officials, with the
assistance of the national authorities from a variety of countries, started an investigation into
potential competition law violations in a variety of countries across the european union. at the
same time, the national authorities in spain and italy initiated additional investigations into
potential antitrust concerns within those countries. in connection with these investigations, a
number of the companys subsidiaries were visited and documents seized. the company or its
table of contents
subsidiaries are also involved in other competition law investigations in belgium, romania and
greece. we believe that all of the above matters involve a number of other consumer products
companies and/or retail customers. the companys policy is to comply with all laws and
regulations, including all antitrust and competition laws.
competition and antitrust law investigations often continue for several years and, if
violations are found, can result in substantial fines. at this point, no formal claims have been
made against the company or any of our subsidiaries in connection with any of above inquiries.
during the fiscal year just ended, certain of the companys subsidiaries in germany received a
formal complaint alleging violations of the antitrust laws. we are now discussing the situation
with the german authorities.
although the company cannot accurately predict what financial impact may ultimately result
from the totality of these matters, we have taken and will take reserves as appropriate. please
refer to the companys risk factors in item1a of this form 10-k for additional information.
item4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders.
not applicable.
table of contents
executive officers of the registrant
the names, ages and positions held by the executive officers of the company on august28, 2008
are:
elected to
name
position
age
officer position
alan g. lafley
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer
director since june8, 2000
susan e. arnold
president  global business units
robert a. mcdonald
chief operating officer
clayton c. daley, jr.
vice chairman & chief financial officer
werner geissler
vice chairman  global operations
e. dimitri panayoptopoulos
vice chairman  global household care
edward d. shirley
vice chairman  global beauty & grooming
robert a. steele
vice chairman  global health & well
being
bruce brown
chief technology officer
r. keith harrison, jr.
global product supply officer
steven w. jemison
chief legal officer and secretary
mariano martin
global customer business development
officer
moheet nagrath
global human resources officer
charlotte r. otto
global external relations officer
filippo passerini
chief information officer and global
services officer
marc s. pritchard
global marketing officer
valarie l. sheppard
vice president and comptroller
table of contents
all of the executive officers named above, excluding mr.shirley, have been employed by the
company for more than five years. during the previous five years, mr.shirley has held the
following positions within the company: vice chairman  global beauty and grooming (july1, 2008 -
present), group president  north america (april17, 2006  june30, 2008) and president -
commercial operations  gillette international (october11, 2005  april16, 2006). mr.shirley
also held the following positions with the gillette company prior to its acquisition by the company
in october2005: president  gillette international commercial operations (june2004  october11,
2005) and senior vice president, gillette global value chain & global marketing resources (june
2002  may2004).
table of contents
part ii
item5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer
purchases of equity securities.
issuer purchases of equity securities
total number of
approximate dollar value
shares purchased
of shares that may yet be
total number of
average price
as part of publicly
purchased under our share
shares purchased
paid per share
announced plans or
repurchase program
period
(1)
(2)
programs(3)
($ in billions)(3) (4)
4/1/08-4/30/08
13,929,269
$
69.37
13,912,597
5/1/08-5/31/08
7,852,339
$
65.94
7,824,090
20.5
6/1/08-6/30/08
7,978,819
$
65.91
7,968,090
(1)
the total number of shares purchased was 29,760,427 for the quarter. all transactions were made in the open market or
pursuant to prepaid forward agreements with large financial institutions. under these agreements, the company prepaid
large financial institutions to deliver shares at a future date in exchange for a discount. the number of shares purchased
other than through a publicly announced repurchase plan was 55,650 for the quarter. these shares were acquired by the
company under various compensation and benefit plans. this table excludes shares withheld from employees to satisfy
minimum tax withholding requirements on option exercises and other equity-based transactions. the company administers
cashless exercises through an independent, third party broker and does not repurchase stock in connection with cashless
exercise.
(2)
average price paid per share is calculated on a settlement basis and excludes commission.
(3)
on august3, 2007, the company announced a share repurchase plan. pursuant to the share repurchase plan, the board of
directors authorized the company and its subsidiaries to acquire in open market and/or private transactions $24 to $30
billion of shares of company common stock over the subsequent three years to be financed by issuing a combination of
long-term and short-term debt. certain purchases were made prior to announcement of program but are considered purchases
against the program.
(4)
the dollar values listed in this column include commissions to be paid to brokers to execute the transactions.
additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference to shareholder
information, which appears on page 79 of the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year
ended june30, 2008, and partiii, item12 of this form 10-k.
item6. selected financial data.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to note 1, summary of
significant accounting policies, which appears on pages 60-63; note 12, segment information,
which appears on pages 74-75; and financial summary, which appears on page 80 of the annual report
to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008.
table of contents
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to managements discussion
and analysis, which appears on pages 39-55; note 1, summary of significant accounting policies,
which appears on pages 60-63; note 2, acquisitions, which appears on page 63; note 11, commitments
and contingencies, which appears on pages 73-74; and note 12, segment information, which appears on
pages 74-75 of the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008.
the company has made certain forward-looking statements in the annual report to shareholders
for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008 and in other contexts relating to volume and net sales
growth, increases in market shares, financial goals and cost reduction, among others.
these forward-looking statements are based on assumptions and estimates regarding competitive
activity, pricing, product introductions, economic conditions, customer and consumer trends,
technological innovation, currency movements, governmental action and the development of certain
markets available at the time the statements are made. there are a number of key factors that
could cause our actual results to materially differ from the forward-looking statements made herein
and in other contexts. please see item1a risk factors of this form 10-k for a discussion of
these important factors.
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled
other information, which appears on pages 54-55, and note 6, risk management activities, which
appears on pages 65-66 of the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30,
2008.
item8. financial statements and supplementary data.
the financial statements and supplementary data are incorporated by reference to pages 56-76
and 79-81 of the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008, but
excluding the section entitled shareholder return performance graphs on page 81.
note 5 (short-term and long-term debt) to the consolidated financial statements incorporated
by reference herein includes: the procter & gamble company fully and unconditionally guarantees the
registered debt securities issued by its 100% owned finance subsidiaries.
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure.
not applicable.
item9a. controls and procedures.
evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures.
the companys chairman of the board and chief executive officer, a. g. lafley, and the
companys chief financial officer, clayton c. daley, jr., performed an evaluation of the companys
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 (exchange act)) as of the end of the period covered by this annual report on
form 10-k.
messrs.lafley and daley have concluded that the companys disclosure controls and procedures
were effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports we file or submit
under the exchange act is (1)recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods
specified in securities and exchange commission rules and forms, and
table of contents
(2)accumulated and
communicated to our management, including messrs.lafley and daley, to allow their timely decisions
regarding required disclosure.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting.
managements annual report on internal control over financial reporting and the report of the
independent registered public accounting firm are incorporated by reference to page 37 of the
annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30, 2008.
changes
in internal control over financial reporting.
there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during
the companys fourth fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to
materially affect, the companys internal control over financial reporting.
item9b. other information.
not applicable.
table of contents
part iii
item10. directors and executive officers of the registrant.
the board of directors has determined that mr.charles r. lee, chairman of the audit
committee, is independent and an audit committee financial expert, as defined by sec guidelines.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to pages 4-10, up to but
not  including the section entitled board and committee meeting attendance; to the section entitled
code of ethics, which appears on pages 10-11; and to the section entitled
section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance, which appears on page 53 of the proxy statement filed since the
close of the fiscal year ended june30, 2008, pursuant to regulation14a which involved the
election of directors. pursuant to instruction 3 of item 401(b) of regulations-k, executive
officers of the registrant are reported in parti of this report.
item11. executive compensation.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to pages 13-51 of the proxy
statement filed since the close of the fiscal year ended june30, 2008, pursuant to regulation14a
which involved the election of directors, beginning with the section
entitled director compensation up to but not including the section entitled security
ownership of management and certain beneficial owners.
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters.
the following table gives information about the companys common stock that may be issued upon
the exercise of options, warrants and rights under all of the companys equity compensation plans
as of june30, 2008. the table includes the following plans: the 1968 procter & gamble plan for
the use of shares in payment of remuneration; the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan; the procter &
gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version); the procter & gamble 1993 non-employee directors stock
plan; the procter & gamble future shares plan; the procter & gamble 2001 stock and incentive
compensation plan; the procter & gamble 2003 non-employee directors stock plan; the gillette
company 1971 stock option plan and the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan.
table of contents
(c)
number of securities
(a)
(b)
remaining available for
number of securities to be
weighted-average exercise
future issuance under
issued upon exercise of
price of outstanding
equity compensation plans
outstanding options,
options, warrants and
(excluding securities
plan category
warrants and rights
rights
reflected in column (a))
equity compensation plans
approved by security
holders (1)
options
283,231,615
$48.8344
(2)
restricted stock units
4,198,405
n/a
(2)
equity compensation plans
not approved by security
holders (3)
options
53,945,145
$45.1620
(4)
restricted stock units
56,884
n/a
(4)
grand total
341,432,049
$48.2468
61,993,881
(1)
includes the 1968 procter & gamble plan for the use of shares in payment of remuneration; the procter & gamble 1992
stock plan; the procter & gamble 1993 non-employee directors stock plan; the procter & gamble 2001 stock and incentive
compensation plan; and the procter & gamble 2003 non-employee directors stock plan.
(2)
of the plans listed in (1), only the procter & gamble 2001 stock and incentive compensation plan and the 2003 non-
employee directors stock plan allow for future grants of securities. the maximum number of shares that may be granted
under these plans is 229million shares, of which no more than 36million in shares may be available for awards of restricted
and unrestricted stock. total shares available for future issuance under these plans is approximately 50million.
(3)
includes the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version); the procter & gamble future shares plan;
the gillette company 1971 stock option plan; and the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan.
(4)
of the plans listed in (3), only the gillette company
2004 long-term incentive plan allows for future grants of securities.
the maximum number of shares that may be granted under this plan is 20million shares. total shares available for future
issuance under this plan is approximately 12million.
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version)
no further grants can be made under the plan, although unexercised stock options previously
granted under this plan remain outstanding. this plan was approved by the companys board of
directors on february14, 1997. although the plan has not been submitted to shareholders for
approval, it is nearly identical to the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan, approved by the companys
shareholders on october13, 1992, except for a few minor changes designed to comply with the
belgian tax laws.
the plan was designed to attract, retain and motivate key belgian employees. under the plan,
eligible participants were: (i)granted or offered the right to purchase stock options, (ii)
granted stock appreciation rights and/or (iii)granted shares of the companys common stock.
except in the case of death of the recipient, all stock options and stock appreciation rights must
vest in no less than one year from the date of grant and must expire no later than fifteen years
from the date of grant. the exercise price for all stock options granted under the plan is the
average price of the companys stock on the date of grant. if a recipient of a grant leaves
the company while holding an unexercised option or right, any unexercisable portions immediately
become void, except in the case of death, and any exercisable portions become void within one month
of departure, except in the case of death or retirement. any common stock awarded under the plan
may be subject to restrictions on sale or transfer while the recipient is employed, as the
committee administering the plan may determine.
table of contents
the procter & gamble future shares plan
on october14, 1997, the companys board of directors approved the procter & gamble future
shares plan pursuant to which options to purchase shares of the companys common stock may be
granted to employees worldwide. the purpose of this plan is to advance the interests of the
company by giving substantially all employees a stake in the companys future growth and success
and to strengthen the alignment of interests between employees and the companys shareholders
through increased ownership of shares of the companys stock. the plan has not been submitted to
shareholders for approval.
subject to adjustment for changes in the companys capitalization, the number of shares to be
granted under the plan is not to exceed 17million shares. under the plans regulations,
recipients are granted options to acquire 100 shares of the companys common stock at an exercise
price equal to the average price of the companys common stock on the date of the grant. these
options vest five years after the date of grant and expire ten years following the date of grant.
if a recipient leaves the employ of the company prior to the vesting date for a reason other than
disability, retirement or special separation (as defined in the plan), then the award is forfeited.
at the time of the first grant following board approval of the plan, each employee of the
company not eligible for an award under the 1992 stock plan was granted options for 100 shares.
from the date of this first grant through june30, 2003, each new employee of the company has also
received options for 100 shares. following the grant of options on june30, 2003, the company
suspended this part of the plan and intends to make no further grants under this part of the plan.
the plan terminated on october13, 2007.
in addition to the grants above, annual grants of options for 100 shares are granted to
approximately 3,000 employees who are not eligible for participation in the 2001 stock and
incentive compensation plan in recognition of outstanding performance. the companys key managers
are not eligible for such grants.
the gillette company 1971 stock option plan
no further grants can be made under the plan after april25, 2005, although unexercised stock
options previously granted under this plan remain outstanding. the plan was approved by
shareholders of the gillette company and assumed by the company upon the merger between the procter
& gamble company and the gillette company. all options became immediately vested and exercisable on
october1, 2005 as a result of the merger. after the merger, all outstanding options became options
to purchase shares of the procter & gamble company subject to an exchange ratio of 0.975 shares of
p&g stock per share of gillette stock.
the plan was designed to attract, retain and motivate key salaried employees of the gillette
company and non-employee members of its board of directors. under the plan, eligible
participants receive the option to purchase company stock at a pre-determined price which
cannot be less than 100% of the fair market value per share at the time that the option is granted.
the period of any option may not exceed ten years from the date of grant. subject to adjustment for
changes in the companys capitalization, the number of shares granted under the plan was not to
exceed 198 million shares.
table of contents
if a recipient leaves the employ of the company for any reason other than death or discharge
for cause, the recipient is permitted to exercise any vested options granted under the plan for a period
between thirty days and five years after termination, depending on the circumstances of his/her
departure. if a participant is discharged for cause, all options are immediately cancelled. if a
participant dies while holding options, the options are exercisable for a period of one to three
years depending on the date of grant. in addition, the plan allows gillette employees whose
employment is terminated for good reason within two years after the effective date of the merger
the ability to exercise remaining options for the shorter of five years following their termination
date or the original life of the grant. employees terminated for good reason who are also
eligible to retire under a company plan are allowed to exercise their options subject to the
original terms of the grant.
the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan
shareholders of the gillette company approved the gillette company 2004 long term incentive
plan on may20, 2004, and the plan was assumed by the company upon the merger between the procter &
gamble company and the gillette company. all options became immediately vested and exercisable on
october1, 2005 as a result of the merger. after the merger, all outstanding options became options
to purchase shares of the procter & gamble company subject to an exchange ratio of 0.975 shares of
p&g stock per share of gillette stock. only employees previously employed by the gillette company
prior to october1, 2005 are eligible to receive grants under this plan.
the plan was designed to attract, retain and motivate employees of the gillette company, and
until the effective date of the merger between the gillette company and the procter & gamble
company, non-employee members of the gillette board of directors. under the plan, eligible
participants are: (i)granted or offered the right to purchase stock options, (ii)granted stock
appreciation rights and/or (iii)granted shares of the companys common stock or restricted stock
units (and dividend equivalents). subject to adjustment for changes in the companys
capitalization and the addition of any shares authorized but not issued or redeemed under the
gillette company 1971 stock option plan, the number of shares to be granted under the plan is not
to exceed 19 million shares.
except in the case of death of the recipient, all stock options and stock appreciation rights
must expire no later than ten years from the date of grant. the exercise price for all stock
options granted under the plan must be equal to or greater than the fair market value of the
companys stock on the date of grant. any common stock awarded under the plan may be subject to
restrictions on sale or transfer while the recipient is employed, as the committee administering
the plan may determine.
if a recipient of a grant leaves the company while holding an unexercised option or right: (1)
any unexercisable portions immediately become void, except in the case of death, retirement,
special separation (as those terms are defined in the plan) or any grants as to which the
compensation committee of the board of directors has waived the termination provisions; and
(2)any exercisable portions immediately become void, except in the case of death, retirement,
special separation, voluntary resignation that is not for good reason (as those terms are defined
in the plan) or any grants as to which the compensation committee of the board of directors has
waived the termination provisions. in addition, the plan allows gillette employees whose
employment was terminated for good reason within two years of the effective date of the merger
the ability to exercise their options for the shorter of five years following their
table of contents
termination
date or the original life of the grant. employees terminated for good reason who are also
eligible to retire under a company plan are allowed to exercise their options subject to the
original terms of the grant.
additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference to pages 51-53,
beginning with the section entitled security ownership of management and certain beneficial owners
and up to but not including the section entitled section 16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance, of the proxy statement filed since the close of the fiscal year ended june30, 2008,
pursuant to regulation14a which involved the election of directors, including footnotes referenced
therein.
item13. certain relationships and related transactions.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the sections entitled
director independence and review and approval of transactions with related persons which appear on
pages 10 and 11, respectively, of the proxy statement filed since the close of the fiscal year
ended june30, 2008, pursuant to regulation14a which involved the election of directors.
item14. principal accounting fees and services.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to pages 54-55 of the proxy
statement filed since the close of the fiscal year ended june30, 2008, pursuant to regulation14a
which involved the election of directors, beginning with the section entitled report of the audit
committee and ending with the section entitled services provided by deloitte.
table of contents
part iv
item15. exhibits and financial statement schedules.
1.
financial statements:
the following consolidated financial statements of the procter & gamble company and
subsidiaries, managements report and the reports of the independent registered public
accounting firm are incorporated by reference in partii, item8 of this form 10-k.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm on internal
control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm on consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings  for years ended june30, 2008, 2007
and 2006
consolidated balance sheets  as of june30, 2008 and 2007
consolidated statements of shareholders equity  for years ended june30, 2008, 2007 and 2006
consolidated statements of cash flows  for years ended june30, 2008, 2007 and 2006
notes to consolidated financial statements
2.
financial statement schedules:
these schedules are omitted because of the absence of the conditions under which they
are required or because the information is set forth in the financial statements or
notes thereto.
exhibits:
exhibit (3-1)
amended articles of incorporation (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (3-1) of the companys
form10-q
for the quarter ended september30, 2005).
(3-2)
regulations (as amended by shareholders at
the annual meeting on october10, 2006) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (3-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2006).
exhibit (4)
registrant agrees to file a copy of documents defining
the rights of holders of long-term debt upon request of
the commission.
exhibit (10-1)
the procter & gamble 2001 stock and incentive
compensation plan (as amended on august14, 2007) which
was originally adopted by shareholders at the annual
meeting on october9, 2001 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (10-1) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended march31, 2008), and related correspondence and
terms and conditions.*
table of contents
(10-2)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (as amended december11,
2001) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual
meeting on october12, 1992.*
(10-3)
the procter & gamble executive group life insurance policy (each
executive officer is covered for an amount equal to annual salary plus
bonus).*
(10-4)
the procter & gamble deferred compensation plan for directors (as
amended december12, 2006) which was originally adopted by the board of
directors on september9, 1980 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-3) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended december31,
2006).*
(10-5)
the procter & gamble 1993 non-employee directors stock plan (as
amended september10, 2002) which was originally adopted by the
shareholders at the annual meeting on october11, 1994.*
(10-6)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version) (as amended
december11, 2001) which was originally adopted by the board of
directors on february14, 1997.*
(10-7)
the procter & gamble future shares plan (as adjusted for the stock
split effective may21, 2004) which was originally adopted by the board
of directors on october14, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended march31,
2005).*
(10-8)
the procter & gamble 2003 non-employee directors stock plan (as
amended in august2007) which was originally adopted by the
shareholders at the annual meeting on october14, 2003 , and related
correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (10-3) of the companys annual report on form10-q for the
quarter ended september30, 2007).*
(10-9)
the procter & gamble company executive deferred compensation plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form10-q
for the quarter ended december31, 2005).*
(10-10)
summary of the companys short term achievement reward program and
related correspondence and terms and conditions.*
(10-11)
summary of the companys business growth program and related
correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated
table of contents
by reference to
exhibit (10-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended march
31, 2007).*
(10-12)
companys form of separation agreement & release (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended march31, 2007).*
(10-13)
summary of personal benefits available to certain officers and
non-employee directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-13) of
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year ended june30,
2007).*
(10-14)
amended revolving credit agreement among procter & gamble
international s.a.r.l and a syndicate of banks led by citigroup.
(10-15)
the gillette company 1971 stock option plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended december31, 2005).*
(10-16)
the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan (as amended on
august14, 2007) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the
companys form10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2007).*
(10-17)
amended and restated employment agreement, dated december23,
2004, between the gillette company and james m. kilts (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10(g) of the annual report on form10-k filed by
the gillette company for the year ended december31, 2004, commission
file no.1-922).*
(10-18)
amendment no.1 to the amended and restated employment agreement
dated as of december23, 2004, entered into as of january27, 2005,
between the gillette company and james m. kilts (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.2 of the form8-k filed by the gillette company
on january28, 2005, commission file no.1-922).*
(10-19)
stock option agreement, dated january19, 2001, between the
gillette company and james m. kilts, filed as exhibita to the amended
and restated employment agreement between the gillette company and james
m. kilts (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(g) of the annual
report on form10-k filed by the gillette company for the year ended
december31, 2004, commission file no.1-922).*
table of contents
(10-20)
the gillette company executive life insurance program
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the companys form10-q
for the quarter ended september30, 2006).*
(10-21)
the gillette company personal financial planning reimbursement
program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-5) of the companys
form10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2006).*
(10-22)
the gillette company senior executive financial planning program
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-6) of the companys form10-q
for the quarter ended september30, 2006).*
(10-23)
the gillette company estate preservation plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-7) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended september30, 2006).*
(10-24)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-8) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended september30, 2006).*
(10-25)
employment agreement dated july28, 2006 between the procter &
gamble company and mark m. leckie (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-24) of the companys annual report on form10-k for the year ended
june30, 2006).*
(10-26)
form of commercial paper dealer agreement in connection with the
$10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble
international funding s.c.a. (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-9) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended september30,
2006).
(10-27)
form of issuing and paying agent agreement in connection with the
$10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble
international funding s.c.a. (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-10) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended september30,
2006).
(10-28)
senior executive recoupment policy (incorporated by referenced to
exhibit99 of the companys
form8-k filed on december15, 2006).*
(10-29)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (for salary
deferrals prior to january1, 2005) as amended through august21, 2006
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-29) of the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year ended june30,
2007).*
table of contents
exhibit (11)
computation of earnings per share.
exhibit (12)
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
exhibit (13)
annual report to shareholders (pages 1-82).
exhibit (21)
subsidiaries of the registrant.
exhibit (23)
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
exhibit (31)
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certifications.
exhibit (32)
section1350 certifications.
exhibit (99-1)
summary of directors and officers insurance program.
*
compensatory plan or arrangement
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized in the city of cincinnati, state of ohio.
the procter & gamble company
by
a.g. lafley
(a.g. lafley)
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer
august28, 2008
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
a.g. lafley
(a.g. lafley)
chairman of the board
and chief executive officer
(principal executive officer)
august28, 2008
clayton c. daley, jr.
(clayton c. daley, jr.)
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
august28, 2008
valarie l. sheppard
(valarie l. sheppard)
vice president and comptroller
(principal accounting officer)
august28, 2008
kenneth i. chenault
(kenneth i. chenault)
director
august28, 2008
scott d. cook
(scott d. cook)
director
august28, 2008
rajat k. gupta
(rajat k. gupta)
director
august28, 2008
table of contents
signature
title
date
charles r. lee
(charles r. lee)
director
august28, 2008
lynn m. martin
(lynn m. martin)
director
august28, 2008
w. james mcnerney, jr.
(w. james mcnerney, jr.)
director
august28, 2008
johnathan a. rodgers
(johnathan a. rodgers)
director
august28, 2008
ralph snyderman, m.d.
(ralph snyderman, m.d.)
director
august28, 2008
margaret c. whitman
(margaret c. whitman)
director
august28, 2008
patricia a. woertz
(patricia a. woertz)
director
august28, 2008
ernesto zedillo
(ernesto zedillo)
director
august28, 2008
table of contents
exhibit index
exhibit (3-1)
amended articles of incorporation (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (3-1) of the companys
form10-q for the quarter ended september30,
2005).
(3-2)
regulations (as amended by shareholders at
the annual meeting on october10, 2006) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (3-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2006).
exhibit (4)
registrant agrees to file a copy of documents defining
the rights of holders of long-term debt upon request of
the commission.
exhibit (10-1)
the procter & gamble 2001 stock and incentive
compensation plan (as amended on august17, 2007) which
was originally adopted by shareholders at the annual
meeting on october9, 2001 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (10-1) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended march31, 2008), and related correspondence and
terms and conditions.
(10-2)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (as amended december11,
2001) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual
meeting on october12, 1992.
(10-3)
the procter & gamble executive group life insurance policy (each
executive officer is covered for an amount equal to annual salary plus
bonus).
(10-4)
the procter & gamble deferred compensation plan for directors (as
amended december12, 2006), which was originally adopted by the board
of directors on september9, 1980 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-3) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended december31,
2006).
(10-5)
the procter & gamble 1993 non-employee directors stock plan (as
amended september10, 2002) which was originally adopted by the
shareholders at the annual meeting on october11, 1994.
(10-6)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version) (as amended
december11, 2001) which was originally adopted by the board of
directors on february14, 1997.
table of contents
(10-7)
the procter & gamble future shares plan (as adjusted for the stock
split effective may21, 2004) which was originally adopted by the board
of directors on october14, 1997 (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended march31,
2005).
(10-8)
the procter & gamble 2003 non-employee directors stock plan (as
amended in august2007) which was originally adopted by the
shareholders at the annual meeting on october14, 2003, and related
correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (10-3) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2007).
(10-9)
the procter & gamble company executive deferred compensation plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form10-q
for the quarter ended december31, 2005).
(10-10)
summary of the companys short term achievement reward program and
related correspondence and terms and conditions.
(10-11)
summary of the companys business growth program and related
correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to
exhibit (10-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended march31,
2007).
(10-12)
companys form of separation agreement & release (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended march31, 2007).
(10-13)
summary of personal benefits available to certain officers and
non-employee directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-13) of
the companys annual report on form10-k for the year ended june30,
2007).
(10-14)
amended revolving credit agreement among procter & gamble
international s.a.r.l and a syndicate of banks led by citigroup.
(10-15)
the gillette company 1971 stock option plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-2) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended december31, 2005).
(10-16)
the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan (as amended
on august14, 2007) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the
companys form10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2007).
table of contents
(10-17)
amended and restated employment agreement, dated december23,
2004, between the gillette company and james m. kilts (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10(g) of the annual report on form10-k filed by
the gillette company for the year ended december31, 2004, commission
file no.1-922).
(10-18)
amendment no.1 to the amended and restated employment
agreement dated as of december23, 2004, entered into as of
january27, 2005, between the gillette company and james m. kilts
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 of the form
8-k filed by the gillette company on january28, 2005,
commission file no.1-922).
(10-19)
stock option agreement, dated january19, 2001, between the
gillette company and james m. kilts, filed as exhibita to the amended
and restated employment agreement between the gillette company and
james m. kilts (incorporated by reference to exhibit10(g) of the
annual report on form10-k filed by the gillette company for the year
ended december31, 2004, commission file no.1-922).
(10-20)
the gillette company executive life insurance program.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the companys 10-q for
the quarter ended september30, 2006).
(10-21)
the gillette company personal financial planning reimbursement
program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-5) of the companys
form10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2006).
(10-22)
the gillette company senior executive financial planning
program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-6) of the
companys form10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2006).
(10-23)
the gillette company estate preservation plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-7) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended september30, 2006).
(10-24)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-8) of the companys form10-q for the quarter
ended september30, 2006).
(10-25)
employment agreement dated july28, 2006 between the procter &
gamble company and mark m. leckie (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-24) of the companys annual report on form10-k for the year ended
june30, 2006).
table of contents
(10-26)
form of commercial paper dealer agreement in connection with the
$10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble
international funding s.c.a. (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-9) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended september30,
2006).
(10-27)
form of issuing and paying agent agreement in connection with the
$10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble
international funding s.c.a. (incorporated by reference to exhibit
(10-10) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended september30,
2006).
(10-28)
senior executive recoupment policy (incorporated by reference to
exhibit99 of the companys form8-k filed on december15, 2006).
(10-29)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (for salary
deferrals prior to january1, 2005) as amended through august21, 2006.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-29) of the companys annual
report on form10-k for the year ended june30, 2007).
exhibit(11)
computation of earnings per share.
exhibit(12)
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
exhibit(13)
annual report to shareholders (pages 1-82).
exhibit(21)
subsidiaries of the registrant.
exhibit(23)
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
exhibit(31)
rule13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certifications.
exhibit(32)
section1350 certifications.
exhibit (99-1)
summary of directors and officers insurance program.
