10-k
d10k.htm
annual report
annual report
the procter& gamble company
and subsidiaries
annual report on
form 10-k  to the
securities and exchange commission
for the  year
ended june 30, 2010  ******************************************
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
x
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange actof 1934
for the fiscal year ended june30, 2010
or
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from  to
commission file no.1-434
the procter & gamble company
one procter& gamble plaza, cincinnati, ohio 45202
telephone (513)983-1100
irs employer identification no.31-0411980
state of incorporation: ohio
securities
registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, without par value
new york stock exchange, nyse euronext-paris
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities
act.yesno
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
act.yesno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange
act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90
days.yesno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any, every interactive data file
required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such
files).yesno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained,
to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer or a smaller
reporting company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act).
largeacceleratedfiler
acceleratedfiler
non-acceleratedfiler
smallerreportingcompany
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesno
the aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates amounted to $176 billion on december31, 2009.
there were 2,838,474,868 shares of common stock outstanding as of july31, 2010.
documents incorporated by reference
portions of the annual report to shareholders for the fiscal year ended june30, 2010, (2010 annual report) are incorporated by reference into part
i, part ii and part iv of this report to the extent described herein.  portions of the proxy statement for the 2010 annual meeting of
shareholders which will be filed within one hundred and twenty days of the fiscal year ended june30, 2010, (2010 proxy statement) are incorporated by reference into part iii of this report to the extent described herein.
part i
item1. business.
additional information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to managements discussion and analysis (md&a),
which appears on pages 31-50; note 1, summary of significant accounting policies, which appears on pages 55-57; and note 11, segment information, which appears on pages 71-72 of the 2010 annual report. unless the context indicates otherwise, the
terms the company, p&g, we, our or us as used herein refers to the procter& gamble company (the registrant) and its subsidiaries.
the procter& gamble company is focused on providing branded consumer packaged goods of superior quality and value to improve
the lives of the worlds consumers. the company was incorporated in ohio in 1905, having been built from a business founded in 1837 by william procter and james gamble. today, we market our products in more than 180 countries.
throughout this form 10-k, we incorporate by reference information from other documents filed with the securities and exchange commission
(sec).  the companys annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q and current reports on form 8-k are
filed electronically with the sec. the sec maintains an internet site that contains these reports at: http://www.sec.gov. you can also access these reports through links from our website at: www.pg.com/investors/sectionmain.shtml.
copies of these reports are also available, without charge, by contacting the procter& gamble company, shareholder services
department, p.o. box 5572, cincinnati, ohio 45201-5572.  financial information about segments
as of june30, 2010, the company was organized into three global business units (gbus): beauty and grooming; health and
well-being; and household care. we had six reportable segments under u.s. gaap: beauty; grooming; health care; snacks and pet care; fabric care and home care; and baby care and family care. many of the factors necessary for an understanding of these
businesses are similar. operating margins of the individual businesses vary slightly due to the nature of materials and processes used to manufacture the products, the capital intensity of the businesses and differences in selling, general and
administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales. net sales growth by business is also expected to vary slightly due to the underlying growth of the markets of each business and products. while none of our reportable segments are highly
seasonal, components within certain of our reportable segments, such as batteries (fabric care and home care), appliances (grooming) and prestige fragrances (beauty) are seasonal. in addition, anticipation or occurrence of natural disasters, such as
hurricanes, can drive unusually high demand for batteries.  additional information about our businesses can be found in
md&a and note 11, segment information, which appear on pages 31-50 and 71-72, respectively, of the 2010 annual report.  narrative
description of business  business model. our business model relies on the continued growth and success of existing
brands and products, as well as the creation of new products. the markets and industry segments in which we offer our products are highly competitive. many of the product segments in which we compete are differentiated by price (referred to as
super-premium, premium, mid-tier value and low-tier economy products). generally speaking, we compete with super-premium, premium and mid-tier value products. our products are sold in more than 180 countries around the world primarily through mass
merchandisers, grocery stores, membership club stores, drug stores and in high-frequency stores, the neighborhood stores which serve many consumers in developing
markets. we work collaboratively with our customers to improve the in-store presence of our products and win the first moment of truthwhen a consumer is shopping in the store.
we must also win the second moment of truthwhen a consumer uses the product, evaluates how well it met his or her expectations and whether it was a good value. we believe we must continue to provide new, innovative products and
branding to the consumer in order to grow our business. research and product development activities, designed to enable sustained organic growth, continued to carry a high priority during the past fiscal year. while many of the benefits from these
efforts will not be realized until future years, we believe these activities demonstrate our commitment to future growth.
key product categories. in 2010, two product categories accounted for 10% or more of consolidated net sales. the laundry category
constituted approximately 17% of net sales for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008. the diaper category constituted approximately 11% of net sales for fiscal years 2010 and 2009 and 10% in 2008.
key customers. our customers include mass merchandisers, grocery stores, membership club stores, drug stores and high-frequency
stores. sales to wal-mart stores, inc. and its affiliates represent approximately 16% of our total revenue in 2010, 2009 and 2008. no other customer represents more than 10% of our net sales. our top ten customers account for approximately 32% of
our total unit volume in 2010, compared to 30% of total unit volume in 2009 and 31% in 2008. the nature of our business results in no material backlog orders or contracts with the government. we believe our practices related to working capital items
for customers and suppliers are consistent with the industry segments in which we compete.  sources and availability of
materials. almost all of the raw and packaging materials used by the company are purchased from others, some of whom are single-source suppliers. we produce raw materials, primarily chemicals, for further use in the manufacturing process. in
addition, fuel, natural gas and derivative products are important commodities used in our plants, products and in the trucks used to deliver our products to customers. the prices we pay for materials and other commodities are subject to fluctuation.
when prices for these items change, we may or may not pass on the change to our customers, depending on the magnitude and expected duration of the change. the company purchases a substantial variety of other raw and packaging materials, no one of
which is material to our business taken as a whole.  trademarks and patents. we own or have licenses under patents and
registered trademarks which are used in connection with our activity in all businesses. some of these patents or licenses cover significant product formulation and processes used to manufacture our products. the trademarks are important to the
overall marketing and branding of our products. all major products and trademarks in each business are registered. in part, our success can be attributed to the existence and continued protection of these trademarks, patents and licenses.
competitive condition. the markets in which our products are sold are highly competitive. our products compete
against similar products of many large and small companies, including well-known global competitors. in many of the markets and industry segments in which we sell our products, we compete against other branded products as well as retailers
private-label brands. we are well positioned in the industry segments and markets in which we operateoften holding a leadership or significant market share position. we market our products with advertising, promotions and other vehicles to
build awareness of our brands in conjunction with an extensive sales force. we believe this combination provides the most efficient method of marketing for these types of products. product quality, performance, value and packaging are also important
competitive factors.  research and development expenditures. research and development expenditures enable us to
develop technologies and obtain patents across all categories in order to meet the needs and improve the lives of our consumers. total research and development expenses were $1,950 million in 2010, $1,864 million in 2009 and $1,946 million in 2008.
expenditures for environmental compliance. expenditures for compliance with federal,
state and local environmental laws and regulations are fairly consistent from year to year and are not material to the company. no material change is expected in fiscal year 2011.
employees. total number of employees is an estimate of total company employees excluding interns, co-ops and employees of joint
ventures. historical numbers include employees of discontinued operations.
total number of employees
127,000
132,000
135,000
135,000
136,000
107,000 financial information about
foreign and domestic operations  net sales in the united states account for approximately 38% of total net sales. no other
individual country had net sales exceeding 10% of total net sales. operations outside the united states are generally characterized by the same conditions discussed in the description of the business above and may also be affected by additional
factors including changing currency values, different rates of inflation, economic growth and political and economic uncertainties and disruptions. our sales by geography for the fiscal years ended june30 were as follows:
north america
%
%
%
western europe
%
%
%
asia
%
%
%
latin america
%
%
%
ceemea
(1)
%
%
%
(1)
ceemea includes central and eastern europe, middle east and africa
net sales and assets in the united states and internationally were as follows (in billions):
net sales (for the yearendedjune30)
assets (as of june30)
united states
$
30.0
$
29.6
$
29.7
$
70.1
$
71.9
$
73.8
international
$
48.9
$
47.1
$
49.6
$
58.1
$
62.9
$
70.2 development of the business
the discussion below provides insight to the general development of our business, including the material acquisitions and
disposition of assets since the beginning of fiscal 2010.  beauty and grooming gbu. effective july1, 2009,
we implemented a number of changes to the organization structure of the beauty gbu, which resulted in changes to the components of our reportable segment structure. female blades and razors were formerly included in the grooming reportable segment
and are now included in the beauty reportable segment. certain male-focused brands and businesses, such as old spice and gillette personal care, moved from the beauty reportable segment to the grooming reportable segment. in addition, the beauty gbu
was renamed the beauty and grooming gbu. these changes have been reflected in our segment reporting for all periods presented.
pharmaceuticals divestiture. on october30, 2009, we sold our global pharmaceuticals business to warner chilcott plc
(warner chilcott) for $2.8 billion. under the terms of the agreement, warner chilcott acquired our portfolio of branded pharmaceuticals products, prescription drug product pipeline and manufacturing facilities in puerto rico and germany. the
pharmaceuticals business had historically been part of
the health care reportable segment. in accordance with applicable accounting guidance for the disposal of long-lived assets, the results of the pharmaceuticals business are presented as
discontinued operations and, as such, are excluded from continuing operations and from segment results.  item1a. risk factors.
we discuss our expectations regarding future performance, events and outcomes, such as our business outlook and objectives in
this form 10-k, the annual report to shareholders, quarterly reports, press releases and other written and oral communications. all statements, except for historical and present factual information, are forward-looking statements and are
based on financial data and business plans available only as of the time the statements are made, which may become out of date or incomplete. we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future
events, or other factors. forward-looking statements are inherently uncertain, and investors must recognize that events could significantly differ from our expectations.
the following discussion of risk factors identifies the most significant factors that may adversely affect our business,
operations, financial position or future financial performance. this information should be read in conjunction with md&a and the consolidated financial statements and related notes incorporated by reference into this report. the following
discussion of risks is not all inclusive but is designed to highlight what we believe are important factors to consider when evaluating our expectations. these factors could cause our future results to differ from those in the forward-looking
statements and from historical trends.  a material change in consumer demand for our products could have a significant impact on our
business.  we are a consumer products company and rely on continued global demand for our brands and products. to achieve
business goals, we must develop and sell products that appeal to consumers. this is dependent on a number of factors including our ability to develop effective sales, advertising and marketing programs in an increasingly fragmented media
environment. we expect to achieve our financial targets, in part, by shifting our portfolio towards faster growing, higher margin businesses. if demand and growth rates fall substantially below expected levels or our market share declines
significantly in these businesses, our results could be negatively impacted. this could occur due to unforeseen negative economic or political events or to changes in consumer trends and habits. in addition, our continued success is dependent on
leading-edge innovation, with respect to both products and operations. this means we must be able to obtain patents that lead to the development of products that appeal to our consumers across the world.
the ability to achieve our business objectives is dependent on how well we can respond to our local and global competitors.
across all of our categories, we compete against a wide variety of global and local competitors. as a result, there are ongoing
competitive product and pricing pressures in the environments in which we operate, as well as challenges in maintaining profit margins. to address these challenges, we must be able to successfully respond to competitive factors, including pricing,
promotional incentives and trade terms, as well as technological advances and patents granted to competition.  our businesses face cost
pressures which could affect our business results.  our costs are subject to fluctuations, particularly due to changes in
commodity prices, raw materials, cost of labor, foreign exchange and interest rates. therefore, our success is dependent, in part, on our continued ability to manage these fluctuations through pricing actions, cost savings projects (including
outsourcing projects), sourcing decisions and certain hedging transactions. in the manufacturing and general overhead areas, we need to maintain key manufacturing and supply arrangements, including any key sole supplier and sole manufacturing plant
arrangements.
we face risks associated with significant international operations.
we conduct business across the globe with a significant portion of our sales outside the united states. as a result, we are subject to a
number of risks, including, but not limited to, changes in exchange rates for foreign currencies, which may reduce the u.s. dollar value of revenues and earnings received and/or balances held by or invested in our foreign subsidiaries, as well as
exchange controls and other limits on our ability to repatriate earnings from outside the u.s. that can increase our exposure. we have sizable businesses and maintain local currency cash balances in a number of foreign countries with exchange
controls, including, but not limited to, venezuela, china and india. our results of operations and/or financial condition could be adversely impacted if we are unable to successfully manage these risks in an increasingly volatile environment.
further, we expect to achieve our financial targets, in part, by achieving disproportionate growth in developing regions. should growth rates or our market share fall substantially below expected levels in these regions, our results could be
negatively impacted. in addition, economic changes, terrorist activity and political unrest may result in business interruption, inflation, deflation or decreased demand for our products. our success will depend, in part, on our ability to manage
continued global political and/or economic uncertainty, especially in our significant geographical markets, as well as any political or economic disruption due to terrorist and other hostile activities.
if the reputation of the company or one or more of our leading brands erodes significantly, it could have a material impact on our financial results.
the companys reputation is the foundation of our relationships with key stakeholders and other constituencies. if we
are unable to effectively manage real or perceived issues, which could negatively impact sentiments toward the company, our ability to operate freely could be impaired and our financial results could suffer. our financial success is directly
dependent on the success of our brands, particularly our billion-dollar brands. the success of these brands can suffer if our marketing plans or product initiatives do not have the desired impact on a brands image or its ability to attract
consumers. further, our results could be negatively impacted if one of our leading brands suffers a substantial impediment to its reputation due to real or perceived quality issues or the distribution and sale of counterfeit products.
our ability to successfully adapt to ongoing organizational change could impact our business results.
we have executed a number of significant business and organizational changes including acquisitions, divestitures and workforce
optimization projects to support our growth strategies. we expect these types of changes to continue for the foreseeable future. successfully managing these changes, including retention of key employees, is critical to our business success. in
addition, we are generally a build-from-within company, and our success is dependent on identifying, developing and retaining key employees to provide uninterrupted leadership and direction for our business. this includes developing organization
capabilities in key growth markets where the depth of skilled employees is limited and competition for these resources is intense. further, business and organizational changes may result in more reliance on third parties for various services, and
that reliance may increase compliance risks, including anti-corruption. finally, our financial targets assume a consistent level of productivity improvement. if we are unable to deliver expected productivity improvements, while continuing to invest
in business growth, our financial results could be adversely impacted.  our ability to successfully manage ongoing acquisition and
divestiture activities could impact our business results.  as a company that manages a portfolio of consumer brands, our
ongoing business model involves a certain level of acquisition and divestiture activities. we must be able to successfully manage the impacts of these activities, while at the same time delivering against base business objectives. specifically, our
financial results could be adversely impacted if: 1) we are not able to deliver the expected cost and growth synergies associated with our acquisitions, 2) changes in the cash flows or other market-based assumptions cause the value of acquired
assets to fall below book value or 3) we are unable to offset the dilutive impacts from the loss of revenue streams associated with divested brands.
our business is subject to legislation, regulation and enforcement in the u.s. and abroad.
changes in laws, regulations and the related interpretations and increased enforcement actions may alter the environment
in which we do business. this includes changes in competition, product-related, privacy and environmental laws, including actions in response to global climate change concerns, increased enforcement as well as changes in accounting standards,
taxation requirements and enforcement penalties. accordingly, our ability to manage regulatory, tax and legal matters (including product liability, patent, and other intellectual property matters), and to resolve pending legal matters without
significant liability, including the competition law and antitrust investigations described in part i, item3 of this form 10-k, which could require us to take significant reserves in excess of amounts accrued to date or pay significant fines
during a reporting period, may materially impact our results. in addition, as a u.s. based multinational company we are also subject to tax regulations in the u.s. and multiple foreign jurisdictions, some of which are interdependent. for example,
certain income that is earned and taxed in countries outside the u.s. is not taxed in the u.s., provided those earnings are indefinitely reinvested outside the u.s. if these or other tax regulations should change, our financial results could be
impacted.  a material change in customer relationships or in customer demand for our products could have a significant impact on our
business.  our success is dependent on our ability to successfully manage relationships with our retail trade customers.
this includes our ability to offer trade terms that are acceptable to our customers and are aligned with our pricing and profitability targets. our business could suffer if we cannot reach agreement with a key customer based on our trade terms and
principles. further, there is a continuing trend towards retail trade consolidation, which can create significant cost and margin pressure and could lead to more complex work across broader geographic boundaries for both us and key retailers. this
can be particularly difficult when major customers are addressing local trade pressures or local law and regulation changes. in addition, our business would be negatively impacted if a key customer were to significantly reduce the range or inventory
level of our products.  we face risks related to changes in the global economic environment.
our business is impacted by global economic conditions, which are increasingly volatile.if the global economy experiences
significant disruptions, our business could be negatively impacted, including such areas as reduced demand for our products from a slow-down in the general economy, supplier or customer disruptions resulting from tighter credit markets and/or
temporary interruptions in our ability to conduct day-to-day transactions through our financial intermediaries involving the payment to or collection of funds from our customers, vendors and suppliers.
a failure of a key information technology system, process or site could have a material adverse impact on our ability to conduct business.
we rely extensively on information technology systems, some of which are managed by third-party service providers, to
interact with internal and external stakeholders. these interactions include, but are not limited to, ordering and managing materials from suppliers, converting materials to finished products, shipping product to customers, processing transactions,
summarizing and reporting results of operations, complying with regulatory, legal or tax requirements, and other processes necessary to manage the business. if our systems are damaged or cease to function properly due to any number of causes,
ranging from catastrophic events to power outages to security breaches, and our business continuity plans do not effectively compensate on a timely basis, we may suffer interruptions in our ability to manage operations which may adversely impact our
results of operations and/or financial condition. in addition, we are transitioning our ordering, shipping and billing systems in north america and western europe to a new system during fiscal 2011. if the new system does not function properly upon
implementation, our ability to process and deliver customer orders in our two largest regions could be limited and could negatively impact our results of operations during the period(s) of transition. also, we may be unable to process and receive
payments for products sold which could negatively impact our cash flow results during those periods.
item1b. unresolved staff comments.
none.  item2.
properties.  in the u.s., we own and operate 37 manufacturing facilities located in 23 different states or territories.
in addition, we own and operate 97 manufacturing facilities in 41 other countries. many of the domestic and international facilities produce products for multiple businesses. beauty products are manufactured at 39 of these locations; grooming
products at 14; fabric care and home care products at 51; baby care and family care products at 30; snacks and pet care products at 11; and health care products at 35. management believes that the companys production facilities are adequate to
support the business efficiently and that the properties and equipment have been well maintained.  item3. legal proceedings.
the company is subject, from time to time, to certain legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business, which cover a
wide range of matters, including antitrust and trade regulation, product liability, advertising, contracts, environmental issues, patent and trademark matters, labor and employment matters and taxes.
the company is subject to a variety of investigations into potential competition law violations in europe. the companys policy is
to comply with all laws and regulations, including all antitrust and competition laws, and to cooperate with investigations by relevant regulatory authorities, which the company is doing.
the company is subject to a number of antitrust investigations in europe. in 2006, french authorities, in connection with an inquiry into
potential competition law violations in france, entered the premises of two of the companys french subsidiaries and seized a variety of documents.in 2008, european commission officials, with the assistance of the national authorities
from a variety of countries, started an investigation into potential competition law violations in a variety of countries across the european union.around the same time, the national authorities in spain, italy and the czech republic initiated
additional investigations into potential antitrust concerns within those countries.in connection with these investigations, a number of the companys subsidiaries were visited and documents seized.also in 2008, authorities in the
united kingdom (uk) initiated an investigation concerning potential antitrust violations in the uk involving one of the companys subsidiaries. the company or its subsidiaries are also involved in other competition law investigations in
germany, belgium, romania, switzerland, france and greece, as well as some other countries. we believe that all of the above matters involve a number of other consumer products companies and/or retail customers. competition and antitrust law
investigations often continue for several years and, if violations are found, can result in substantial fines. in other industries, fines have amounted to hundreds of millions of dollars.
in response to the actions of the european commission and national authorities, the company launched its own internal investigations into
potential violations of competition laws. the company identified violations in certain european countries and appropriate actions were taken.
during this fiscal year, authorities in france, germany, italy, spain and switzerland have issued complaints alleging that the company,
along with several other companies, engaged in violations of competition laws. the company has the opportunity to respond to these complaints. the remaining matters discussed above are in various stages of the investigatory process.
it is still too early for us to reasonably estimate the total amount of fines to which the company will be subject as a result of these
various competition law issues. however, we have taken and will take reserves as appropriate.please refer to the companys risk factors in item1a of this form 10-k for additional information.
in december 2008, the company became aware of an investigation by italian authorities into
an environmental accident at the site of a contractor which provides services to one or more of the companys european affiliates. the accident involved the explosion of certain pressurized cans and resulted in the death of one worker and
serious injuries to another. italian authorities have commenced a formal criminal proceeding regarding whether the companys local affiliate and certain of its employees complied with italian laws related to the proper classification and
disposal of their products. should they find that these entities violated the law, the italian authorities could levy fines in excess of $100 thousand against the companys european affiliate(s).
executive officers of the registrant
the names, ages and positions held by the executive officers of the company on august13, 2010, are:
name
position
age
electedtoofficerposition
robert a. mcdonald
chairman of the board, president and
chief executive officer
director since july 1, 2009
jon r. moeller
chief financial officer
werner geissler
vice chairmanglobal operations
e. dimitri panayotopoulos
vice chairmanglobal household care
edward d. shirley
vice chairmanglobal beauty & grooming
robert a. steele
vice chairmanglobal health and wellbeing
bruce brown
chief technology officer
robert l. fregolle, jr.
global customer business development officer
r. keith harrison, jr.
global product supply officer
christopher d. hassall
global external relations officer
deborah p. majoras
chief legal officer and secretary
moheet nagrath
global human resources officer
filippo passerini
presidentglobal business services and
chief information officer
marc s. pritchard
global brand building officer
valarie l. sheppard
senior vice president & comptroller and
global household care finance and accounting
2005 all of the executive officers named
above, excluding mr.shirley and ms.majoras, have been employed by the company for more than five years. during the previous five years, mr.shirley held the following positions within the company: vice chairman  global beauty
and grooming (july 1, 2008  present), group presidentnorth america (april 17, 2006  june30, 2008) and presidentcommercial operationsgillette international (october 11, 2005  april16, 2006). prior to
the companys acquisition of the gillette company in october 2005, mr.shirley was presidentgillette international commercial operations (june 2004  october11, 2005). ms.majoras held the following positions within
the company during the past five years: chief legal officer and secretary (february 1, 2010  present), vice president and general counsel (june 24, 2008  january31, 2010). ms.majoras was chairman of the federal trade
commission from 2004 until joining the company in 2008.
part ii
item5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities.
issuer purchases of equity securities
period
totalnumber ofsharespurchased(in
thousands)(1)
average
pricepaidpershare(2)
total number ofsharespurchasedaspart of publiclyannounced plans
orprograms (3)
approximatedollarvalueof shares that may yetbe purchased under ourshare
repurchaseprogram($ in billions) (3) (4)
4/1/10-4/30/10
6,376,462
$
62.76
6,373,863
$
9.9
5/1/10-5/31/10
17,345,260
$
61.98
17,344,431
$
8.8
6/1/10-6/30/10
18,092,881
$
61.41
18,092,881
$
(1)
the total number of shares purchased was 41,814,603 for the quarter. all transactions were made in the open market or pursuant to prepaid forward agreements with large
financial institutions. under these agreements, the company prepays large financial institutions to deliver shares at future dates in exchange for a discount. the number of shares purchased other than through a publicly announced repurchase plan was
3,428 for the quarter. the 3,428 shares were acquired by the company under various compensation and benefit plans. this table excludes shares withheld from employees to satisfy minimum tax withholding requirements on option exercises and other
equity-based transactions. the company administers cashless exercises through an independent, third party broker and does not repurchase stock in connection with cashless exercise.
(2)
average price paid per share is calculated on a settlement basis and excludes commission.
(3)
on august3, 2007, the company announced a share repurchase plan. pursuant to the share repurchase plan, the board of directors authorized the company and its
subsidiaries to acquire in open market and/or private transactions $24 to $30 billion of shares of company common stock over the subsequent three years (through june30, 2010) to be financed by issuing a combination of long-term and short-term
debt. certain purchases were made prior to the announcement of the program but are considered purchases against the program. the total dollar value of shares purchased under the share repurchase plan was $22 billion. the share repurchase plan
expired on june30, 2010.
(4)
the dollar values listed in this column include commissions to be paid to brokers to execute the transactions.
additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference to shareholder return performance graphs, which appears on
pages 76-77; company and shareholder information, which appears on page 78 of the 2010 annual report; and can be found in part iii, item12 of this form 10-k.
item6. selected financial data.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to note 1, summary of significant accounting policies, which appears on
pages 55-57; note 11, segment information, which appears on pages 71-72; and financial summary, which appears on page 76 of the 2010 annual report.
item7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to managements discussion and analysis, which appears on pages
31-50; note 1, summary of significant accounting policies, which appears on pages 55-57; note 10, commitments and contingencies, which appears on page 70; and note 11, segment information, which appears on pages 71-72 of the 2010 annual report.
the company has made certain forward-looking statements in the 2010 annual report and in
other contexts relating to volume and net sales growth, increases in market shares, financial goals and cost reduction, among others.
these forward-looking statements are based on assumptions and estimates regarding competitive activity, pricing, product introductions,
economic conditions, customer and consumer trends, technological innovation, currency movements, governmental action and the development of certain markets available at the time the statements are made. there are a number of key factors that could
cause our actual results to materially differ from the forward-looking statements made herein and in other contexts. please see item1a risk factors of this form 10-k for a discussion of these important factors.
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the section entitled other information, which appears on pages
48-49, and note 5, risk management activities and fair value measurements, which appears on pages 59-62 of the 2010 annual report.
item8. financial statements and supplementary data.
additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference to pages 51-74 and 76 of the 2010 annual report.
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure.
not applicable.  item9a.
controls and procedures.   evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures.
the companys president and chief executive officer, robert a. mcdonald, and the companys chief financial officer, jon r.
moeller, performed an evaluation of the companys disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the securities exchange act of 1934 (exchange act)) as of the end of the period covered by this annual report
on form 10-k.  messrs. mcdonald and moeller have concluded that the companys disclosure controls and procedures were
effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports we file or submit under the exchange act is (1)recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in securities and exchange commission rules
and forms, and (2)accumulated and communicated to our management, including messrs. mcdonald and moeller, to allow their timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting.
managements annual report on internal control over financial reporting and the report of the independent registered public
accounting firm are incorporated by reference to pages 29-30 of the 2010 annual report.  changes in internal control over financial
reporting.  there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the companys
fourth fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial reporting.
item9b. other information.
not applicable.
part iii
item10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance.
the board of directors has determined that the following members of the audit committee are independent and are audit committee financial
experts as defined by sec rules: ms.patriciaa. woertz (chair) and mr.rajatk. gupta.  the information
required by this item is incorporated by reference to the following sections of the 2010 proxy statement filed pursuant to regulation 14a: the sections entitled election of directors, nominees for election of directors with terms expiring in 2011,
the board of directors and committees of the board, up to but not including the section entitled board and committee meeting attendance; the section entitled code of ethics; and the section entitled section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance. pursuant to instruction 3 of item401(b) of regulation s-k, executive officers of the registrant are reported in part i of this report.
item11. executive compensation.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the 2010 proxy statement filed pursuant to regulation 14a, beginning
with the section entitled director compensation up to but not including the section entitled security ownership of management and certain beneficial owners.
item12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters.
the following table gives information about the companys common stock that may be issued upon the exercise of options, warrants and
rights under all of the companys equity compensation plans as of june30, 2010. the table includes the following plans: the procter& gamble 1992 stock plan; the procter& gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version); the
procter& gamble 1993 non-employee directors stock plan; the procter& gamble future shares plan; the procter& gamble 2001 stock and incentive compensation plan; the procter& gamble 2003 non-employee
directors stock plan; the gillette company 1971 stock option plan; the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan; and the procter & gamble 2009 stock and incentive compensation plan.
plan category
(a)numberofsecuritiestobeissued upon exercise ofoutstanding
options,warrants and rights
(b)weighted-averageexerciseprice of outstandingoptions, warrants andrights
(c)number of securitiesremaining available forfuture issuance
underequitycompensationplans(excluding securitiesreflected in column (a))
equity compensation plans approved by security holders(1)
options
323,131,725
$
50.5810
(2
)
restricted stock units (rsus)
5,376,606
n/a
(2
)
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders(3)
options
41,839,216
$
46.9131
(4
)
restricted stock units (rsus)
98,136
n/a
(4
)
grand total
370,445,683
$
53.6847
155,167,362
(1)
includes the procter& gamble 1992 stock plan; the procter& gamble 1993 non-employee directors stock plan; the procter& gamble 2001
stock and incentive compensation plan; the procter& gamble 2003 non-employee directors stock plan; and the procter& gamble 2009 stock and incentive compensation plan.
(2)
of the plans listed in (1), only the procter& gamble 2009 stock and incentive compensation plan and the 2003 non- employee directors stock plan allow
for future grants of securities. the maximum number of shares that may be granted under these plans is 180million shares. stock options and stock appreciation rights are counted on a one for one basis while full value awards (such as rsus)
will be counted as 2.88 shares for each share awarded. total shares available for future issuance under these plans is 155 million.
(3)
includes the procter& gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version); the procter& gamble future shares plan; the gillette company 1971 stock option
plan; and the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan.
(4)
none of the plans listed in (3)allow for future grants of securities.
the procter& gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version)
no further grants can be made under the plan, although unexercised stock options previously granted under this plan remain outstanding.
this plan was approved by the companys board of directors on february14, 1997. although the plan has not been submitted to shareholders for approval, it is nearly identical to the procter& gamble 1992 stock plan, approved by
the companys shareholders on october13, 1992, except for a few minor changes designed to comply with the belgian tax laws.
the plan was designed to attract, retain and motivate key belgian employees. under the plan, eligible participants were: (i)granted
or offered the right to purchase stock options, (ii)granted stock appreciation rights and/or (iii)granted shares of the companys common stock. except in the case of death of the recipient, all stock options and stock appreciation
rights must vest in no less than one year from the date of grant and must expire no later than fifteen years from the date of grant. the exercise price for all stock options granted under the plan is the average price of the companys stock on
the date of grant. if a recipient of a grant leaves the company while holding an unexercised option or right, any unexercisable portions immediately become void, except in the case of death, and any exercisable portions become void within one month
of departure, except in the case of death or retirement. any common stock awarded under the plan may be subject to restrictions on sale or transfer while the recipient is employed, as the committee administering the plan may determine.
the procter& gamble future shares plan
on october14, 1997, the companys board of directors approved the procter& gamble future shares plan pursuant to
which options to purchase shares of the companys common stock may be granted to employees worldwide. the purpose of this plan is to advance the interests of the company by giving substantially all employees a stake in the companys future
growth and success and to strengthen the alignment of interests between employees and the companys shareholders through increased ownership of shares of the companys stock. the plan has not been submitted to shareholders for approval.
subject to adjustment for changes in the companys capitalization, the number of shares to be granted under the plan is
not to exceed 17million shares. under the plans regulations, recipients are granted options to acquire 100 shares of the companys common stock at an exercise price equal to the average price of the companys common stock on
the date of the grant. these options vest five years after the date of grant and expire ten years following the date of grant. if a recipient leaves the employ of the company prior to the vesting date for a reason other than disability, retirement
or special separation (as defined in the plan), then the award is forfeited.  at the time of the first grant following
board approval of the plan, each employee of the company not eligible for an award under the 1992 stock plan was granted options for 100 shares. from the date of this first grant through june30, 2003, each new employee of the company has also
received options for 100 shares. following the grant of options on june30, 2003, the company suspended this part of the plan and intends to make no further grants under this part of the plan. the plan terminated on
october13, 2007.
in addition to the grants above, annual grants of options for 100 shares are granted to
approximately 3,000 employees who are not eligible for participation in the 2001 stock and incentive compensation plan in recognition of outstanding performance. the companys key managers are not eligible for such grants.
the gillette company 1971 stock option plan
no further grants can be made under the plan after april25, 2005, although unexercised stock options previously granted under this
plan remain outstanding. the plan was approved by shareholders of the gillette company and assumed by the company upon the merger between the procter& gamble company and the gillette company. all options became immediately vested and
exercisable on october1, 2005 as a result of the merger. after the merger, all outstanding options became options to purchase shares of the procter& gamble company subject to an exchange ratio of .975 shares of p&g stock per
share of gillette stock.  the plan was designed to attract, retain and motivate key salaried employees of the gillette company
and non-employee members of its board of directors. under the plan, eligible participants receive the option to purchase company stock at a pre-determined price which cannot be less than 100% of the fair market value per share at the time that the
option is granted. the period of any option may not exceed ten years from the date of grant. subject to adjustment for changes in the companys capitalization, the number of shares granted under the plan was not to exceed 198,000,000 shares.
if a recipient leaves the employ of the company for any reason other than death or discharge for cause, the recipient is
permitted to exercise any vested options granted under the plan for a period between thirty days and five years after termination, depending on the circumstances of his/her departure. if a participant is discharged for cause, all options are
immediately cancelled. if a participant dies while holding options, the options are exercisable for a period of one to three years depending on the date of grant. in addition, the plan allows gillette employees whose employment is terminated for
good reason within two years after the effective date of the merger the ability to exercise remaining options for the shorter of five years following their termination date or the original life of the grant. employees terminated for
good reason who are also eligible to retire under a company plan are allowed to exercise their options subject to the original terms of the grant.
the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan
shareholders of the gillette company approved the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan on may20, 2004, and the plan was
assumed by the company upon the merger between the procter& gamble company and the gillette company. all options became immediately vested and exercisable on october1, 2005 as a result of the merger. after the merger, all outstanding
options became options to purchase shares of the procter& gamble company subject to an exchange ratio of .975 shares of p&g stock per share of gillette stock. only employees previously employed by the gillette company prior to
october1, 2005 are eligible to receive grants under this plan.  the plan was designed to attract, retain and motivate
employees of the gillette company, and until the effective date of the merger between the gillette company and the procter& gamble company, non-employee members of the gillette board of directors. under the plan, eligible participants are:
(i)granted or offered the right to purchase stock options, (ii)granted stock appreciation rights and/or (iii)granted shares of the companys common stock or restricted stock units (and dividend equivalents). subject to
adjustment for changes in the companys capitalization and the addition of any shares authorized but not issued or redeemed under the gillette company 1971 stock option plan, the number of shares to be granted under the plan is not to exceed
19,000,000 shares.  except in the case of death of the recipient, all stock options and stock appreciation rights must expire
no later than ten years from the date of grant. the exercise price for all stock options granted under the plan must be equal to or greater than the fair market value of the companys stock on the date of grant. any common stock awarded under
the plan may be subject to restrictions on sale or transfer while the recipient is employed, as the committee administering the plan may determine.
if a recipient of a grant leaves the company while holding an unexercised option or right:
(1)any unexercisable portions immediately become void, except in the case of death, retirement, special separation (as those terms are defined in the plan) or any grants as to which the compensation committee of the board of directors has
waived the termination provisions; and (2)any exercisable portions immediately become void, except in the case of death, retirement, special separation, voluntary resignation that is not for good reason (as those terms are defined in the plan)
or any grants as to which the compensation committee of the board of directors has waived the termination provisions.
additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the 2010 proxy statement filed pursuant to regulation 14a,
beginning with the section entitled security ownership of management and certain beneficial owners and up to but not including the section entitled section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance.
item13. certain relationships and related transactions and director independence.
the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the following sections of the 2010 proxy statement filed pursuant to
regulation 14a: the sections entitled director independence and review and approval of transactions with related persons.  item14.
principal accounting fees and services.  the information required by this item is incorporated by reference to the 2010
proxy statement filed pursuant to regulation 14a, beginning with the section entitled report of the audit committee and ending with the section entitled services provided by deloitte.
part iv
item15. exhibits and financial statement schedules.
1.
financial statements:  the
following consolidated financial statements of the procter& gamble company and subsidiaries, managements report and the reports of the independent registered public accounting firm are incorporated by reference in part ii,
item8 of this form 10-k.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm on consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings  for years ended june30, 2010, 2009 and 2008
consolidated balance sheets  as of june30, 2010 and 2009
consolidated statements of shareholders equity  for years ended june30, 2010, 2009 and 2008
consolidated statements of cash flows  for years ended june30, 2010, 2009 and 2008
notes to consolidated financial statements
2.
financial statement schedules:
these schedules are omitted because of the absence of the conditions under which they are required or because the information is set forth
in the financial statements or notes thereto.  exhibits:
exhibit(3-1)
amended articles of incorporation (as amended by shareholders at the annual meeting on october14, 2008) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (3-1) of the companys form
10-q for the quarter ended december31, 2008).
(3-2)
regulations (as amended by shareholders at the annual meeting on october 10, 2006) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (3-2) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended
september 30, 2006).
exhibit(4)
registrant agrees to file a copy of documents defining the rights of holders of long-term debt upon request of the commission.
exhibit(10-1)
the procter & gamble 2001 stock and incentive compensation plan (as amended on august 17, 2007) which was originally adopted by shareholders at the annual meeting on october 9,
2001 (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 2008), and related correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to exhibit(10-1) of the companys form
10-q for the quarter ended december 31, 2008).*
(10-2)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (as amended december11, 2001) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual meeting on october12, 1992
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-2) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june30, 2008).*
(10-3)
the procter & gamble executive group life insurance policy (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june
30, 2008).*
(10-4)
the procter & gamble deferred compensation plan for directors (as amended december 12, 2006), which was originally adopted by the board of directors on september 9, 1980
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december 31, 2006).*
(10-5)
the procter & gamble 1993 non-employee directors stock plan (as amended september 10, 2002) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual meeting on
october 11, 1994 (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-5) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june 30, 2008).*
(10-6)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version) (as amended december 11, 2001) which was originally adopted by the board of directors on february 14, 1997 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit (10-6) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june 30, 2008).*
(10-7)
the procter & gamble future shares plan (as adjusted for the stock split effective may 21, 2004) which was originally adopted by the board of directors on october14,
1997.*
(10-8)
the procter & gamble 2003 non-employee directors stock plan (as amended in august 2007) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual meeting on october
14, 2003, and related correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2007).*
(10-9)
the procter & gamble company executive deferred compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-2) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december 31,
2008).*
(10-10)
summary of the companys short term achievement reward program and related correspondence and terms and conditions.*
(10-11)
summary of the companys business growth program and related correspondence and terms and conditions. (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-11) of the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended june 30, 2009).*
(10-12)
companys form of separation agreement & release (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31,
2007).*
(10-13)
summary of personal benefits available to certain officers and non-employee directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter
ended september 30, 2008).*
(10-14)
the gillette company 1971 stock option plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit(10-2) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december 31,
2005).*
(10-15)
the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan (as amended on august 14, 2007) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended
september 30, 2007).*
(10-16)
the gillette company executive life insurance program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the companys 10-q for the quarter ended september 30,
2006).*
(10-17)
the gillette company personal financial planning reimbursement program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-5) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september
30, 2006).*
(10-18)
the gillette company senior executive financial planning program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-6) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30,
2006).*
(10-19)
the gillette company estate preservation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-7) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30,
2006).*
(10-20)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-8) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30,
2006).*
(10-21)
form of commercial paper dealer agreement in connection with the $10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble international funding s.c.a. (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-9) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2006).
(10-22)
form of issuing and paying agent agreement in connection with the $10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble international funding s.c.a. (incorporated
by reference to exhibit (10-10) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2006).
(10-23)
senior executive recoupment policy (incorporated by referenced to exhibit 99 of the companys form 8-k filed on december 15, 2006).*
(10-24)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (for salary deferrals prior to january 1, 2005) as amended through august 21, 2006. (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-29) of
the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june 30, 2007).*
(10-25)
the procter & gamble 2009 stock and incentive compensation plan which was originally adopted by shareholders at the annual meeting on october 13, 2009 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december 31, 2009), and related correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended
december 31, 2009).*
exhibit(11)
computation of earnings per share.
exhibit(12)
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
exhibit(13)
annual report to shareholders (pages 1-79).
exhibit(21)
subsidiaries of the registrant.
exhibit(23)
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
exhibit(31)
rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certifications.
exhibit(32)
section 1350 certifications.
exhibit(99-1)
summary of directors and officers insurance program.
101.ins(1)
xbrl instance document
101.sch(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension schema document
101.cal(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document
101.def(1)
xbrl taxonomy definition linkbase document
101.lab(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document
101.pre(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase document
(1)
pursuant to rule 406t of regulation s-t, these interactive data files are deemed not filed or part of a registration statement or prospectus for purposes of sections 11
or 12 of the securities act of 1933 or section18 of the securities exchange act of 1934 and otherwise are not subject to liability.
*
compensatory plan or arrangement
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed
on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized in the city of cincinnati, state of ohio.
the procter& gamble company
by
/s/robert a. mcdonald
(robert a. mcdonald)
chairman of the board, president and chief executive officer
august13, 2010
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/robert a.
mcdonald (robert a. mcdonald)
chairman of the board, president and chief executive officer (principal executive officer)
august 13, 2010
/s/jon r.
moeller (jon r. moeller)
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
august 13, 2010
/s/valarie l.
sheppard (valarie l. sheppard)
senior vice president & comptroller and global household care finance and accounting (principal accounting officer)
august 13, 2010
/s/angela f.
braly (angela f. braly)
director
august 13, 2010
/s/kenneth i.
chenault (kenneth i. chenault)
director
august 13, 2010
/s/scott d.
cook (scott d. cook)
director
august 13, 2010
/s/rajat k.
gupta (rajat k. gupta)
director
august 13, 2010
/s/w. james mcnerney,
jr. (w. james mcnerney, jr.)
director
august 13, 2010
/s/johnathan a.
rodgers (johnathan a. rodgers)
director
august 13, 2010
/s/mary agnes
wilderotter (mary agnes wilderotter)
director
august 13, 2010
signature
title
date
/s/patricia a.
woertz (patricia a. woertz)
director
august 13, 2010
/s/ernesto
zedillo (ernesto zedillo)
director
august 13, 2010
exhibit index
exhibit(3-1)
amended articles of incorporation (as amended by shareholders at the annual meeting on october14, 2008) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (3-1) of the companys
form10-q for the quarter ended december31, 2008).
(3-2)
regulations (as amended by shareholders at the annual meeting on october10, 2006) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (3-2) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter
ended september30, 2006).
exhibit(4)
registrant agrees to file a copy of documents defining the rights of holders of long-term debt upon request of the commission.
exhibit(10-1)
the procter & gamble 2001 stock and incentive compensation plan (as amended on august17, 2007) which was originally adopted by shareholders at the annual meeting on
october9, 2001 (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2008), and related correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-1) of the
companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december31, 2008).
(10-2)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (as amended december11, 2001) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual meeting on october12, 1992
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-2) of the companys annual report on form10-k for the year ended june30, 2008).
(10-3)
the procter & gamble executive group life insurance policy (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended
june30, 2008).
(10-4)
the procter & gamble deferred compensation plan for directors (as amended december12, 2006), which was originally adopted by the board of directors on september9,
1980 (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form10-q for the quarter ended december31, 2006).
(10-5)
the procter & gamble 1993 non-employee directors' stock plan (as amended september10, 2002) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual meeting on
october11, 1994 (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-5) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june30, 2008).
(10-6)
the procter & gamble 1992 stock plan (belgian version) (as amended december11, 2001) which was originally adopted by the board of directors on february14, 1997
(incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-6) of the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june30, 2008).
(10-7)
the procter & gamble future shares plan (as adjusted for the stock split effective may21, 2004) which was originally adopted by the board of directors on october 14, 1997.
(10-8)
the procter & gamble 2003 non-employee directors stock plan (as amended in august2007) which was originally adopted by the shareholders at the annual meeting on
october14, 2003, and related correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september30, 2007).
(10-9)
the procter & gamble company executive deferred compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-2) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december 31,
2008).
(10-10)
summary of the companys short term achievement reward program and related correspondence and terms and
conditions.
(10-11)
summary of the companys business growth program and related correspondence and terms and conditions. (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-11) of the companys annual
report on form 10-k for the year ended june 30, 2009).
(10-12)
companys form of separation agreement & release (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31,
2007).
(10-13)
summary of personal benefits available to certain officers and non- employee directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-3) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter
ended september 30, 2008).
(10-14)
the gillette company 1971 stock option plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-2) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december 31, 2005).
(10-15)
the gillette company 2004 long-term incentive plan (as amended on august 14, 2007) (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended
september 30, 2007).
(10-16)
the gillette company executive life insurance program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-4) of the companys 10-q for the quarter ended september30,
2006).
(10-17)
the gillette company personal financial planning reimbursement program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-5) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september
30, 2006).
(10-18)
the gillette company senior executive financial planning program (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-6) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended
september30, 2006).
(10-19)
the gillette company estate preservation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-7) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30,
2006).
(10-20)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit(10-8) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30,
2006).
(10-21)
form of commercial paper dealer agreement in connection with the $10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble international funding s.c.a. (incorporated by
reference to exhibit (10-9) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2006).
(10-22)
form of issuing and paying agent agreement in connection with the $10 billion commercial paper program initiated by procter & gamble international funding s.c.a. (incorporated
by reference to exhibit (10-10) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2006).
(10-23)
senior executive recoupment policy (incorporated by referenced to exhibit 99 of the companys form 8-k filed on december 15, 2006).
(10-24)
the gillette company deferred compensation plan (for salary deferrals prior to january 1, 2005) as amended through august 21, 2006. (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-29) of
the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended june 30, 2007).
(10-25)
the procter & gamble 2009 stock and incentive compensation plan which was originally adopted by shareholders at the annual meeting on october 13, 2009 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended december 31, 2009), and related correspondence and terms and conditions (incorporated by reference to exhibit (10-1) of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended
december 31, 2009).
exhibit(11)
computation of earnings per share.
exhibit(12)
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.
exhibit(13)
annual report to shareholders (pages 1-79).
exhibit(21)
subsidiaries of the registrant.
exhibit(23)
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
exhibit(31)
rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certifications.
exhibit(32)
section 1350 certifications.
exhibit(99-1)
summary of directors and officers insurance program.
101.ins(1)
xbrl instance document
101.sch(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension schema document
101.cal(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document
101.def(1)
xbrl taxonomy definition linkbase document
101.lab(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document
101.pre(1)
xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase document
(1)
pursuant to rule 406t of regulation s-t, these interactive data files are deemed not filed or part of a registration statement or prospectus for purposes of sections 11
or 12 of the securities act of 1933 or section18 of the securities exchange act of 1934 and otherwise are not subject to liability.
