10-k
boeing10k_123102.htm
the boeing company form 10-k, december 31, 2002
form 10-k 12/31/02
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
(mark one)
[x]
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2002
or
[]
transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the transition period from _____ to_____
commission file number 1-442
the boeing company
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
91-0425694
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
100 n. riverside, chicago, il
60606-1596
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(312)544-2000
(registrant's telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, $5 par value
new york stock exchange
indicate by check mark
whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by section
13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such
reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90
days. yesxno
indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulation s-k (
229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to
the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any
amendment to this form 10-k. [ ] [ ]
as of january 31, 2003,
there were 799,978,098 common shares outstanding held by nonaffiliates of the
registrant, and the aggregate market value of the common shares (based upon the
closing price of these shares on the new york stock exchange) was approximately
$25.3 billion.
part i and part ii
incorporate information by reference to certain portions of the companys
2002 annual report to shareholders. part iii incorporates information by
reference to the registrants definitive proxy statement, to be filed with
the securities and exchange commission within 120 days after the close of the
fiscal year.
the boeing company
form 10-k
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2002
index
part i
item 1.
business
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5.
market for registrant's common equity and related stockholder matters
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item 14.
controls and procedures
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
signatures
certifications
part i
item 1. business
the boeing company, together
with its subsidiaries (herein referred to as the company), is one of
the worlds major aerospace firms. the company is organized based on the
products and services it offers. the company operates in four principal
segments: commercial airplanes, military aircraft and missile systems, space and
communications, and boeing capital corporation (bcc). the company also
established an other segment classification which principally includes the
activities of connexion by boeingsm, a two-way data communications
service for global travelers; air traffic management, a business unit developing
new approaches to a global solution to address air traffic management issues;
and boeing technology, an advanced research and development organization focused
on innovative technologies, improved processes and the creation of new products.
revenues, earnings from
operations and other financial data of the companys business segments for
the three years ended december 31, 2002, are set forth on pages 80-83 of the
companys 2002 annual report to shareholders and are incorporated herein by
reference.
the commercial airplanes
segment is involved in development, production and marketing of commercial jet
aircraft and providing related support services, principally to the commercial
airline industry worldwide. the company is a leading producer of commercial
aircraft and offers a family of commercial jetliners designed to meet a broad
spectrum of passenger and cargo requirements of domestic and foreign airlines.
this family of commercial jet aircraft currently includes the 717, 737
next-generation, and 757 standard-body models and the 747, 767 and 777 wide-body
models. final deliveries of the md-80, md-90 and 737 classic aircraft occurred
in 2000. final delivery of the md-11 aircraft occurred in 2001.
commercial jet aircraft are
normally sold on a firm fixed-price basis with an indexed price escalation
clause. the companys ability to deliver jet aircraft on schedule is
dependent upon a variety of factors, including execution of internal performance
plans, availability of raw materials, performance of suppliers and
subcontractors, and regulatory certification. the introduction of new commercial
aircraft programs and major derivatives involves increased risks associated with
meeting development, production and certification schedules.
the worldwide market for
commercial jet aircraft is predominantly driven by long-term trends in airline
passenger traffic. the principal factors underlying long-term traffic growth are
sustained economic growth, both in developed and emerging countries, and
political stability. demand for the companys commercial aircraft is
further influenced by airline industry profitability, world trade policies,
government-to-government relations, environmental constraints imposed upon
aircraft operations, technological changes, and price and other competitive
factors.
commercial aviation has
been impacted by an economic downturn that began in 2001 and continued through
2002. in addition, the industry suffered a tremendous shock from the terrorist
attacks of september 11, 2001. air travel in most areas of the world has not
recovered to the volume carried by the airlines in 2000, which is affecting
profitability for many airlines. u.s. full service airlines have suffered the
greatest losses. holiday traffic in 2002 for the u.s. airlines showed an
improvement and most carriers indicated better financial performance. however,
this improvement was for only a short period of time and the major u.s. full
service airlines reported significant losses for 2002. in contrast, low fare
airlines in the u.s. and in europe are reporting positive financial results and
are growing. european network airlines are expected to show better results than
their u.s. counterparts for the fiscal period ending in march of 2003. traffic
between asia and europe has rebounded to pre-september 11 levels. this trend
combined with stronger traffic within the region is offsetting the slow growth
over the pacific permitting most asian airlines to show profits.
the companys
commercial aircraft sales are subject to intense competition, primarily from
airbus industrie. to meet competition, the company maintains a program directed
toward continually enhancing the performance and capability of its products and
has a family of commercial aircraft to meet varied and changing airline
requirements. additionally, extensive customer support services network for
airlines throughout the world plays a key role in maintaining high customer
satisfaction.
- 1 -
the company continually
evaluates opportunities to improve current models, and assesses the marketplace
to ensure that its family of commercial jet aircraft is well positioned to meet
future requirements of the airline industry. the fundamental strategy is to
maintain a broad product line responsive to changing market conditions by
maximizing commonality among the boeing family of commercial aircraft.
additionally, the company is determined to continue to lead the industry in
customer satisfaction by offering products with the highest standards of
quality, safety, technical excellence, economic performance and in-service
support.
the major focus of
commercial aircraft development activities over the past three years has been
the 737 next-generation-900 model, the 747-400er, the 747-400erf, the 767-400er,
the 777-200lr, the 777-300er, and a sonic cruiser airplane. the initial delivery
of the 737-900, the largest member of the 737 next-generation family, occurred
in the second quarter of 2001. initial delivery of the 767-400er, a stretched
version of the 767-300er capable of carrying over 300 passengers in a two-class
configuration, occurred in the third quarter of 2000. certification and first
delivery of the 747-400er and 747-400erf occurred during the fourth quarter of
2002. certification and first delivery of the 777-300er and 777-200lr is
scheduled for 2004 and 2006, respectively.
in the fourth quarter of
2002, the company announced it will focus its product development efforts on the
development of an efficient 200- to 250-seat airplane that will fly 7,000 to
8,000 nautical miles with 15 to 20 percent lower fuel usage at the top end of
todays commercial jet speeds. the market potential for a new airplane of
this size is forecasted at up to 3,000 units over the next 20 years. the company
expects to formally offer the new airplane to customers in early 2004, with
entry into service targeted for 2008.
the major trends that shape
the current environment of the military aircraft and missile systems segment and
the space and communications segment include significant but relatively flat
u.s. government defense and space budgets; rapid expansion of information and
communication technologies; the need for low cost, assured access to space; and
a convergence of military, civil and commercial markets.
the military aircraft and
missile systems segment is involved in the research, development, production,
modification and support of the following products and related systems: military
aircraft, including fighter, transport and attack aircraft; helicopters; and
missiles.
the u.s. department of
defense (dod), represents nearly 50% of the worlds defense budget, and
remains the principal customer of the military aircraft and missile systems
segment. several trends are emerging that are shaping customer behavior in this
market. u.s. military force structure is shrinking, its platforms are aging, and
the tempo of operations and engagements worldwide remains high. the united
states current military activity demonstrates the value of systems
solutions that allow all systems to communicate with each other; operate over
longer ranges; and are unmanned and provide the advantages of precision,
persistence and selective engagement. these factors are driving the u.s. dod,
along with militaries worldwide, to focus on ways to transform their forces and
the way they operate.
events like nuclear
proliferation in north korea, operation enduring freedom and the continued war
on terrorism, highlight the fact that our national security goals are not
rhetorical. there is an immediate and a durable need to maintain strong u.s.
defense capabilities covering a very broad spectrum of threats and responses.
near-term dod budgets have increased, and longer-range forecasts expect dod
budgets to grow faster than anticipated prior to september 11, 2001. however,
with a softening global economy and anticipated federal budget tensions,
allocations to dod procurement are unlikely to increase significantly. this
suggests that the dod will continue to focus on affordability strategies
emphasizing network-centric operations, long range strike, unmanned air combat
and reconnaissance vehicles, precision guided weapons and continued
privatization of logistics and support activities as a means to improve overall
effectiveness while maintaining control over costs. the companys
capabilities and programs are well suited to provide the military capabilities
essential to meet the challenges facing our nation.
- 2 -
the company is continuing
to invest in business opportunities where it can use its customer knowledge,
technical strength and large-scale systems integration capabilities to shape the
market. current major developmental programs include the f/a-22 raptor, v-22
osprey tiltrotor aircraft, c-130 avionics modernization program (amp), the
rah-66 comanche helicopter and the unmanned combat air vehicle (ucav). both the
v-22 and f/a-22 programs have transitioned to low-rate initial production but
also continue developmental activities. the ch-47 chinook is currently
transitioning from development to production of a major new upgrade program.
current products in the tactical missiles market include the harpoon block ii,
slam-er, calcm and the joint direct attack munition (jdam). future programs
include the small diameter bomb and the company is aggressively pursuing
opportunities that utilize high-speed technology for the next-generation
missile.
investments in unmanned
systems continue to leverage military aircraft and missile systems capabilities
in architectures, system-of-systems integration and weapon systems technologies
to provide transformational capabilities for the u.s. military. investment is
continuing in the 767 tanker programs for the u.s. air force and international
customers. company investments in airborne electronic attack and precision
weapons and advanced rotorcraft systems are expanding its breadth of products
and capabilities enabling it to access larger portions of the combat systems
markets.
the space and
communications segment is involved in the research, development, production,
modification and support of the following products and related systems: space
systems; missile defense systems; satellites and satellite launching vehicles;
rocket engines; and information and battle management systems.
on october 6, 2000, the
company acquired hughes space and communications businesses and related
operations. the acquired businesses are operated under the name of boeing
satellite systems (bss). bss provides space-based communications,
reconnaissance, surveillance and imaging systems. bss also manufactures
commercial communications satellites. also included in the acquisitions are
hughes electron dynamics, a supplier of electronic components for satellites;
spectrolab, a provider of solar cells and panels for satellites; and a share of
hrl laboratories, a research center. bss is accounted for as part of the space
and communications segment.
space and communications
segment business performed under cost-reimbursement-type contracts currently
include the international space station, ground-based midcourse defense program,
space shuttle flight operations and space shuttle main engine.
the total human space
flight and exploration market is forecasted to be relatively flat over the next
ten years. this forecast is based on budget projections for nasa, the primary
customer in this market. the company is observing changes in direction and
emphasis with the establishment of a new vision and mission. over the past year
nasa has developed a new integrated space transportation plan (istp) to
implement their new vision. this plan is designed to benefit the international
space station, space shuttle program, and the agencys science and research
objectives. the new istp dedicates more resources to the space station program,
provides additional funding to extend the life and enhance the safety and
reliability of the agencys orbiter fleet, boosts funding for science-based
payloads and research, and restructures nasas space launch initiative. the
space launch initiative will now focus on the development of a crew transport
vehicle to ferry space station crewmembers, along with a continued technology
effort to identify future reusable launch vehicle technologies. the
companys space and communications segment is well positioned to join with
nasa to help realize their vision using the expertise the company has gained
from its prime contractor role on the space shuttle program and the
international space station and an integral player in the space launch
initiative program.
- 3 -
on february 1, 2003, the
country experienced the tragic loss of space shuttle columbia and its
seven-person crew. the company is assisting nasa to determine the cause of this
accident. this accident did not impact the companys results of operations
for 2002, and it is too early to determine the effect on the companys
business operations for 2003 and beyond.
in the communications
market, the company is investing to enable connectivity between existing
air/ground platforms, increase communications availability and bandwidth through
more robust space systems, and leverage innovative communications concepts.
investments were made in global situational awareness concepts to develop
communication system architectures to support various business opportunities
including future combat systems, joint tactical radio system, fab-t and global
missile defense. a major contributor to the companys support of these dod
transformation programs is the investment in the boeing integration center where
the companys network centric operations concepts are developed in
partnership with its customers. the company also will continue to make focused
investments that will lead to the development of next-generation space
intelligence systems.
within the space and
communications businesses the company continued investing in the new delta iv
expendable launch vehicle, which resulted in its successful inaugural commercial
launch in november of 2002. this product gives the company greater access to a
portion of the launch market that was previously unavailable with the delta ii
rocket alone. the space and communications segment has continued to be the
premier provider of airborne early warning systems with the execution of the
agreement with the turkish government for four new airborne early warning and
control (aew&c) systems aircraft and continued technical progress on the
previously awarded australian aew&c contract.
the acquisition and merger
consolidations among u.s. aerospace companies have resulted in three principal
prime contractors for the dod and nasa, including the company. as a result of
the extensive consolidation in the defense and space industry, the company and
its major competitors are also partners or major suppliers to each other on
various programs.
the company and lockheed
martin are 50-50 partners in united space alliance, which is responsible for all
ground processing of the space shuttle fleet and for space-related operations
with the u.s. air force. united space alliance also performs modifications,
testing and checkout operations that are required to ready the space shuttle for
launch. united space alliance operations are performed under cost-plus-type
contracts. the companys proportionate share of joint venture earnings is
recognized as income.
the sea launch venture, in
which the company is a 40% partner with rsc energia (25%) of russia, kvaerner
asa (20%) of norway, and kb yuzhnoye/po yuzhmash (15%) of ukraine, provides
ocean-based launch services to commercial satellite customers. the venture had
one successful launch in 2002. the companys investment in this venture as
of december 31, 2002, is reported at zero, which reflects the recognition of
losses reported by sea launch in prior years. the venture incurred losses in
2002, due to the relatively low volume of launches, reflecting a depressed
satellite market.
the boeing capital
corporation segment is primarily engaged in the financing of commercial and
private aircraft and commercial equipment. bcc acts as a captive finance
subsidiary for the company and provides market-based lease and loan financing
primarily to airlines that purchase or lease commercial aircraft manufactured by
the company or others. bcc competes for aircraft finance business with other
finance companies, commercial banks, insurance companies and other financial
institutions.
bcc also competes in the
commercial equipment leasing and finance markets, primarily in the united
states, against a number of large ticket competitors, mainly heavily capitalized
leasing companies and relationship banks. approximately 22% of bccs
portfolio has been generated from commercial equipment leasing and financing
activities. commercial equipment consists of executive aircraft, machine tools
and production equipment, containers and marine equipment, chemical, oil and gas
equipment and other equipment. new business volume of bcc is funded with debt
obtained in the capital markets, cash from operations, and contributions from
the company.
- 4 -
total company research and
development expense amounted to $1.6 billion, $1.9 billion, and $2.0 billion in
2002, 2001, and 2000, respectively. the amount expensed in 2000 included $557
million attributable to in-process research and development.
the companys backlog
of firm contractual orders (in billions) at december 31 follows:
commercial airplanes
$
68.2
$
75.9
$
89.8
military aircraft and missile systems
21.1
17.6
17.1
space and communications
14.9
13.1
13.7
$
104.2
$
106.6
$
120.6
not included in contractual
backlog are purchase options and announced orders for which definitive contracts
have not been executed. additionally, u.s. government and foreign military firm
backlog is limited to amounts obligated to contracts. unobligated contract
funding not included in backlog at december 31, 2002, 2001, and 2000, totaled
$34.7 billion, $27.5 billion, and $31.3 billion.
in evaluating the
companys contractual backlog for commercial customers, certain risk
factors should be considered. approximately 34% of the commercial aircraft
backlog units are scheduled for delivery beyond 2005. changes in the economic
environment and the financial condition of airlines sometimes result in customer
requests for rescheduling or cancellation of contractual orders.
contracts with the u.s.
government are subject to termination for default or for convenience by the
government if deemed in its best interests. contracts that are terminated for
convenience generally provide for payments to a contractor for its costs and a
proportionate share of profit for work accomplished through the date of
termination. contracts that are terminated for default generally provide that
the government pays only for the work it has accepted, can require the company
to pay the difference between the original contract price and the cost to
reprocure the contract items net of the value of the work accepted from the
original contractor, and can hold the company liable for damages.
the company is dependent on
the availability of energy sources, such as electricity, at affordable prices.
the company is also highly dependent on the availability of essential materials,
parts and subassemblies from its suppliers and subcontractors. the most
important raw materials required for the companys aerospace products are
aluminum (sheet, plate, forgings and extrusions), titanium (sheet, plate,
forgings and extrusions) and composites (including carbon and boron). although
alternative sources generally exist for these raw materials, qualification of
the sources could take a year or more. many major components and product
equipment items are procured or subcontracted on a sole-source basis with a
number of domestic and foreign companies. the company is dependent upon the
ability of its large number of suppliers and subcontractors to meet performance
specifications, quality standards, and delivery schedules at anticipated costs,
and their failure to do so would adversely affect production schedules and
contract profitability, while jeopardizing the ability of the company to fulfill
commitments to its customers. the company maintains an extensive qualification
and performance surveillance system to control risk associated with such
reliance on third parties.
while the company owns
numerous patents and has licenses under patents owned by others relating to its
products and their manufacture, it does not believe that its business would be
materially affected by the expiration of any patents or termination of any
patent license agreements. the company has no trademarks, franchises or
concessions that are considered to be of material importance to the conduct of
its business.
the company is subject to
federal, state and local laws and regulations designed to protect the
environment and to regulate the discharge of materials into the environment. the
company believes its policies, practices and procedures are properly designed to
prevent unreasonable risk of environmental damage and the consequent financial
liability to the company. compliance with environmental laws and regulations
requires continuing management effort and expenditures by the company.
compliance with environmental laws and regulations has not had in the past, and,
the company believes, will not have in the future, material effects on the
capital expenditures, earnings or competitive position of the company.
- 5 -
the company is subject to
business and cost classification regulations associated with its u.s. government
defense and space contracts. violations can result in civil, criminal or
administrative proceedings involving fines, compensatory and treble damages,
restitution, forfeitures, and suspension or debarment from u.s. government
contracts.
sales outside the united
states (principally export sales from domestic operations) by geographic area
are included on page 81 of the companys 2002 annual report to shareholders
and incorporated herein by reference. approximately 1% of total sales were
derived from non-u.s. operations of the company for each of the three years in
the period ended december 31, 2002. approximately 40% of the companys
contractual backlog at december 31, 2002, was with non-u.s. customers. sales
outside the united states are influenced by u.s. government foreign policy,
international relationships, and trade policies of governments worldwide.
relative profitability is not significantly different from that experienced in
the domestic market.
approximately 20% and 18%
of combined accounts receivable and customer and commercial financing consisted
of amounts due from customers outside the united states as of december 31, 2002
and 2001, respectively. substantially all of these amounts are payable in u.s.
dollars, and, in managements opinion, related risks are adequately covered
by allowance for losses. the company has not experienced materially adverse
financial consequences as a result of sales and financing activities outside the
united states.
the company incurred
employment reductions resulting from the decrease in aircraft demand, which
directly related to the attacks of september 11, 2001. the companys
workforce level at february 27, 2003, was approximately 165,000, including
approximately 1,800 in canada and 2,500 in australia.
- 6 -
item 2. properties
the locations and covered
areas of the companys principal operating properties on january 1, 2003,
are indicated in the following table:
floor area
(thousands of square feet)
company-owned
leased
united states
puget sound, washington
37,659
2,288
southern california
13,987
4,268
wichita, kansas
12,218
greater st. louis, missouri
6,947
2,614
pennsylvania
3,368
alabama
2,220
arizona
1,872
greater portland, oregon
1,123
texas
2,443
oakridge, tennessee
eastern washington
southern colorado
greater denver, colorado
greater salt lake city, utah
georgia
glasgow, montana
oklahoma
melbourne, arkansas
florida
greater tulsa, oklahoma
1,501
greater washington, d.c.
ohio
greater chicago, illinois
delaware
mississippi
albuquerque, new mexico
alaska
hawaii
maine
central california
australia
victoria
new south wales
queensland
canada
toronto, ontario
1,469
winnipeg, manitoba
england
germany
china
united arab emirates
- 7 -
most runways and taxiways
used by the company are located on airport properties owned by others and are
used by the company jointly with others. the companys rights to use such
facilities are provided for under long-term leases with municipal, county or
other government authorities. in addition, the u.s. government furnishes the
company certain office space, installations and equipment at government bases
for use in connection with various contract activities. facilities at the major
locations support all principal industry segments. work related to a given
program may be assigned to various locations, based upon periodic review of shop
loads and production capability.
because of the acquisition
of the aerospace and defense units of rockwell, hughes satellite, mcdonnell
douglas, and numerous smaller acquisitions, the company is in the process of
re-evaluating facilities to consolidate redundant activities. properties and
land that do not meet long-term business requirements will be leased out or
sold.
the companys
principal properties are well maintained and in good operating condition. all
existing facilities are sufficient to meet the companys near-term
operating requirements.
item 3. legal proceedings
various legal proceedings,
claims and investigations related to products, contracts and other matters are
pending against the company. most significant legal proceedings are related to
matters covered by insurance. major contingencies are discussed below.
the company is subject to
u.s. government investigations from which civil, criminal or administrative
proceedings could result. such proceedings could involve claims by the
government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble damages, restitution
and/or forfeitures. under government regulations, a company, or one or more of
its operating divisions or subdivisions, can also be suspended or debarred from
government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of
investigations. the company believes, based upon all available information, that
the outcome of any such government disputes and investigations will not have a
material adverse effect on its financial position or continuing operations.
in 1991, the u.s. navy
notified mcdonnell douglas (now a subsidiary of the company) and general
dynamics corporation (the team) that it was terminating for default
the teams contract for development and initial production of the a-12
aircraft. the team filed a legal action to contest the navys default
termination, to assert its rights to convert the termination to one for
the convenience of the government, and to obtain payment for work
done and costs incurred on the a-12 contract but not paid to date. as of
december 31, 2002, inventories included approximately $583 million of recorded
costs on the a-12 contract, against which the company has established a loss
provision of $350 million. the amount of the provision, which was established in
1990, was based on mcdonnell douglass belief, supported by an opinion of
outside counsel, that the termination for default would be converted to a
termination for convenience, and that the best estimate of possible loss on
termination for convenience was $350 million.
on august 31, 2001, the
u.s. court of federal claims issued a decision after trial upholding the
governments default termination of the a-12 contract on the grounds that
the team could not meet the revised contract schedule unilaterally imposed by
the u.s. government. the court did not, however, enter a money judgment for the
u.s. government on its claim for unliquidated progress payments. this
followedan earlier trial court decision in favor of the contractors and
reversal of that initial decision on appeal.the team appealed the decision
to the court of appeals and is awaiting a decision. the team also obtained a
stay of the trial courts judgment to prevent the navy from collecting any
allegedly due amounts prior to the decision by the court of appeals.
if, after all judicial
proceedings have ended, the courts determine contrary to the companys
belief that a termination for default was appropriate, the company would incur
an additional loss of approximately $275 million, consisting principally of
remaining inventory costs and adjustments, and if contrary to the companys
belief the courts further hold that a money judgment should be entered against
the team, the company would be required to pay the government one-half of the
unliquidated progress payments of $1,350 million plus statutory interest from
february 1991 (currently totaling approximately $1,040 million). in that event
the loss to the company would total approximately $1,465 million in pre-tax
charges. should, however, the trial courts decision on termination be
reversed on appeal and its 1998 judgment in favor of the team be reinstated, the
company would receive approximately $957 million, including interest.
- 8 -
the company believes,
supported by an opinion of outside counsel, that the trial courts rulings
with respect to the enforceability of the unilateral schedule and the
termination for default are contrary to law and fact and that the loss provision
established by mcdonnell douglas in 1990 continues to provide adequately for the
reasonably possible reduction in value of a-12 net contracts in process as of
december 31, 2002. final resolution of the a-12 litigation will depend upon the
outcome of further proceedings or possible negotiations with the government.
the company is a defendant
in seven employment discrimination matters in which class certification is
sought or has been granted. three matters are pending in the federal district
court for the western district of washington in seattle; one case is pending in
the federal district court for the central district of california in los
angeles; one case is pending in the federal district court in st. louis
missouri; one case is pending in the federal district court in tulsa, oklahoma;
and the final case is pending in the federal district court in wichita, kansas.
the company intends to continue its aggressive defense of these cases. it is not
possible to predict what impact, if any, these cases could have on the financial
statements.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of
security holders
there were no matters
submitted to a vote of security holders during the quarter ended december 31,
2002.
part ii
item 5. market for registrant's common equity
and related stockholder matters*
information required by this
item is included on pages 84, 93-94 and the inside back cover of the companys
2002 annual report to shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference.
the number of holders of
the companys common stock as of february 26, 2003, is approximately
138,000.
- 9 -
item 6. selected financial data
five-year summary (unaudited)
(dollars in millions except per share data)
operations
sales and other operating revenues
commercial airplanes
$
28,387
$
35,056
$
31,171
$
38,475
$
36,998
military aircraft and missile systems
13,990
12,451
11,924
11,866
12,488
space and communications
10,967
10,364
8,039
6,831
6,889
boeing capital corporation (a)
other (b)
accounting differences/eliminations
(813)
(901)
(844)
(304)
(1,335)
total
$
54,069
$
58,198
$
51,321
$
57,993
$
56,154
general and administrative expense
2,534
2,389
2,335
2,044
1,993
research and development expense
1,639
1,936
1,441
1,341
1,895
other income/(expense), net
net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change
$
2,319
$
2,826
$
2,128
$
2,309
$
1,120
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax
(1,827)
net earnings
$
$
2,827
$
2,128
$
2,309
$
1,120
basic earnings per share
2.90
3.46
2.48
2.52
1.16
diluted earnings per share
2.87
3.41
2.44
2.49
1.15
cash dividends paid
$
$
$
$
$
per share
0.68
0.68
0.56
0.56
0.56
additions to plant and equipment, net
1,001
1,189
1,289
1,665
depreciation of plant and equipment
1,094
1,140
1,159
1,330
1,386
employee salaries and wages
11,424
11,703
11,615
11,019
12,074
year-end workforce
166,000
188,000
198,000
197,000
231,000
financial position at december 31
total assets
$
52,642
$
48,978
$
43,504
$
36,952
$
38,002
working capital
(2,955)
(3,721)
(2,383)
2,112
2,836
net plant and equipment
8,765
8,459
8,794
8,192
8,589
cash and short-term investments
2,333
1,010
3,454
2,462
total debt
14,403
12,265
8,799
6,732
6,972
customer and commercial financing assets
12,211
10,398
6,959
6,004
5,711
shareholders' equity
7,696
10,825
11,020
11,462
12,316
per share
9.62
13.57
13.18
13.16
13.13
common shares oustanding (in millions) (c)
799.7
797.9
836.3
870.8
937.9
contractual backlog
commercial airplanes
$
68,159
$
75,850
$
89,780
$
72,972
$
86,057
military aircraft and missile systems
21,073
17,630
17,113
15,691
17,007
space and communications
14,941
13,111
13,707
10,585
9,832
total
$
104,173
$
106,591
$
120,600
$
99,248
$
112,896
cash dividends have been paid on common stock every year since 1942.
(a)
in the first quarter of 2002, the segment formerly identified as
customer and commercial financing was reclassified as boeing capital corporation (bcc). the years 1998 through 2001 are restated.
(b)
the other segment classification was established in 2001 and the
years 1998 through 2000 are restated.
(c)
computation excludes treasury shares and the outstanding shares
held by the sharevalue trust.
- 10 -
item 7. management's discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations
forward-looking information is subject to risk and uncertainty
certain statements in this
report may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning
of the private litigation reform act of 1995. words such as expects,
intends, plans, projects,
believes, estimates, and similar expressions are used to
identify these forward-looking statements. these statements are not guarantees
of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are
difficult to predict. forward-looking statements are based upon assumptions as
to future events that may not prove to be accurate. actual outcomes and results
may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in these
forward-looking statements. as a result, these statements speak only as of the
date they were made and we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise
any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future
events or otherwise. our actual results and future trends may differ materially
depending on a variety of factors, including the continued operation, viability
and growth of major airline customers and non-airline customers (such as the
u.s. government); adverse developments in the value of collateral securing
customer and other financings; the occurrence of any significant collective
bargaining labor dispute; the companys successful execution of internal
performance plans, price escalation, production rate increases and decreases
(including any reduction in or termination of an aircraft product), acquisition
and divestiture plans, and other cost-reduction and productivity efforts;
charges from any future sfas no. 142 review; an adverse development in rating
agency credit ratings or assessments; the actual outcomes of certain pending
sales campaigns and u.s. and foreign government procurement activities,
including the timing of procurement of tankers by the u.s. department of
defense; the cyclical nature of some of the companys businesses;
unanticipated financial market changes which may impact pension plan
assumptions; domestic and international competition in the defense, space and
commercial areas; continued integration of acquired businesses; performance
issues with key suppliers, subcontractors and customers; factors that could
result in significant and prolonged disruption to air travel worldwide
(including future terrorist attacks); any additional impacts from the attacks of
september 11, 2001; global trade policies; worldwide political stability;
domestic and international economic conditions; price escalation; the outcome of
political and legal processes, including uncertainty regarding government
funding of certain programs; changing priorities or reductions in the u.s.
government or foreign government defense and space budgets; termination of
government or commercial contracts due to unilateral government or customer
action or failure to perform; legal, financial and governmental risks related to
international transactions; legal proceedings; tax settlements with the irs; and
other economic, political and technological risks and uncertainties. additional
information regarding these factors is contained in the companys sec
filings, including, without limitation, the companys annual report on form
10-k for the year ended december 31, 2001 and the forms 10-q for the quarters
ended march 31, 2002, june 30, 2002 and september 30, 2002.
- 11 -
critical accounting policies and standards issued and not yet implemented
application of critical accounting policies
the companys primary operating
segments are commercial airplanes, military aircraft and missile systems, space
and communications, and boeing capital corporation (bcc), a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the company. the following is a summary of the companys most
critical accounting policies.
contract accounting
contract accounting is used
predominately by the military aircraft and missile systems and space and
communications segments. the majority of the business conducted in these
segments is performed under contracts for the u.s. government and foreign
governments that extend over a number of years.
the process to estimate the
total contract cost-revenue relationship results in the development of gross
margin and cost of sales percentages. these percentages are utilized in the
recognition of earnings and are significant factors in contract accounting. the
amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of
sales percentages to the amount of revenue recognized for each contract.
total contract revenue
estimates are based on the negotiated contract price modified by assumptions
regarding contract options, change orders, incentive and award provisions
associated with technical performance, and contract terms that provide for the
adjustment of prices in the event of variations from projected inflationary
trends.
total contract cost
estimates are based in a large part on historical performance trends, business
base and other economic projections, and information provided by suppliers.
factors that influence these estimates include technical and schedule risk,
internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions,
asset utilization, anticipated labor agreements, and inflationary trends.
revenues under contracts
with fixed prices are generally recognized as deliveries are made. for certain
fixed-price contracts that require substantial performance over an extended
period before deliveries begin, revenues are recorded based on the attainment of
performance milestones. revenues under contracts with terms that reimburse for
costs incurred plus an agreed upon profit are recorded as costs are incurred.
contracts may contain provisions to earn incentive and award fees if targets are
achieved. incentive and award fees that can be reasonably estimated are recorded
over the performance period of the contract. incentive and award fees that
cannot be reasonably estimated are recorded when awarded.
the development of gross
margin and cost of sales percentages involves procedures and personnel in all
areas of the company that provide financial or production information on the
status of contracts. this contract management process produces the
companys best estimate of contract cost and contract revenue. estimates of
each significant contracts cost and revenue are reviewed and reassessed
quarterly. changes in these estimates result in recognition of cumulative
adjustments to the contract profit in the period in which changes are made.
the experience over the
past two years has resulted in a range of plus or minus 0.5% for the combined
gross margin of all contracts in the military aircraft and missile systems and
the space and communications segments. if combined gross margin for all
contracts in the military aircraft and missile systems and the space and
communications segments for all of 2002 had been estimated to be higher or lower
by 0.5% it would have increased or decreased income for the year by
approximately $125 million.
- 12 -
program accounting
the company uses program
accounting for its 7-series commercial airplane programs. program accounting is
a method of accounting for the costs of certain products manufactured for
delivery under production type contracts where profitability is realized over
multiple contracts and years. under program accounting, inventoriable production
costs (including overhead), program tooling costs and warranty costs are
accumulated and charged to revenue by program instead of by individual units or
contracts. a program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting
quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production
effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. to establish the
relationship of revenue to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates
of (a) the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period
over which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced, and (c) their
expected selling prices, production costs, program tooling, and warranty costs
for the total program.
the reliance on estimates
in the use of program accounting requires the demonstrated ability to reliably
estimate the cost-revenue relationship for the defined program accounting
quantity. the factors that must be estimated include selling price, labor and
employee benefit costs, material costs, procured parts and major component
costs, and overhead costs. to meet this requirement the company employs a
rigorous estimating process that is reviewed and updated on a quarterly basis.
changes in estimate are recognized on a prospective basis.
underlying all estimates
used for program accounting is the assumed market and the corresponding
production rates. the program accounting quantity is established based upon the
assumed market. the total program revenue is determined by estimating the model
mix and sales price for all unsold units within the accounting quantity added
together with the revenue for all undelivered units under contract. the sales
prices for all undelivered units within the accounting quantity include an
escalation adjustment that is based on projected escalation rates. cost
estimates are based in a large part on historical performance trends, business
base and other economic projections, and information provided by suppliers.
factors that influence these estimates include production rates, internal and
subcontractor performance trends, asset utilization, anticipated labor
agreements, and inflationary trends.
the company recognizes
revenue for commercial airplanes when a unit is completed and accepted by the
customer. the revenue recognized is the price negotiated with the customer
including special features adjusted by an escalation formula. the amount
reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales
percentage for the total remaining program to the amount of revenue recognized
for the quarter. because of the higher unit production costs experienced at the
beginning of a new airplane program (known as the learning curve effect), the
actual costs incurred for production of the early units in the program will
exceed the amount reported as cost of sales for those units. this difference
known as deferred production costs is included in inventory along with
unamortized tooling costs.
the experience of the last
two years, with all programs being relatively mature, has been that estimate
changes due to model mix, escalation, cost performance, and accounting quantity
increases have resulted in a range of plus or minus 0.5% for the combined gross
margin of all commercial airplane programs. if combined gross margin for all
commercial airplane programs for all of 2002 had been estimated to be higher or
lower by 0.5% it would have increased or decreased income for the year by
approximately $122 million.
aircraft valuation
used aircraft under trade-in agreements
the company enters into certain trade-in agreements to purchase used aircraft from customers at a
specific price at a future point in time when those customers purchase new
aircraft from the company. in the event the company accepts an aircraft under a
trade-in agreement, the aircraft purchased by the company serves as collateral
to offset amounts paid by the company to the customer.
obligations recorded from
trade-in aircraft agreements are measured as the difference between gross
amounts payable to customers and the estimated fair value of the collateral. the
fair value of collateral is determined using a process based on the net present
value of expected future cash flows from the trade-in aircraft, assuming the
most likely market placement of the aircraft. the first step in this process
uses the companys assessment of the market for each trade-in aircraft,
which in most instances begins years before the return of the aircraft. there
are several possible markets to which the company continually pursues
opportunities to place used aircraft. these markets include, but are not limited
to, (1) the resale market, which could potentially include the cost of long-term
storage, (2) the leasing market, with the potential for refurbishment costs to
meet the leasing customers requirements, or (3) the scrap market.
collateral valuation varies significantly depending on which market the company
determines is most likely for each aircraft. on a quarterly basis, the company
updates its valuation analysis based on the actual activities associated with
placing each aircraft into a market. this quarterly collateral valuation process
yields results that are typically lower than residual value estimates by
independent sources and tends to more accurately reflect results upon the actual
placement of the aircraft.
- 13 -
based on the best market
information available at the time, the company deemed it probable that it would
be obligated to perform on trade-in agreements with gross amounts payable to
customers totaling $1,370 million and $1,340 million as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, respectively. accounts payable and other liabilities included $156 million
and $189 million as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, respectively, which
represents the trade-in aircraft exposure related to these trade-in agreements.
using a measurement date of
december 31, 2002, had the estimate of collateral value used to calculate its
obligation related to trade-in agreements been 10% higher or lower than the
companys actual assessment, accounts payable and other liabilities would
have decreased or increased by approximately $121 million. the company
continually updates its assessment of the likelihood of its trade-in aircraft
purchase obligations and continues to monitor all these obligations for adverse
developments.
asset valuation for equipment under operating lease, held for re-lease
and collateral on receivables
the fair value of owned assets (equipment under operating leases and assets
held for re-lease) and collateral on receivables is periodically assessed to
determine if the fair value is less than the carrying value. differences between
carrying value and fair value are considered in determining the allowance for
losses on receivables and, in certain circumstances, recorded as impairment for
owned assets.
the company uses the
average published value from multiple sources based on the type and age of the
aircraft to determine the fair value of aircraft. under certain circumstances,
the company applies judgment based on the attributes of the specific aircraft to
determine fair value, usually when the features or utilization of the aircraft
varies significantly from the more generic aircraft attributes covered by
outside publications.
impairment review for equipment under operating leases and held for re-lease
the company reviews these assets for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying
amount of these assets may not be recoverable. an asset under operating lease or
held for re-lease is considered impaired when the expected undiscounted cash
flow over the remaining useful life is less than the book value. various
assumptions are used when determining the expected undiscounted cash flow. these
assumptions include lease rates, lease term(s), periods in which the asset may
be held in preparation for a follow-on lease, maintenance costs, remarketing
costs and the life of the asset. the determination of expected lease rates is
generally based on outside publications. the company uses historical information
and current economic trends to determine the remaining assumptions. when
impairment is indicated for an asset, the amount of impairment loss is the
excess of carrying value over fair value. the company estimates that had the
fair value of such assets deemed impaired during 2002 been 10% higher or lower
at the time each specific impairment had been taken, the impairment expense
would have decreased or increased by approximately $6 million. the company is
unable to predict the magnitude of any future impairments.
allowance for losses on receivables
the allowance for losses on receivables (valuation allowance) is a valuation account used to provide for
potential impairment of receivables on the balance sheet. the balance is an
accounting estimate of probable but unconfirmed losses in the receivable
portfolio. the valuation allowance relates to two components of receivables: (a)
specifically identified receivables that are evaluated individually for
impairment, and (b) pools of receivables that are evaluated for impairment.
a specific receivable is
reviewed for impairment when, based on current information and events, it is
probable that the company will be unable to collect amounts due according to the
contractual terms of the receivable agreement. factors considered in assessing
uncollectibility include a customers extended delinquency, requests for
restructuring and filing for bankruptcy. a specific impairment allowance is
provided based on the difference between the carrying value of the receivable
and the estimated fair value of the related collateral.
the company reviews the
adequacy of the general valuation allowance attributable to the remaining pool
of receivables by assessing both the collateral exposure and the applicable
default rate. collateral exposure for a particular receivable is the excess of
the carrying value over the applicable collateral value of the related asset. a
receivable with an estimated collateral value in excess of the carrying value is
considered to have no collateral exposure. the applicable default rate is
determined using two components: customer credit ratings and weighted-average
remaining portfolio term. credit ratings are identified for each customer in the
portfolio. customer credit ratings are updated based on current rating agency
information or the companys best estimates.
- 14 -
for each credit rating
category, the collateral exposure is multiplied by an applicable historical
default rate, yielding a credit-adjusted collateral exposure. historical default
rates are published by standard & poors reflecting both the customer
credit rating and the weighted-average remaining portfolio term. the sum of the
credit-adjusted collateral exposures generates an initial estimate of the
general valuation allowance. in recognition of the uncertainty of the ultimate
loss experience and relatively long duration of the portfolio, a range of
reasonably possible outcomes of the portfolios credit-adjusted collateral
exposure is calculated by varying the applicable default rate by approximately
plus and minus 15%. the valuation allowance recorded represents the best
estimate within the resulting range of credit-adjusted collateral exposure,
factoring in considerations of risk of individual credits, current and projected
economic and political conditions, and prior loss experience.
the resulting range of the
credit-adjusted collateral exposure as of december 31, 2002, was approximately
$280 million to $355 million. the company adjusted the valuation allowance to
$342 million at december 31, 2002.
goodwill impairment
the company accounts for
its goodwill under statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no. 142,
goodwill and other intangible assets. this statement requires an
impairment-only approach to accounting for goodwill. because the composition of
the company has changed significantly due to various acquisitions, goodwill
constitutes a significant portion of the companys long-term assets. as a
result of the adoption of sfas no. 142, the company recorded a pre-tax goodwill
impairment charge of $2,410 million during the first quarter of 2002.
the sfas no. 142 goodwill
impairment model is a two-step process. first, it requires a comparison of the
book value of net assets to the fair value of the related operations that have
goodwill assigned to them. if the fair value is determined to be less than book
value, a second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. in
this process, a fair value for goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair
value of the operations used in the first step, and is compared to its carrying
value. the shortfall of the fair value below carrying value represents the
amount of goodwill impairment. sfas no. 142 requires goodwill to be tested for
impairment annually at the same time every year, and when an event occurs or
circumstances change such that it is reasonably possible that an impairment may
exist. the company selected april 1 as its annual testing date.
the company estimates the
fair values of the related operations using discounted cash flows. the forecasts
of future cash flows are based on the companys best estimate of future
revenues and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected
future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements, and general market
conditions, and are subject to review and approval by senior management and the
board of directors. changes in these forecasts could cause a particular
operating group to either pass or fail the first step in the sfas no. 142
goodwill impairment model, which could significantly change the amount of
impairment recorded.
the cash flow forecasts are
adjusted by an appropriate discount rate derived from the companys market
capitalization plus a suitable control premium at the date of evaluation.
therefore, changes in the stock price will also affect the amount of impairment
recorded. at the date of the previous impairment, a 10% increase in the value of
boeing common stock would have reduced the impairment charge recorded in the
first quarter of 2002 by approximately $190 million. a 10% decrease in the value
of boeing common stock would have increased the impairment charge by
approximately $160 million.
postretirement plans
the company sponsors
various pension plans covering substantially all employees. the company also
provides postretirement benefit plans other than pensions, consisting
principally of health care coverage, to eligible retirees and qualifying
dependents. the liabilities and annual income or expense of the companys
pension and other postretirement plans are determined using methodologies that
involve several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the
discount rate, the long-term rate of asset return, and medical trend (rate of
growth for medical costs). not all net periodic pension income or expense is
recognized in net earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to
production as product costs, and a portion remains in inventory at the end of a
reporting period.
the company uses a discount
rate that is based on a point-in-time estimate as of the september 30
measurement date. this rate is determined based on a review of long-term, high
quality corporate bonds as of the measurement date and use of models that match
projected benefit payments of the companys major united states pension and
other postretirement plans to coupons and maturities from high quality bonds. a
25 basis point increase in the discount rate would decrease the 2002 pension and
other postretirement liabilities by approximately $1,000 million (3%) and $230
million (3%), respectively, and decrease the 2002 net periodic pension and other
postretirement expense by approximately $16 million and $11 million,
respectively. a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate would increase the
2002 pension and other postretirement liabilities by approximately $1,250
million (3.5%) and $250 million (3.5%), respectively, and increase the 2002 net
periodic pension and other postretirement expense by approximately $18 million
and $13 million, respectively.
- 15 -
net periodic pension costs
include an underlying expected long-term rate of asset return. in developing
this assumption, the company looks at a number of factors: a review of asset
class return by several of the companys trust fund investment advisors,
long-term inflation assumptions, and long-term historical returns for the
companys plans. the expected long-term rate of asset return is based on a
diversified portfolio including domestic and international equities, fixed
income, real estate, private equities and uncorrelated assets. pension income or
expense is especially sensitive to changes in the long-term rate of asset
return. an increase or decrease of 25 basis points in the expected long-term
rate of asset return would have increased or decreased 2002 pension income by
approximately $95 million.
the 2002 postretirement
benefit obligation for non-pension plans reflects a significant increase in
medical trend. recent losses due to higher-than-expected increases in medical
claims costs have created an unrecognized loss in 2002. the company increased
its short-term medical trend for 2003 to reflect the revised expectations of
continued cost increases in the next few years.
standards issued and not yet implemented
in june 2001, the financial
accounting standards board (fasb) issued sfas no. 143, accounting for asset
retirement obligations, which is effective january 1, 2003. this standard
addresses financial accounting and reporting for obligations associated with the
retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated retirement costs.
the company has determined that the implementation of this standard will not
have a material effect on its financial statements.
in july 2002, the fasb
issued sfas no. 146, accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal
activities. this standard requires costs associated with exit or disposal
activities to be recognized when they are incurred. the requirements of sfas no.
146 apply prospectively to activities that are initiated after december 31,
2002, and as such, the company cannot reasonably estimate the impact of adopting
these new rules until and unless it undertakes relevant activities in future
periods.
in november 2002, the fasb
issued interpretation no. 45 (fin 45), guarantors accounting and
disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of the
indebtedness of others, which clarifies the requirements of sfas no. 5,
accounting for contingencies, relating to a guarantors accounting
for and disclosures of certain guarantees issued. fin 45 requires enhanced
disclosures for certain guarantees. it also will require certain guarantees that
are issued or modified after december 31, 2002, including certain third-party
guarantees, to be initially recorded on the balance sheet at fair value. for
guarantees issued on or before december 31, 2002, liabilities are recorded when
and if payments become probable and estimable. the company expects fin 45 to
have the general effect of delaying recognitionfor a portion of the
revenue forproduct sales that are accompanied by certain third-party
guarantees. the financial statement recognition provisions are effective
prospectively, and the company cannot reasonably estimate the impact of adopting
fin 45 until guarantees are issued or modified in future periods, at which time
their results will be initially reported in the financial statements. see
off-balance sheet arrangements discussion.
in january 2003, the fasb
issued interpretation no. 46 (fin 46), consolidation of variable interest
entities, which clarifies the application of accounting research bulletin
no. 51, consolidated financial statements, relating to consolidation of
certain entities. first, fin 46 will require identification of the
companys participation in variable interests entities (vie), which are
defined as entities with a level of invested equity that is not sufficient to
fund future activities to permit them to operate on a stand alone basis, or
whose equity holders lack certain characteristics of a controlling financial
interest. for entities identified as vie, fin 46 sets forth a model to evaluate
potential consolidation based on an assessment of which party to the vie, if
any, bears a majority of the exposure to its expected losses, or stands to gain
from a majority of its expected returns. fin 46 also sets forth certain
disclosures regarding interests in vie that are deemed significant, even if
consolidation is not required. the company is currently assessing the
application of fin 46 as it relates to its variable interests. see off-balance
sheet arrangements discussion.
- 16 -
consolidated results of operations and financial condition
the company operates in
four principal segments: commercial airplanes, military aircraft and missile
systems, space and communications, and bcc. all other activities fall within the
other segment, principally made up of boeing technology, connexion by
boeingsm and air traffic management.
consolidated results of operations
(dollars in millions)
revenues
$54,069
$58,198
$51,321
operating earnings
$3,868
$3,896
$3,058
operating margins
7.2%
6.7%
6.0%
net earnings
$492
$2,827
$2,128
research and development*
$1,639
$1,936
$1,998
effective income tax rate
27.1%
20.7%
29.0%
contractual backlog
$104,173
$106,591
$120,600
*includes in-process
research & development in 2000
revenues
revenues for 2002 were
$54.1 billion compared with $58.2 billion in 2001 and $51.3 billion in 2000. the
lower revenues in 2002 principally reflect decreased deliveries in the
commercial airplanes segment. fewer commercial airplane deliveries in 2002 were
offset by growth of $1.5 billion in the military aircraft and missile systems
segment revenues. the higher revenues in 2001 compared to 2000 principally
reflect increased deliveries in the commercial airplanes segment, but also
reflect an increase in space and communications segment revenues.
based on current schedules
and plans, the company projects total 2003 revenues to be approximately
$49 billion.
operating earnings
operating earnings for 2002
were $3,868 million compared with $3,896 million in 2001 and $3,058 million in
2000. 2001 operating earnings were significantly impacted by $935 million of
pre-tax special charges related to the events of september 11, 2001. see note 3.
excluding the september 11, 2001, special charges, operating earnings in 2002
would have been $963 million lower than 2001 operating earnings. this decrease
in operating earnings reflected lower commercial airplane deliveries offset by
production efficiencies in the commercial airplanes segment and higher
deliveries of military aircraft and missile systems segment products. space and
communications segment operating earnings also decreased as commercial satellite
losses offset growth and performance on other programs. in addition, $426
million of asset impairment charges and additional valuation reserves related to
customer and commercial financing assets were recorded by bcc and the other
segment during 2002.
operating earnings of
$3,896 million for 2001 were $838 million higher than 2000 operating earnings of
$3,058 million. excluding the september 11, 2001, pre-tax special charges of
$935 million, operating earnings in 2001 would have been $1,773 million higher
than 2000 operating earnings. the increase in operating earnings during 2001 was
primarily related to higher commercial airplane deliveries and an increase in
space and communications segment operating earnings.
- 17 -
as indicated in note 16,
the company has generated significant net periodic benefit income related to
pensions: $404 million in 2002, $920 million in 2001, and $428 million in 2000.
not all net periodic pension benefit income or expense is recognized in net
earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to production as product
costs, and a portion remains in inventory at the end of a reporting period.
accordingly, the operating earnings for 2002, 2001 and 2000, included $537
million, $785 million and $403 million, respectively, of pension income.
due to the significant
investment losses incurred in recent years, the expected future market-related
value of assets is expected to decrease significantly in the near future. this
decrease, when combined with the decrease of 25 basis points in the expected
long-term asset return is expected to reduce pension income reflected in
operating earnings from $537 million in 2002 to approximately $75 million in
2003. in 2004, the pension impact to earnings will depend on market conditions,
but based upon current assumptions, the company expects to recognize a non-cash
pension expense estimated to range from $200 million to $300 million.
net earnings
net earnings of $492
million for 2002 were $2,335 million lower than 2001 earnings of $2,827 million.
the decrease in net earnings principally reflected a $1,827 million charge
recorded in 2002 upon the adoption of sfas no. 142, decreased commercial
airplane deliveries, increased customer financing charges and higher commercial
satellite production costs. other income decreased $276 million in 2002, to $42
million in 2002 from $318 million in 2001. other income in 2001 included $210
million of interest income associated with federal income tax audit settlements;
2002 did not include similar interest income. also contributing to lower other
income in 2002 was $46 million of losses on long-held equity investments.
interest and debt expense increased $80 million in 2002, to $730 million in 2002
from $650 million in 2001. the increased interest expense resulted from
increased debt, primarily associated with the increased customer and commercial
financing activities of bcc. interest expense is expected to increase concurrent
with increasing future financing activity.
net earnings of $2,827
million for 2001 were $699 million higher than 2000 net earnings of $2,128
million. the increase in net earnings principally reflected increased operating
earnings associated with the increase in revenue for 2001. net earnings in 2001
were significantly reduced by $935 million of pre-tax special charges ($633
million after tax) related to the events of september 11, 2001. the increase in
net earnings for 2001 over 2000 also reflected the in-process research and
development expense of $557 million ($348 million after tax) that was recognized
in 2000, of which $500 million was associated with the acquisition of the hughes
space and communications businesses, which were renamed boeing satellite
systems. other income decreased $68 million in 2001, to $318 million in 2001
from $386 million in 2000. the decrease in other income in 2001 principally
reflected lower interest income from cash, but was partially offset by higher
interest income associated with federal income tax audit settlements ($210
million in 2001, compared with $73 million in 2000). other income in 2000 also
included a $42 million gain on sale of a long-held equity investment. interest
and debt expense increased $205 million in 2001, to $650 million in 2001 from
$445 million in 2000. the increased interest expense resulted from increased
debt, primarily associated with the increased customer and commercial financing
activities of bcc.
research and development
research and development expenditures
involve design, development and related test activities for defense systems, new
and derivative commercial jet aircraft, advance space, other company-sponsored
product development, and basic research and development. these expenditures are
either charged directly against earnings or are included in amounts allocable as
reimbursable overhead costs on u.s. government contracts. research and
development highlights for each of the major business segments are discussed in
segment results of operations and financial condition. in addition, boeing
technology, the advanced research and development organization of the company,
focuses on improving its competitive position by investing in certain
technologies and processes that apply to multiple business units. technology
investments currently being pursued within boeing technology include network
centric operations, affordable structures and manufacturing technology, lean and
efficient design processes and tools, lean support and service initiatives,
advanced platform systems and safe and clean products.
- 18 -
total research and
development expense in 2002 was $1,639 million, compared with $1,936 million in
2001 and $1,998 million in 2000. excluding the $557 million of in-process
research and development expense in 2000, research and development expense
increased $495 million in 2001, principally reflecting increases in the
commercial airplanes segment and the other segment, which includes activities
relating to connexion by boeingsm.
income taxes
the effective income tax
rate for 2002 was 27.1% compared with 20.7% in 2001 and 29.0% in 2000. the 2002
effective income tax rate of 27.1% varies from the federal statutory tax rate of
35%, principally due to foreign sales corporation (fsc) and extraterritorial
income (eti) exclusion tax benefits of $195 million. this rate also reflects tax
credits, state income taxes and favorable resolution of certain audit issues.
the effective income tax
rates of 20.7% for 2001 and 29.0% for 2000 also vary from the federal statutory
tax rate principally due to fsc benefits of $222 million in 2001 and $291
million in 2000. the 2001 income tax rate also reflects a one-time benefit of
$343 million reflecting a settlement with the internal revenue service (irs)
relating to research credit claims on mcdonnell douglas corporation fixed price
government contracts applicable to the 1986-1992 federal income tax returns.
in december 1996, the
boeing company filed suit in the u.s. district court for the western district of
washington for the refund of over $400 million in federal income taxes and
related interest. if the company were to prevail, the refund of the amount in
dispute would include interest computed to the payment date. however, the
company cannot predict the likelihood of a favorable outcome. the suit
challenged the irs method of allocating research and development costs for the
purpose of determining tax incentive benefits on export sales through the
companys domestic international sales corporation (disc) and its fsc for
the years 1979 through 1987. the company prevailed with the district court, but
lost an appeals decision with the ninth circuit court of appeals. the company
appealed to the supreme court and is awaiting their decision, which is expected
in the first half of 2003. the companys financial statements will not be
negatively impacted as a result of the suits outcome.
beginning in 1999 and
continuing through 2002 the european union (eu) has issued a series of
objections with the world trade organization (wto) to both u.s. fsc and eti
provisions. the wto has agreed with the eu and ruled that the fsc and eti
provisions constitute prohibited export subsidies. in response the wto has
authorized the eu to impose retaliatory tariffs. a list of products upon which
the retaliatory tariff would be imposed is not yet final, but at this point no
boeing products have been included on the list. president bush has stated that
the u.s. will bring its tax laws into compliance with the wto ruling that the
extraterritorial income regime constitutes a prohibited export subsidy. both the
house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee are continuing
to assess alternatives for a replacement of the eti legislation. it is not
possible to predict what impact this issue will have on future earnings pending
final resolution of these matters. if eti is repealed and replacement
legislation is not enacted, the loss of benefit to the company could be
substantial.
income taxes have been
settled with the irs for all years through 1978, and irs examinations have been
completed through 1991. in connection with these examinations, the company
disagrees with irs proposed adjustments, and the years 1979 through 1987 are in
litigation. the irs examination for mcdonnell douglas corporation for the years
1993 through 1995 has been settled and the company received a refund of $102
million in 2002. the company believes adequate provision for all outstanding
issues has been made for all open years.
- 19 -
backlog
contractual backlog of
unfilled orders excludes purchase options, announced orders for which definitive
contracts have not been executed, and unobligated u.s. and foreign government
contract funding. total contractual backlog balances were $104.2 billion at
december 31, 2002, $106.6 billion at december 31, 2001, and $120.6 billion at
december 31, 2000. the decreases in contractual backlog from 2001 to 2002 and
2000 to 2001 were related to decreases in contractual backlog for commercial
airplanes offset by increases in contractual backlog for both space and
communications and military aircraft and missile systems.
unobligated backlog
includes u.s. and foreign government definitive contracts for which funding has
not been appropriated. unobligated backlog totaled $34.7 billion, $27.5 billion
and $31.3 billion at december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively. the
increase in unobligated backlog from 2001 to 2002 is primarily related to
military aircraft and missile systems, partially offset by space and
communications. overall, unobligated backlog decreased from 2000 to 2001 due to
a decrease in unobligated backlog for military aircraft and missile systems,
which was partially offset by an increase in unobligated backlog for space and
communications.
liquidity and capital resources
the primary factors that affect the companys investment requirements and liquidity position, other
than operating results associated with current sales activity, include the
following: timing of new and derivative programs requiring both high
developmental expenditures and initial inventory buildup; cyclical factors,
including growth and expansion requirements and requirements associated with
reducing sales levels; customer financing assistance; the timing of federal
income tax payments; the companys stock repurchase plan; and potential
acquisitions.
cash flow summary
the company has generated
strong cash flow from operating activities with $4.4 billion provided in 2002,
$3.9 billion in 2001 and $6.2 billion in 2000. earnings, adjusted for non-cash
items, continue to be the primary source of operating cash flow with over $4
billion provided in each of the last three years.
(dollars in millions)
year ended december 31,
net earnings
$
$
2,827
$
2,128
non-cash items
3,772
1,786
1,977
changes in working capital
(719)
2,121
net cash provided by operating activities
4,375
3,894
6,226
net cash used by investing activities
(3,421)
(4,789)
(7,911)
net cash provided (used) by financing activities
(659)
net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
1,700
(377)
(2,344)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
1,010
3,354
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
2,333
$
$
1,010
non-cash items
non-cash items in earnings
primarily include depreciation, amortization, share-based plans expense,
impairments, valuation provisions and the cumulative effect of accounting change
relating to the adoption of sfas no. 142. non-cash items and corresponding
amounts are listed in the companys consolidated statements of cash
flows.
working capital
working capital from
operations excluding cash contributions for pensions generated approximately
$0.5 billion of net cash in 2002. due to the decline in the airline industry,
lower inventory balances and production rates resulted in a $1.5 billion
increase in cash flow. the amount of customer advance payments received in
excess of costs was $0.9 billion less in 2002 than the previous year due
primarily to lower advance payments received. there was also a substantial
reduction in vendor payables. the reduction in tax payments in 2002 resulted
principally from lower earnings and a $0.1 billion tax refund from settlements
of several tax audits.
- 20 -
the working capital trend
as reflected in the five-year summary indicates that the company has been able
to use lower amounts of working capital to support the volume of business
transacted and is using capital more efficiently. this trend does not reflect a
change in the companys ability to meet obligations.
pensions
2002 operating cash flow
included $0.3 billion of cash funding to the pension plans. on april 15, 2002,
the company voluntarily funded three of its defined benefit plans to ensure that
each of its plans would have assets that were at least approximately equal to
(and in most cases greater than) the liability for vested benefits as measured
by the pension benefit guaranty corporation. the company does not expect
significant pension funding requirements in 2003, although it may make
additional discretionary contributions.
the company measures its
pension plan using a september 30 year-end for financial accounting purposes.
the significant declines experienced in the financial markets have unfavorably
impacted asset performance. as a result, the company has reduced its expected
long-term rate of asset return by 25 basis points to 9.0% beginning in 2003. the
expected long-term rate of asset return is based on target asset allocations of
60% equity with a return of 10.0%, 30% fixed income with a return of 6.8%, and
10% other (including real estate) with a return of 9.2%. current allocations are
within 1 to 3% of each of the long-term targets. the decline in asset
performance coupled with historically low interest rates (a key factor when
estimating plan liabilities), caused the company to recognize a significant
non-cash charge to equity in the fourth quarter of 2002. this charge, which
amounted to a $5.7 billion increase to the accrued pension plan liability and a
$3.6 billion after tax decrease to the accumulated other comprehensive income
account within shareholders equity, did not impact earnings or cash flow,
and could reverse in future periods should either interest rates increase or
market performance and plan returns improve. the company uses a discount rate
that is based on a point-in-time estimate as of the september 30 measurement
date. although future changes to the discount rate are unknown, had the discount
rate increased or decreased 100 basis points, the pension and postretirement
liability would have decreased $3.6 billion or increased $4.4 billion,
respectively.
investing activities
the majority of bccs
customer financing is funded by debt and cash flow from its own operations. as
of december 31, 2002, the company had outstanding irrevocable commitments of
approximately $3.2 billion to arrange or provide financing related to aircraft
on order or under option for deliveries scheduled through the year 2007. not all
these commitments are likely to be used; however, a significant portion of these
commitments are with parties with relatively low credit ratings. see note 20 and
21. outstanding loans and commitments are primarily secured by the underlying
aircraft.
additional investments of
$0.4 billion were made by bcc in enhanced equipment trust certificates (eetcs)
offered by various airlines in 2002. eetcs are widely used in the airline
industry as a method of financing aircraft. bcc provides financing for airlines
and has begun investing in these types of instruments as an investor. see bcc
segment results of operations and financial condition.
financing activities
debt maturities during this
three-year period included $1.3 billion in 2002, $0.5 billion in 2001, and $0.5
billion in 2000. additionally, bcc issued $2.8 billion of debt in 2002, $3.9
billion in 2001 and $2.0 billion in 2000. the significant bcc debt issuance in
2000 and 2001 was performed in conjunction with the transfer of a significant
portion of the companys customer financing assets to bcc as well as growth
in the customer financing portfolio. in 2002, bcc debt issuance was generally
used for growth in the customer financing portfolio. the company has a share
repurchase program, but there were no share repurchases in 2002. see note 18.
- 21 -
disclosures about contractual obligations and commitments
the following table
summarizes the companys known obligations to make future payments or other
consideration pursuant to certain contracts as of december 31, 2002, as well as
an estimate of the timing in which these obligations are expected to be
satisfied.
contractual obligations
(dollars in millions)
total
less than 1year
1-3 years
4-5 years
after 5years
long-term debt
$
13,704
$
1,377
$
2,808
$
2,843
$
6,676
capital lease obligations
operating leases
1,915
other long-term liabilities
12,247
2,743
2,762
6,451
total contractual obligations
$
28,565
$
2,454
$
6,168
$
6,094
$
13,849
other long-term liabilities
in the table above include accrued retiree health care, accrued pension plan
liability and deferred lease income.
inventory procurement contacts
the company has entered
intocertain significant inventory procurementcontracts that
specifydeterminable prices and quantities, and long-term delivery
timeframes.these agreements require suppliers and vendors to be prepared
to build and deliver items in sufficient time to meet the companys
production schedules.the need for such arrangements with suppliers and
vendors arises due to the extended production planning horizon for many of its
products, including commercial aircraft, military aircraft and other products
where the delivery to the customer is over an extended period of time. a
significant portion of these inventory commitments are either supported by a
firm contract from a customer or have historically resulted in settlement
through either termination payments or contract adjustments, when necessary,
should the customer base not materialize to support delivery from the supplier.
although there are no plans to do so, if any of the companys programs were
to be terminated, the company would be exposed to potentially material
termination costs.
industrial participation agreements
the company has entered
into various industrial participation agreements with customers in foreign
countries to effect economic flow back and/or technology transfer to their
businesses or government agencies as the result of their procurement of goods
and/or services from the company. these commitments may be satisfied by the
companys placement of direct work, placement of vendor orders for
supplies, opportunities to bid on supply contracts, transfer of technology, or
other forms of assistance to the foreign country. the company does not commit to
industrial participation obligations unless a contract for sale of the
companys products or services is signed. to be eligible for such a
commitment from the company, the foreign country or customer must have
sufficient capability and capacity and must be competitive in cost, quality and
schedule. in certain cases, if a contract is placed with a foreign supplier to
satisfy an industrial participation obligation, failure of that supplier to
comply with any or all of these terms and conditions relieves the company of its
obligations pursuant to that portion of its industrial participation commitment.
in certain cases, penalties could be imposed if the company does not meet its
industrial participation obligations. during 2002, no penalties were incurred by
the company. as of december 31, 2002, the company has outstanding industrial
participation obligations totaling approximately $8.2 billion that extend
through 2013.
capital resources
the company has the following standard & poor's credit ratings: short-term, a-1; senior debt, a+. bcc has the
following standard & poor's credit ratings:  short-term, a-1; senior debt,  a+. the company has the following
moody's credit ratings: short-term, p-1; senior debt, a2. bcc has the following moody's credit ratings:
short-term, p-2; senior debt, a3. the company has the following fitch's credit ratings:  short-term, f-1; senior
debt, a+. bcc has the following fitch's credit ratings:  short-term, f-1; senior debt, a+.
the events of september 11,
2001, negatively impacted the liquidity and capital resources of the company.
subsequent to september 11, 2001, the company established a commercial paper
program providing additional short-term liquidity. commercial paper remains a
significant liquidity source.
- 22 -
the company has debt
obligations of $14.4 billion, which are unsecured. approximately $1.8 billion
will mature in 2003, and the balance has an average maturity of 12.4 years.
excluding bcc debt of $9.5 billion and non-recourse debt of $0.6 billion, total
debt is at 42% of total shareholders equity plus debt. the consolidated
debt, including bcc, is at 65% of total shareholders equity plus debt. as
previously noted, the company has recognized a significant non-cash charge to
equity of $3.6 billion, net of tax. excluding this item and bcc debt, the
consolidated debt was 31% of shareholders equity plus debt.
the company has additional
substantial borrowing capability. currently, the company has $4.3 billion that
remains available from shelf registrations filed with the securities and
exchange commission (sec) and $4.5 billion ($2.0 billion exclusively available
for bcc) of unused borrowing on revolving credit line agreements with a group of
major banks. see note 15. the company believes its internally generated
liquidity, together with access to external capital resources, will be
sufficient to satisfy existing commitments and plans, and also to provide
adequate financial flexibility to take advantage of potential strategic business
opportunities should they arise within the next year.
due to the continuing
downturn in the commercial aviation market and the recent airline announcements
in the united states that confirm the delayed recovery of airline traffic and
profitability, several customers have rescheduled aircraft delivery dates. the
rescheduling of delivery dates will reduce aircraft advance payments in the near
term. the reduction in advance payments will be offset by reduced inventory
spending, resulting in an immaterial impact on the companys liquidity.
off-balance sheet arrangements
the company is a party to
certain off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by the sec, including certain
guarantees and variable interests in unconsolidated entities.
guarantees
the following tables
provide quantitative data regarding the companys third-party guarantees.
the maximum potential payment amounts represent worst-case
scenarios, and do not necessarily reflect results expected by the company.
estimated proceeds from collateral and recourse represent the anticipated values
of assets the company could liquidate or receive from other parties to offset
its payments under guarantees. the carrying amount of liabilities recorded on
the balance sheet reflects the companys best estimate of future payments
it may be required to make as part of fulfilling its guarantee obligations.
portions of certain liabilities were established in prior periods as part of the
companys special charges due to the events of september 11, 2001.
as of december 31, 2002,
maximumpotentialpayments
estimatedproceeds fromcollateral/recourse
carryingamounts ofliabilities*
portion ofliabilitiesrelated to theevents of
septemer 11, 2001
asset-related guarantees
$
$
$
$
credit guarantees related to thesea launch venture
other credit guarantees
equipment trust certificates
performance guarantees
*amounts included in accounts payable and other liabilities
the company has issued
various asset-related guarantees, principally to facilitate the sale of certain
commercial aircraft. under these arrangements, the company is obligated to make
payments to a guaranteed party in the event the related aircraft fair values
fall below a specified amount at a future point in time. these obligations are
collateralized principally by commercial aircraft. no aircraft have been
delivered with these types of guarantees in several years. recent declines in
asset values of commercial aircraft increase the risk of future payment by the
company under these guarantees. during the year ended december 31, 2002,
the company recorded a reduction to expense of $3 million and made net cash
payments totaling $138 million related to its asset-related guarantees.
- 23 -
the company has issued
credit guarantees to creditors of the sea launch venture, of which the company
is a 40% owner, to assist the venture in obtaining financing. in the event the
company is required to perform on these guarantees, it has the right to recover
a portion of the loss from another venture partner, and has collateral rights to
certain assets of the venture. in addition, the company has issued credit
guarantees, principally to facilitate the sale of certain commercial aircraft.
under these arrangements, the company is obligated to make payments to a
guaranteed party in the event that lease or loan payments are not made by the
original debtor or lessee. the companys commercial aircraft credit-related
guarantees are collateralized by the underlying commercial aircraft. a
substantial portion of these guarantees have been extended on behalf of original
debtors or lessees with less than investment-grade credit. recent financial
weakness in certain airlines further exposes the company to loss under its
credit guarantees. during the year ended december 31, 2002, the company recorded
no expenses and made net cash payments totaling $9 million related to its credit
guarantees.
as a liquidity provider for
equipment trust certificate (etc) pass-through arrangements, the company has
certain obligations to investors in the trusts, which requires funding to the
trust to cover interest due to such investors resulting from an event of default
by united airlines. in the event of funding, the company receives a first
priority position in the etc collateral in the amount of the funding. on
february 7, 2003, the company advanced $101 million to the trust perfecting its
collateral position and terminating its liquidity obligation. the trust
currently has collateral value that significantly exceeds the amount due to the
company.
also relating to an etc
investment, the company has potential obligations relating to shortfall interest
payments in the event that the interest rates in the underlying agreements are
reset below a certain level. these obligations would cease if united airlines
were to default on its interest payments to the trust. there were no significant
payments made by the company during 2002.
the company has outstanding
performance guarantees issued in conjunction with joint venture investments.
pursuant to these guarantees, the company would be required to make payments in
the event a third-party fails to perform specified services.
material variable interests in unconsolidated entities
the company is currently
assessing the application of fin 46 as it relates to its variable interests.
while the company is currently not required to consolidate the full amount of
the etcs, eetcs or the sea launch venture in which it has invested, it is unable
to definitively conclude at this time whether consolidation or disclosure will
be required for these investments upon full adoption of fin 46. the
companys investment in etcs and eetcs aggregated $455 million at december
31, 2002. during the year ended december 31, 2002, the company recorded revenues
of $25 million, cash inflows of $41 million, and impairment expense of $79
million relating to these investments. as of december 31, 2002, the vie (etcs
and eetcs) in which the company has invested have total assets of approximately
$4.2 billion and total debt (which is non-recourse to the company) of
approximately $3.7 billion. the total assets and total liabilities of the sea
launch venture each represent less than 4% of the companys consolidated
total assets and total liabilities as of december 31, 2002. the company made no
additional capital contributions to the sea launch venture during the year ended
december 31, 2002.
disclosures about commercial commitments
the following table
summarizes the companys commercial commitments outstanding as of december
31, 2002, as well as an estimate of the timing in which these commitments are
expected to expire.
commercial commitments
(dollars in millions)
total amountscommitted/maximum
amount of loss
less than 1year
1-3 years
4-5 years
after 5years
standby letters of credit and surety bonds
$
1,663
$
1,079
$
$
$
guarantees:
asset-related guarantees
credit guarantees
equipment trust certificates
performance guarantees
trade-in commitments
1,993
1,054
other commercial commitments
3,329
1,569
1,715
total commercial commitments
$
8,794
$
3,344
$
3,063
$
$
1,423
- 24 -
related to the issuance of
certain standby letters of credit and surety bonds included in the above table,
the company received $608 million of advance payments from customers.
the company enters into
certain trade-in agreements to purchase used aircraft from customers at a
specific price at a future point in time when those customers purchase new
aircraft from the company. in the event the company accepts an aircraft under a
trade-in agreement, the aircraft purchased by the company serves as collateral
to offset amounts paid by the company to the customer. as of december 31, 2002,
accounts payable and other liabilities included $156 million related to trade-in
commitments, of which $93 million was related to the events of september 11,
2001. the total contractual trade-in value of all aircraft that customers had
the right to sell to the company was $1,993 million as of december 31, 2002, and
the company estimated the fair value of those aircraft was $1,837 million. there
is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the assessment of the likelihood of
trade-in commitments. generally, as commercial aircraft values decline, the
probability of the companys performance on trade-in commitments increases.
there have been recent declines in value for certain aircraft models, including
those for which the company has trade-in agreements. updates on the likelihood
that trade-in commitments will be exercised using both quantitative information
from valuation sources and qualitative information from other sources are
continually assessed. the company continues to monitor all trade-in commitments
for adverse developments.
other commercial
commitments include irrevocable financing commitments related to aircraft on
order and commercial equipment financing. these are previously discussed and
also disclosed in note 20 to the consolidated financial statements.
segment results of operations and financial condition
commercial airplanes
(dollars in millions)
revenues
$28,387
$35,056
$31,171
% of total company revenues
53%
60%
61%
unit cost method
operating earnings
$2,847
$2,632
$2,736
operating margins
10.0%
7.5%
8.8%
program accounting method
operating earnings
$2,017
$1,911
$2,099
operating margins
7.1%
5.5%
6.7%
research and development
$768
$858
$574
contractual backlog
$68,159
$75,850
$89,780
revenues
commercial airplanes
segment revenues were $28.4 billion in 2002 compared with $35.1 billion in 2001
and $31.2 billion for 2000. commercial airplanes revenue is derived primarily
from jet aircraft deliveries. the decline in revenue in 2002 compared to 2001
was due primarily to the decline in the commercial aviation market and resulting
jet aircraft deliveries and revenue. 2001 revenue was higher than in 2000 due
primarily to the increase in commercial jet aircraft deliveries.
commercial jet aircraft deliveries were 381 in 2002 compared with 527
in 2001 and 489 in 2000 summarized as follows:
model
(10)
(23)
737 classic
-
-
737 next-generation
(2)
(5)
(1)
(1)
(1)
md-11
-
md-90
-
-
total
- 25 -
commercial jet aircraft
deliveries included deliveries under operating lease, which are identified by
parentheses in the table above. deliveries in 2002 included intercompany
deliveries of four 737 next-generation aircraft, consisting of three c-40
aircraft and one project wedgetail airborne early warning and control
(aew&c) system aircraft. deliveries in 2001 included intercompany deliveries
of two 737 next-generation aircraft, and in 2000 included intercompany
deliveries of four 737 next-generation aircraft and one 747 aircraft. final
deliveries of the md-11 aircraft program occurred in 2001. final deliveries of
the 737 classic and md-90 aircraft programs occurred in 2000.
the cumulative number of commercial aircraft deliveries as of december 31
were as follows:
model
737 next-generation
1,247
1,024
1,319
1,292
1,261
1,022
the undelivered units under firm order* as of december 31
were as follows:
model
737 next-generation
*
firm orders represent
new aircraft purchase agreements where the customers
rights to cancel without penalty have expired. typical customer rights to cancel
without penalty include receiving board of directors approval, shareholder
approval, government approval and completing financing arrangements. all such
cancellation rights must be satisfied or expired even if satisfying such
conditions are highly certain. firm orders exclude option aircraft and aircraft
subject to reconfirmation.
total commercial jet
aircraft deliveries for 2003 are currently projected to approximate 280
aircraft. for 2004, commercial aircraft deliveries are currently projected to be
in the range of 275 to 300 aircraft. as of january 30, 2003, the delivery
forecast for 2003 is virtually sold out and approximately 80% sold for 2004 at
the lower end of the range. commercial airplanes segment revenues for 2003 are
projected to be in the range of $22 billion.
operating earnings
commercial airplanes
segment calculates its operating earnings using both the unit cost and program
accounting methods. for segment reporting purposes, as disclosed in note 24, the
commercial airplanes operating earnings as of december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000,
are provided on the unit cost basis. beginning in first quarter 2003, commercial
airplanes segment data will be based on the program accounting method.
commercial airplanes
segment 2002 operating earnings, based on the unit cost of airplanes delivered,
were $2,847 million, compared with $2,632 million in 2001 and $2,736 million in
2000. the related operating margins were 10.0%, 7.5% and 8.8%, respectively.
2002 and 2001 operating earnings included $(2) million and $908 million,
respectively, of (recoveries)/charges associated with the september 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks. excluding these (recoveries)/charges, commercial airplanes
segment operating earnings in 2002 and 2001 were $2,845 million and $3,540
million, resulting in operating margins of 10.0% and 10.1%, respectively.
excluding the september 11 (recoveries)/charges, 2002 operating margin was
slightly lower than 2001 due to the decline in revenue offset by improved
operating efficiency and reduced research and development expense. 2001
operating earnings and margin, excluding september 11 charges, increased from
2000 principally due to increased revenue and continued improvement in the
production process.
- 26 -
commercial airplanes
segment operating earnings, based on the program method of accounting and
including intercompany transactions, as discussed in note 24, were $2,017
million, $1,911 million and $2,099 million as of december 31, 2002, 2001 and
2000, respectively. the related operating margins were 7.1%, 5.5%, and 6.7%.
excluding the 2002 and 2001 (recoveries)/charges associated with september 11,
2001, the operating earnings for these periods were $2,015 million and $2,819
million, respectively. the comparable margins were 7.1% and 8.0%. the decline in
margins from 2001 to 2002 is primarily due to the reduction in revenue offset by
improved operating efficiency and reduced research and development expense. in
addition, the margins have been adversely impacted compared to 2001 due to the
aircraft market decline. in general, this has resulted in the lengthening of the
time needed to produce the accounting quantity.
commercial aircraft
production costs include a significant amount of infrastructure costs, a portion
of which do not vary with production rates. as the amount of time needed to
produce the accounting quantity increases, the average cost of the accounting
quantity also increases as these infrastructure costs are included in the total
cost estimates, thus reducing the gross margin and related earnings provided
other factors do not change.
the favorable cost
performance reflected in the current year earnings and margin is recognized over
current and future deliveries under the program method of accounting. for
segment reporting purposes, the favorable cost performance is a cumulative
adjustment to unit cost over current and prior deliveries.
the company will continue
to experience a higher than normal quantity of used airplanes through 2003 as a
result of commitments entered into through purchase agreements with customers
for new aircraft and services. due to the current market for used airplanes, the
companys used airplane inventory may increase and these purchases and
commitments to purchase may result in future charges.
accounting quantity
a program consists of the
estimated accounting quantity for each aircraft to be produced for delivery
under existing and anticipated contracts. the company has a policy that
determines the appropriate accounting quantity for each commercial aircraft
program. this policy takes into account several factors influenced by the demand
for the particular product. the company reviews and reassesses its program
accounting quantities on a quarterly basis in compliance with relevant program
accounting guidance.
the current market for
commercial aircraft is adversely affecting all of commercial airplanes
commercial aircraft programs. the resulting reduction in production rates is
extending the time frame for production and delivery of the accounting
quantities used for program accounting. this is particularly true for the 747,
757 and 767 programs. the 757 and 767 programs have been experiencing the most
difficulty acquiring new orders. current market projections indicate that the
company will be successful in selling the unsold units within the current
accounting quantity for all programs, therefore no accounting quantities have
been reduced.
the estimate of total program accounting quantities and changes, if any,
as of december 31 were:
737 next-generation
2,000
1,401
1,100
1,000
additions
1,800
1,401
1,100
1,000
additions/(deletions)
(65)
1,650
1,351
1,050
the accounting quantity for
the 717 program continues to be based on firm orders as it has been since fourth
quarter of 2001. the increase of five units in the 717 program accounting
quantity during the second quarter of 2002 was the result of net new order
activity on the program. the reduction of 65 units in the 717 program accounting
quantity during the fourth quarter of 2001 was driven by a lack of firm demand
for the 717 aircraft subsequent to september 11, 2001. see note 3. this decrease
in demand is demonstrated in the table below by the sharp decrease in the 717
programs anticipated orders as a percentage of cumulative firm orders
between december 31, 2001 and december 31, 2000. program accounting quantity
increases between december 31, 2002 and december 31, 2000 on other programs were
the result of the normal progression of business; delivering aircraft; and
obtaining additional orders.
- 27 -
within the accounting
quantity for all programs there are units that have been delivered, undelivered
units under contract, and units anticipated to be under contract in the future
(anticipated orders). in developing total program estimates all of these
conditions within the accounting quantity must be addressed. the percentage of
anticipated orders included in the program accounting estimates as compared to
the number of cumulative firm orders* as of december 31 were as follows:
737 next-generation
cumulative firm orders (cfo)
2,012
1,371
1,050
anticipated orders
n/a
anticipated orders as a % cfo
0%
n/a
2%
5%
7%
1%
cumulative firm orders (cfo)
1,881
1,351
1,048
anticipated orders
n/a
anticipated orders as a % cfo
9%
n/a
4%
5%
7%
4%
cumulative firm orders (cfo)
1,722
1,338
1,042
anticipated orders
n/a
anticipated orders as a % cfo
32%
n/a
1%
1%
5%
8%
*
cumulative firm
orders represent the cumulative number of commercial jet
aircraft deliveries as of december 31 (see table on page 26) plus undelivered
units under firm order (see table on page 26). cumulative firm orders
include orders that fall within the current accounting quantities as well as
orders that extend beyond the current accounting quantities. cumulative firm
orders exclude program test aircraft that will not be refurbished for sale.
as of december 31, 2002,
the company had cumulatively delivered 113 717 program aircraft. the company
will record 717 deliveries on a break-even basis until such time as program
reviews indicate changes to the gross margin. the company has potentially
material exposures related to the 717 program, principally attributable to
termination costs that could result from a lack of longer-term market
acceptance.
the company is anticipating
an order from the u.s. air force for 100 767 tankers, which will have a
long-term positive impact on the 767 program. this order has been incorporated
into the program estimates to the extent the aircraft fall within the current
accounting quantity. based on the anticipated delivery schedule and forecasted
production rates most of these aircraft fall beyond the current accounting
quantity. the order from the u.s. air force for 100 767 tankers is anticipated
to become a firm contract during 2003.
deferred production costs
inventory production costs
incurred on in-process and delivered units in excess of the estimated average
cost of such units determined as described in note 1 represent deferred
production costs. as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, there were no significant
excess deferred production costs or unamortized tooling costs not recoverable
from existing firm orders for the 737 next-generation and 777 programs.
the unamortized tooling and
deferred production costs included in inventory at december 31are summarized in
the following table:
unamortized tooling
737 next-generation
$
$
deferred production costs
737 next-generation
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, the balance of deferred production costs and unamortized tooling related
to the 717, 747, 757 and 767 programs was insignificant.
- 28 -
fleet support
the company provides the
operators of all its commercial airplane models assistance and services to
facilitate efficient and safe aircraft operation. collectively known as fleet
support services, these activities and services include flight and maintenance
training, field service support costs, engineering services and technical data
and documents. fleet support activity begins prior to aircraft delivery as the
customer receives training, manuals and technical consulting support, and
continues throughout the operational life of the aircraft. services provided
after delivery include field service support, consulting on maintenance, repair,
and operational issues brought forth by the customer or regulators, updating
manuals and engineering data, and the issuance of service bulletins that impact
the entire models fleet. field service support involves company personnel
located at customer facilities providing and coordinating fleet support
activities and requests. the costs for fleet support are expensed as incurred
and have been historically less than 1.5% of total consolidated costs of
products and services. this level of expenditures is anticipated to continue in
the upcoming years. these costs do not vary significantly with current
production rates.
research and development
the company continually
evaluates opportunities to improve current aircraft models, and assesses the
marketplace to ensure that its family of commercial jet aircraft are well
positioned to meet future requirements of the airline industry. the fundamental
strategy is to maintain a broad product line that is responsive to changing
market conditions by maximizing commonality among the boeing family of
commercial aircraft. additionally, the company is determined to continue to lead
the industry in customer satisfaction by offering products with the highest
standards of quality, safety, technical excellence, economic performance and
in-service support.
commercial airplanes
segment research and development expense was $768 million in 2002, $858 million
in 2001 and $574 million in 2000. the decrease in 2002 from 2001 was due
primarily to reduced spending on the development of the 777-300er and 747-400er.
the increase in 2001 over 2000 was due primarily to increased spending on the
development of the 777-300er, 777-200lr, 747-400er and a sonic cruiser airplane.
the initial delivery of the
747-400er and the rollout of the first 777-300er occurred in the fourth quarter
of 2002. the initial delivery of the 777-300er is expected to occur in 2004. the
initial delivery of the 737-900, the largest member of the 737 next-generation
family occurred in the second quarter of 2001. the initial delivery of the
767-400er, a stretched version of 767-300er, occurred in the third quarter of
2000.
in the fourth quarter of
2002, the company announced it will focus its product development efforts on the
development of an efficient 200- to 250-seat airplane that will fly 7,000 to
8,000 nautical miles with 15 to 20 percent lower fuel usage at the top end of
todays commercial jet speeds. the market potential for a new airplane of
this size is forecasted at up to 3,000 units over the next 20 years. the company
expects to formally offer the new airplane to customers in early 2004, with
entry into service targeted for 2008.
the following chart summarizes
the time horizon between go-ahead and certification/initial delivery for major commercial
airplanes derivatives and programs.
backlog
commercial airplanes
segment contractual firm backlog balances were $68.2 billion at december 31,
2002, $75.9 billion at december 31, 2001, and $89.8 billion at december 31,
2000. contractual firm backlog for commercial airplanes segment excludes
customers deemed by management to be high risk or in bankruptcy as of the
reporting date. the contractual backlog decline reflects the impact that the
economic downturn has had on the airline industry. the decline in backlog of
$7.7 billion from december 31, 2001 to december 31, 2002, and $13.9 billion from
december 31, 2000 and december 31, 2001, represents higher delivery volume on
all airplane programs relative to new orders.
december 31, 2002, backlog
does not include the anticipated order of 100 u.s. air force 767 tankers. this
order is anticipated to become a firm contract during 2003.
- 29 -
business environment and trends
overview
the worldwide market for
commercial jet airplanes continues to be predominantly driven by long-term
trends in airline passenger traffic. the principal factors underlying long-term
traffic growth are sustained economic growth, both in developed and emerging
countries, and political stability. demand for the companys commercial
airplanes is further influenced by airline industry profitability, world trade
policies, government-to-government relations, environmental constraints imposed
upon airplane operations, technological changes, and price and other competitive
factors.
airline industry environment
commercial aviation has
been impacted by an economic downturn that began in 2001 and continued through
2002. in addition, the industry suffered a tremendous shock from the terrorist
attacks of september 11, 2001. air travel in most areas of the world has not
recovered to the volume carried by the airlines in 2000, which is affecting
profitability for many airlines. u.s. full service airlines have suffered the
greatest losses. holiday traffic in 2002 for the u.s. airlines showed an
improvement and most carriers indicated better financial performance. however,
this improvement was for only a short period of time and the major u.s. full
service airlines reported significant losses for 2002. in contrast, low fare
airlines in the u.s. and in europe are reporting positive financial results and
are growing. european network airlines are expected to show better results than
their u.s. counterparts for the fiscal period ending in march of 2003. traffic
between asia and europe has rebounded to pre-september 11 levels. this trend
combined with stronger traffic within the region is offsetting the slow growth
over the pacific permitting most asian airlines to show profits.
our timetable for industry
recovery has been delayed. we presently see 2003 to be the year of recovery for
world air travel; late 2003/early 2004 to be the year of airline profitability
recovery; 2004 to be the year of airplane order recovery; and 2005 to be the
year of delivery recovery. the major uncertainty that is curbing economic growth
and a stronger and sooner rebound in the industry is the iraqi situation
in terms of timing, scale of military engagement, effect on oil prices, and
clarity of political resolution.
the companys 20-year
forecast of the average long-term growth rate in passenger traffic is 4.9%
annually, based on projected average worldwide annual economic real growth of
2.9%. based on global economic growth projections over the long term, and taking
into consideration an increasingly competitive environment, increasing
utilization levels of the worldwide airplane fleet and requirements to replace
older airplanes, the company projected almost a $5 trillion market for new
airplanes and services over the next 20 years. this is a long-term forecast;
historically, while factors such as the gulf war and ticket charges for security
have had significant impact over the span of several years, they have not
dramatically affected the longer term trends in the world economy, and
therefore, the companys market outlook.
airline deregulation
worldwide, the airline
industry has experienced progressive deregulation of domestic markets and
increasing liberalization of international markets. twenty-five years ago
virtually all air travel took place within a framework of domestic and
international regulatory oversight. since then, an increasing number of
countries, most notably the united states, australia, japan and the countries in
western europe, have eliminated restrictive regulations for domestic airline
markets and promoted a more open-market climate for international services.
these trends are expected to continue, but at varying rates in different parts
of the world. at the end of the next decade, an estimated two-thirds of air
travel will be in open markets. liberalization of government regulations,
together with increased airplane range capabilities, gives airlines greater
freedom to pursue optimal fleet-mix strategies. this increased flexibility
allows the airlines to accommodate traffic growth by selecting the best mix of
flight frequencies and airplane size and capabilities for their route systems.
in intercontinental markets, more liberal bilateral air service agreements
provide an important stimulus to opening new city-pair markets, which favor
increased flight frequency over capacity growth. in parallel with regulatory
liberalization, improvements in airplane range performance will continue to
allow airlines to expand the number of direct city-to-city routes, thus reducing
the reliance on indirect routes through central hubs that require larger
capacity airplanes.
- 30 -
industry competitiveness
the company currently faces
aggressive international competitors that are seeking to increase market share.
this competitive factor was demonstrated by the decision of airbus to introduce
the a380, a proposed aircraft with passenger seating greater than the 747, to
increase market share at the upper end of the large airplane market. this market
environment has resulted in intense pressures on pricing and other competitive
factors. the companys focus on improving processes and other cost
reduction efforts is intended to enhance its ability to pursue pricing
strategies that enable the company to maintain leadership at satisfactory
margins. additionally, the companys extensive customer support services
network for airlines throughout the world plays a key role in maintaining high
customer satisfaction. as an example, on-line access is available to all airline
customers for engineering drawings, parts lists, service bulletins and
maintenance manuals.
the commercial jet aircraft
market and the airline industry remain extremely competitive. competitive
pressures and increased lower-fare travel have combined to cause a long-term
downward trend in passenger revenue yields worldwide (measured in real terms).
market liberalization within europe has enabled low-cost airlines to enter the
market. these airlines increase the downward pressure on airfares, similar to
the competitive environment in the united states. airfares between asia and the
united states are among the lowest yield (airfare divided by revenue passenger
miles) of any in the world. these factors result in continued price pressure on
the companys products. major productivity gains are essential to ensure a
favorable market position at acceptable profit margins.
in july 2000, three major
european aerospace companies (aerospatiale matra of france, daimlerchrysler
aerospace of germany, and construcciones aeronautica of spain) combined to form
the european aeronautic defence and space company (eads). as a result of the
formation, eads became an 80% owner of airbus industrie (ai) and led the effort
for the formation of the airbus integrated company (aic) in early 2001. the
creation of the aic effectively changes the airbus role, from that of a
marketer/distributor of large commercial airplanes to one including complete
manufacturing responsibility. the aic is incorporated under french law as a
privately held corporation owned 80% by eads and 20% by bae systems.
over the past five years,
sales outside the united states have accounted for approximately 53% of the
companys total commercial airplanes third-party segment sales;
approximately 50% of the commercial airplanes segment contractual backlog as of
december 31, 2002, was with customers based outside the united states. continued
access to global markets remains vital to the companys ability to fully
realize its sales potential and projected long-term investment returns.
summary
although near-term market
uncertainties remain, particularly with respect to the recovery post september
11, the long-term market outlook appears favorable. the company is well
positioned in all segments of the commercial jet airplane market, and intends to
remain the airline industrys preferred supplier through emphasis on
product offerings and customer service that provide the best overall value in
the industry.
military aircraft and missile systems
(dollars in millions)
revenues
$13,990
$12,451
$11,924
% of total company revenues
26%
21%
23%
operating earnings
$1,652
$1,346
$1,245
operating margins
11.8%
10.8%
10.4%
research and development
$345
$258
$257
contractual backlog
$21,073
$17,630
$17,113
revenues
military aircraft and
missile systems segment revenues were $14.0 billion in 2002, $12.5 billion in
2001 and $11.9 billion in 2000. increased revenues in 2002 were primarily due to
additional deliveries on the c-17 globemaster, f/a-18e/f super hornet, f-15
eagle, jdam, ah-64 apache programs and increased aerospace support volume. the
military aircraft and missile systems business segment is broadly diversified,
and no program other than the c-17 globemaster program and the f/a-18e/f super
hornet program accounted for more than 6% of total 2002 segment revenues.
revenues include amounts attributable to production programs and amounts
recognized on a cost-reimbursement basis for developmental programs such as the
f/a-22 raptor, v-22 osprey, and the rah-66 comanche. the increase in revenues
between 2001 and 2000 is primarily due to increased aircraft deliveries in 2001,
one additional c-17 globemaster, four 737 c-40a clippers and four ch-47 chinook
helicopters.
- 31 -
deliveries of units for
principal production programs, including deliveries under operating lease, which
are identified by parentheses, were as follows:
model
c-17 globemaster
(4)
f/a-18e/f super hornet
t-45ts goshawk
f-15e eagle
-
ch-47 chinook
737 c-40a clipper
-
ah-64 apache
military aircraft and
missile systems segment revenues for 2003 are projected to be in the $14 billion
range.
operating earnings
military aircraft and missile
systems segment operating earnings for 2002, 2001 and 2000 were $1,652 million,
$1,346 million and $1,245 million, respectively. the segment operating margins
for 2002, 2001 and 2000 were 11.8%, 10.8% and 10.4%, respectively. the 2002
operating results reflect strong profits on major production programs. the
segment operating margins for 2002 were 11.2% after adjusting for gains of $64
million related to the divestiture of equity investments and a favorable
adjustment of $24 million attributable to f-15 eagle program charges taken in
1999. increased earnings in 2001 from 2000 were associated with the additional
delivery of one c-17 globemaster, four 737 c-40a clippers and four ch-47
deliveries. the segment operating earnings for 2001 include the recognition of
$48 million of charges relating to asset reductions attributable to reduced work
volume at the philadelphia site, and $46 million of charges associated with the
joint strike fighter program and idle manufacturing assets. the 2001 operating
earnings also included a favorable adjustment of $57 million attributable to
f-15 eagle program charges taken in 1999. exclusive of these items, the segment
operating margins for 2001 were 11.1%.
research and development
the company is continuing
to invest in business opportunities where it can use its customer knowledge,
technical strength and large-scale systems integration capabilities to shape the
market. investments in unmanned systems continue to leverage the companys
capabilities in architectures, system-of-systems integration and weapon systems
technologies to provide transformational capabilities for the u.s. military.
investment is continuing in the 767 tanker programs for the u.s. air force and
international customers. company investments in airborne electronic attack and
precision weapons and advanced rotorcraft systems are expanding its breadth of
products and capabilities enabling it to access larger portions of the combat
systems markets.
military aircraft and
missile systems research and development expense in 2002 was $345 million,
compared with $258 million in 2001 and $257 million in 2000. current research
and development activities are focused on the international and domestic 767
tanker program, reflected in the 2002 increased expenditures over 2001. this
program represents a large opportunity to provide state of the art tanking
capabilities to our potential domestic and international customers. it
demonstrates the synergistic value of the diversified boeing portfolio in
providing best value solutions to our customers. italy recently became the first
customer of the 767 tanker ordering four aircraft with first aircraft delivery
scheduled in 2005. the military aircraft and missile systems segment continues
to pursue business opportunities where it can use its customer knowledge,
technical strength and large-scale integration capabilities. the segments
level of research and development expenditures is consistent with this approach,
and reflects the recent business environment, which has presented few major
new-start opportunities. other research and development efforts include upgrade
and technology insertions to enhance the capability and competitiveness of
current product lines, as well as exploration of new markets such as unmanned
air vehicles (uavs).
- 32 -
backlog
total contractual backlog
for military aircraft and missile systems was $21.1 billion at december 31,
2002, $17.6 billion at december 31, 2001 and $17.1 billion at december 31, 2000.
military aircraft and missiles systems contractual backlog increased by 20% in
2002 compared to 2001. the increase in 2002 compared to 2001 is primarily
attributed to the capture of several key international awards including the
korean f-15 eagle contract and the italian 767 tanker contract. backlog also
increased due to rate increases on several domestic programs in low rate initial
production including v-22 osprey and the f/a-22 raptor. the c-17 globemaster
program maintained consistent backlog as new orders replaced sales on the
existing production contracts. the program is well positioned for continued
sales well into this decade. the f/a-18e/f super hornet program backlog
increased moderately as the customer continues to increase production rate. the
jdam program backlog also increased moderately with additional orders from both
the navy and air force. aerospace support orders continued to increase this past
year.
business environment and trends
overview
the u.s. department of
defense (dod), represents nearly 50% of the worlds defense budget, and
remains the principal customer of the military aircraft and missile systems
business unit. several trends are emerging that are shaping customer behavior in
this market. u.s. military force structure is shrinking, its platforms are
aging, and the tempo of operations and engagements worldwide remains high. the
united states current military activity demonstrates the value of systems
solutions that allow all systems to communicate with each other, to operate over
longer ranges, are unmanned and provide the advantages of precision, persistence
and selective engagement. these factors are driving the u.s. dod, along with
militaries worldwide, to focus on ways to transform their forces and the way
they operate.
military transformation
the transformation in
forces is evidenced by a trend toward smaller, but more capable and more
technologically advanced force structures. the transformation in acquisition is
evidenced by an increasing trend toward spiral development programs, cooperative
international development programs and a demonstrated willingness to explore new
forms of acquisition and ownership including the lease of military support
aircraft.
institutions and events
continue to shape the defense industrial environment. from an institutional
perspective, the establishment of the homeland defense and u.s. northern command
are creating new organizations with responsibilities for national airspace
control, coastal protection and civil support. the creation of the u.s.
strategic command is consolidating responsibilities for global strike,
integrated missile defense, information operations, command, control,
communications and computers, and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaisance
into a single organization. events like operation enduring freedom and the
continuing war on global terrorism reaffirms the need for the rapid projection
of decisive combat power around the world and emphasizes the need for new
capabilities and solutions for the warfighter. toward that end, the dod is fully
committed to a transformation that will achieve and maintain advantages through
changes in operational concepts, organizational structure and technologies that
significantly improve warfighting capabilities.
competitive environment
the global competitive
environment continues to intensify, with increased focus on the u.s. defense
market, the worlds largest and most attractive. military aircraft and
missile systems faces strong competition in all market segments, primarily from
lockheed martin, raytheon, eads and northrop grumman. the financial problems
plaguing some domestic industry competitors appear to be resolved, enabling them
to acquire new assets and compete more vigorously. eads continues to
strategically build a presence in the u.s. market through building its north
american operations and by partnering with u.s. defense companies.
continued industry
consolidation and market concentration was marked by the acquisition of trw by
northrop grumman. northrops position in the uav, space, systems
integration, and strike markets has been strengthened. however, all prime
contractors continue to partner or serve as major suppliers to each other on
various programs. at the lower tiers, consolidation persists and select
companies have been positioning for larger roles, especially in the aerospace
support market.
in addition to leveraging
its internal resources and capabilities, the company is creating a competitive
advantage by developing global strategic relationships to provide superior value
for its customers, both in the u.s. and abroad.
- 33 -
summary
events like nuclear
proliferation in north korea, operation enduring freedom and the continued war
on terrorism, highlight the fact that our national security goals are not
rhetorical. there is an immediate and a durable need to maintain strong u.s.
defense capabilities covering a very broad spectrum of threats and responses.
near-term dod budgets have increased, and longer-range forecasts expect dod
budgets to grow faster than anticipated prior to september 11, 2001. however,
with a softening global economy and anticipated federal budget tensions,
allocations to dod procurement are unlikely to increase significantly. this
suggests that the dod will continue to focus on affordability strategies
emphasizing network-centric operations, long range strike, unmanned air combat
and reconnaissance vehicles, precision guided weapons and continued
privatization of logistics and support activities as a means to improve overall
effectiveness while maintaining control over costs. the companys
capabilities and programs are well suited to provide the military capabilities
essential to meet the challenges facing our nation.
space and communications
(dollars in millions)
revenues
$10,967
$10,364
$8,039
% of total company revenues
20%
18%
16%
operating earnings (loss)
$357
$619
$(243)
operating margins
3.3%
6.0%
(3.0%)
research and development
$397
$526
$526
contractual backlog
$14,941
$13,111
$13,707
revenues
space and communications
segment revenues were $11.0 billion in 2002, compared with $10.4 billion in 2001
and $8.0 billion in 2000. the segment remains broadly diversified. the
contributors to 2002 space and communications segment revenues included five
market segments: integrated battlespace, missile defense, human space flight and
exploration, launch and satellite and homeland security. the increase in
revenues from 2001 to 2002 was primarily due to increased activity in missile
defense offset by decreases in launch and satellite due to continued market
downturn. 2001 revenues were higher than 2000 revenues due primarily to
increased activity on integrated battlespace programs and the acquisition of
boeing satellite systems (bss) in october 2000.
deliveries of production
units were as follows:
model
delta ii
delta iv
-
-
bss satellites
space and communications segment
revenues for 2003 are projected to be in the $12 billion range. the greatest
growth is expected in the integrated battlespace market as space and
communications has become the dods leading industry partner in executing
the military transformation with the capture of the future combat systems
program, joint tactical radio system, and the family of advanced beyond
line-of-sight terminals program. missile defense expects continued growth as the
missile defense agency continues its emphasis on the development of various
missile defense capabilities.
operating earnings
space and communications
segment operating earnings for 2002 were $357 million compared with $619 million
in 2001 and $(243) million in 2000, and the related operating margins were 3.3%,
6.0% and (3.0)% for 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively. the 2002 operating
results include a $100 million pre-tax charge to write-down an equity investment
in teledesic, llc. also contributing to the 2002 decreased operating earnings
was cost growth on satellite programs and the continued downturn in the launch
and commercial satellite market. the 2000 operating results included a pre-tax
charge of $505 million associated with the in-process research and development
from the acquisition of the hughes space and communications businesses and
autometric businesses, along with $78 million in costs associated with a delta
iii demonstration launch in august 2000.
the 2002 segment operating
margins were reduced from 2001 due to factory cost, schedule performance and a
satellite contract termination in the commercial satellite business along with
737 aew&c development cost growth. the reduced 2002 margins were offset by
favorable commercial space contract actions, improved margins for integrated
battlespace, and ground-based midcourse defense program performance. the 2001
operating margins were improved over the 2000 operating margins primarily due to
reduced new product development expenses associated with the delta iv rs-68
engine as it completed developmental engine certification and transitioned to
production. the company projects that 2003 operating earnings will continue to
be impacted by new program development expenses but to a lesser degree than in
prior years, primarily due to the transition of the delta iv launch vehicle into
production.
- 34 -
in february 2002, space and
communications undertook a reorganization of its commercial satellite
manufacturing activities in response to poor performance compounded by
unfavorable market conditions. the impact to earnings by satellite program cost
growth was partially offset by favorable contractual actions. the net impact to
the year for bss was a reduction in operating earnings of approximately $146
million. progress has been made in implementing process improvements and program
management best practices, however, factory problems that arise out of
acceptance testing continue to impact existing contracts. as a result,
completion schedules have slipped which has resulted in exposing the company to
the risk of contract termination for default (tfd) notification.
during the fourth quarter
of 2002, the company received a tfd notification on a commercial satellite
contract that had an expected delivery beyond the contractual tfd date. the
customer no longer required the satellite for their current business base. the
company is currently marketing the satellite, which was adjusted to the
estimated net realizable value. early in the first quarter of 2003, the company
passed the tfd dates for two commercial satellite contracts. management believes
a tfd situation for each of these contracts is not likely to result in a
material financial impact due to continuing legal, production, and contractual
efforts in work.
certain launch and
satellite contracts include provisions for replacement launch services or
hardware if specified performance criteria are not met. the company has
historically purchased insurance to cover these obligations when allowed under
the terms of the contract. due to recent events, the current insurance market
reflects unusually high premium rates and also suffers from a lack of capacity
to handle all insurance requirements. although the company does not intend to do
so, it may elect to forego the procurement of third-party insurance and,
instead, retain such risks internally. management believes the contract cost
estimates have sufficient provisions to cover the expected value for these
risks.
previously identified
market-based risks associated with delta iii inventory is being mitigated by a
combination of reusing inventory on other delta programs, customer payments
provided to reassign payloads to other launch vehicles, and the retention of
existing customer deposits should those customers terminate their contract for
delta iii launches. at this time the delta iii inventory is no longer considered
a material financial risk.
the sea launch venture, in
which the company is a 40% partner with rsc energia (25%) of russia, kvaerner
asa (20%) of norway, and kb yuzhnoye/po yuzhmash (15%) of ukraine, provides
ocean-based launch services to commercial satellite customers. the venture had
one successful launch in 2002. the companys investment in this venture as
of december 31, 2002, is reported at zero, which reflects the recognition of
losses reported by sea launch in prior years. the venture incurred losses in
2002, due to the relatively low volume of launches, reflecting a depressed
satellite market. the company has financial exposure with respect to the
venture, which relates to guarantees by the company provided to certain sea
launch creditors, performance guarantees provided by the company to a sea launch
customer of $33 million and financial exposure related to accounts
receivable/inventory of $253 million. the exposures related to guarantees are
included in the off-balance sheet arrangements discussion and disclosed in note
20 to the consolidated financial statements.
the company and lockheed
martin are 50-50 partners in united space alliance, which is responsible for all
ground processing of the space shuttle fleet and for space-related operations
with the u.s. air force. united space alliance also performs modifications,
testing and checkout operations that are required to ready the space shuttle for
launch. united space alliance operations are performed under cost-plus-type
contracts. the companys proportionate share of joint venture earnings is
recognized as income. the segments operating earnings include earnings of
$68 million, $72 million, and $60 million for 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively,
attributable to united space alliance.
on february 1, 2003, the
country experienced the tragic loss of space shuttle columbia and its
seven-person crew. the company is assisting nasa to determine the cause of this
accident. this accident did not impact the companys results of operations
for 2002, and it is too early to determine the effect on the companys
business operations for 2003 and beyond.
research and development
within the space and
communications businesses the company continued investing in the new delta iv
expendable launch vehicle which resulted in its successful inaugural commercial
launch in november of 2002. this product gives the company greater access to a
portion of the launch market that was previously unavailable with the delta ii
rocket alone.
- 35 -
in the communications
market, the company is investing to enable connectivity between existing
air/ground platforms, increase communications availability and bandwidth through
more robust space systems, and leverage innovative communications concepts.
investments were made in global situational awareness concepts to develop
communication system architectures to support various business opportunities
including future combat systems, joint tactical radio system, fab-t and global
missile defense. a major contributor to the companys support of these dod
transformation programs is the investment in the boeing integration center where
the companys network centric operations concepts are developed in
partnership with its customers. the company also will continue to make focused
investments that will lead to the development of next-generation space
intelligence systems.
space and communications
research and development expense, excluding in-process research and development,
was $397 million in 2002 compared to $526 million in 2001 and 2000. significant
investment in development programs at the space and communications segment
continued during 2002. company-sponsored research and development expenditures
supported the development of the delta iv launch vehicle. delta iv development
expense has been reduced by the u.s. governments participation in
developing the evolved expendable launch vehicle (eelv). aew&c system
research and development program expenses decreased as the effort transitioned
to work that is specifically required for the australian wedgetail program.
company-sponsored research and development levels are expected to decline in
2003 due to the transition of the delta iv launch vehicle into production.
backlog
total contractual backlog
for space and communications was $14.9 billion at december 31, 2002 and $13.1
billion at december 31, 2001 and $13.7 billion at december 31, 2000. space and
communications contractual backlog increased by 14% in 2002 compared to 2001.
the 2002 increase is primarily due to orders for proprietary programs, an order
by the department of transportation for airport security, a nasa award for space
flight payload processing and orders for delta iv launch vehicles. this increase
was partially offset by the declines in commercial satellite backlog due to
decreases in new orders and sales on existing orders.
business environment and trends
overview
space and communications
products and services, as part of integrated defense systems, will span five
distinctive markets: integrated battlespace, missile defense, homeland security,
human space flight and exploration, and commercial launch and satellite. each of
these markets has unique customers and requirements, and therefore, will be
discussed individually below.
integrated battlespace
u.s. military force structure is shrinking,
its platforms are aging, and the tempo of operations and engagements
worldwide remains high. several of the recent united states' military actions have demonstrated the value of
systems solutions that allow all systems to communicate with each other; operate over longer ranges; and are
unmanned and provide the advantages of precision, persistence and selective engagement.
refer to military aircraft
and missile systems business environment and trends beginning on page 33 for
further discussion on military transformation.
missile defense
funding for the missile
defense market is primarily driven by the u.s. government missile defense agency
(mda) budget. the primary thrusts in this market are the continued development
and deployment of theater missile defense systems and the ground-based missile
defense (gmd) program. the overall mda missile defense budget is approximately
$8 billion. there is continued congressional support for development of strong
missile defense capabilities as evidenced by the fact that the fiscal year 2003
budgets were fully funded in all four defense committees by congress.
in january 2002, a new gmd
program strategy was released in which the mda stated their objective to put a
test bed capability in place by september 2004. this test bed would allow
critical testing of the ground-based midcourse defense segment along with the
addition of other systems and sensors into the test scenario. these new
requirements for a test bed and development program were baselined by the
company and the u.s. government in 2002. the resulting contract change was
finalized in december 2002. additionally on december 17, 2002, president george
w. bush called for our nations missile defense capabilities to move from
the test only category into a deployed system. the company, in conjunction with
mda, has initiated efforts to fulfill the direction of the president.
through our leadership
position on the missile defense national team and our prime contractor role on
the ground-based midcourse defense segment program and on the airborne laser
program, space and communications is positioned to maintain its role as
mdas #1 contractor.
- 36 -
homeland security
since the events of
september 11, 2001, the world has permanently changed. the president quickly
issued an executive order establishing an office of homeland security. this
office was officially designated as a cabinet level department led by governor
tom ridge on january 24, 2003. this department will be responsible for a budget
of nearly $40 billion annually with a workforce of 170,000 consolidating from 22
disparate agencies. over the past year, the company has aligned internally to
meet the challenges of the new threat. in june 2002, the company was chosen to
lead the team that installed explosive detection technology for baggage
screening in all u.s. airports by december 31, 2002. this was the largest
homeland security contract awarded to date, representing one of the largest
short-term projects in government history. the company is focusing on the
federal homeland security marketplace, and will leverage its experience and
capabilities in network centric operations to enhance the solutions for homeland
security opportunities.
human space flight and exploration
the total human space
flight and exploration market is forecasted to be relatively flat over the next
ten years. this forecast is based on budget projections for nasa, the primary
customer in this market. but within this flat forecast the company is observing
changes in direction and emphasis with the establishment of a new vision and
mission. over the past year, nasa has developed a new integrated space
transportation plan (istp) to implement their new vision. this plan is designed
to benefit the international space station, space shuttle program, and the
agencys science and research objectives. the new istp dedicates more
resources to the space station program, provides additional funding to extend
the life and enhance the safety and reliability of the agencys orbiter
fleet, boosts funding for science-based payloads and research, and restructures
nasas space launch initiative. the space launch initiative will now focus
on the development of a crew transport vehicle to ferry space station
crewmembers, along with a continued technology effort to identify future
reusable launch vehicle technologies. the company is well positioned to join
with nasa to help realize their vision using the expertise the company has
gained from its prime contractor role on the space shuttle program and the
international space station and an integral player in the space launch
initiative program.
as nasas
investigation of the columbia accident continues the company may see some budget
reprioritizing, but it is far too early in the investigation to speculate on
that. what we do know is that this administration is committed to finding the
cause of the accident, fixing it, and successfully returning the space shuttle
fleet back to operational status. we will participate fully in these efforts.
commercial launch and satellite
the commercial market has
softened significantly since the late 1990s in conjunction with the downturn in
the telecommunications industry. these markets are now characterized by
overcapacity, commodity pricing and limited near term opportunities. the
recovery in the commercial satellite market may take several years at which time
we believe the market will stabilize in the 15-20 satellites per year range.
this recovery in satellite orders should also produce new opportunities in the
launch services business. we have taken aggressive actions to right size and
restructure our organizations to meet the future commercial demand, while
continuing to meet our government customer requirements. in addition, we have
worked diligently over the last year to improve processes in our quality,
engineering and manufacturing disciplines. we believe boeing satellite systems
and boeing launch services (delta ii, iii, iv and sea launch) are positioned to
bring unique and competitive offerings to our commercial customers as their
requirements for new or replacement satellites resurfaces.
boeing capital corporation
(dollars in millions)
revenues
$994
$815
$545
operating earnings
$482
$562
$397
operating margins
48.5%
69.0%
72.8%
debt
$9,465
$7,295
$4,318
debt-to-equity ratio
5.7-to-1
5.3-to-1
6.4-to-1
revenues
revenues for bcc consisted principally
of income earned on portfolio assets (direct finance leases, operating leases,
notes receivable and investments). the major revenue components include
commercial aircraft and commercial equipment financing. interest expense on debt
is not included in bccs operating earnings as the company reports interest
expense below operating earnings on the consolidated statements of operations.
however, interest expense of $410 million, $324 million, and $229 million was
associated with debt relating to bcc financing activities for the years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000. beginning in 2003, interest expense will be
reported as a component of operating earnings for bcc.
- 37 -
operating revenues for bcc
were $994 million in 2002, compared with $815 million in 2001 and $545 million
in 2000. a larger portfolio, resulting from new business volume and portfolio
transfers from boeing over the last two years, is primarily responsible for the
increased revenues in 2002 and 2001.
operating earnings
operating earnings for bcc
were $482 million for the year ended december 31, 2002, compared with $562
million for the year ended december 31, 2001. this decrease was primarily
attributable to the impairment and valuation allowance charges recognized in
2002, offset by additional income due to the growth in the portfolio. operating
earnings for 2001 were $562 million compared with $397 million in 2000. the
growth in investment in financing assets was principally responsible for the
increase. the increase was partially offset by higher provision for losses, and
higher operating and other expenses.
during the year ended
december 31, 2002, the company recognized a pre-tax expense of $426 million
primarily in recognition of the deterioration of aircraft values and customer
credit ratings. total impairment expense recognized in 2001 and 2000 was not
significant.
bccsegment
othersegment
consolidated
increased valuation allowance
$
$
$
impairment of investment inequipment trust certificates
impairment of joint venture aircraft
other assets impairments
$
$
$
a pre-tax expense of $180 million
was recorded to increase the valuation allowance based on the companys
assessment of the adequacy of customer financing reserves.
a specific pre-tax
impairment of $79 million was recorded during the third quarter of 2002 related
to a long-held investment in etcs secured by aircraft on lease to united
airlines (united). the write-down was based on the decline in credit
ratings of united, the long-term maturity of the investment and the decline in
the underlying aircraft collateral valuations. the ultimate realization of this
investment will depend upon legal developments in uniteds bankruptcy
proceedings and uniteds ability to meet its related contractual
obligations.
a specific pre-tax
impairment of $48 million was recorded related to a joint venture investment
that was established to lease and eventually convert 24 727 passenger aircraft
to full cargo configuration. based on the companys assessment of current
market conditions and the average age of the aircraft (averaging over twenty
years old), the company recorded an impairment for its share of the adjustment
to estimated fair market value for the joint ventures 727 aircraft. the
bcc portfolio does not include any 727 aircraft other than those held through
this joint venture.
other pre-tax charges of
$119 million related to valuations of other assets in the portfolio during the
year ended december 31, 2002. included in this amount was a $66 million
impairment charge recorded during the fourth quarter of 2002 on the return of 24
717s to the company by amr corporation.
the total bcc portfolio was
$11.8 billion as of december 31, 2002, compared with $9.2 billion as of december
31, 2001. at december 31, 2002, bccs debt-to-equity ratio was 5.7-to-1,
compared with 5.3-to-1 at december 31, 2001.
business environment and trends
bcc acts as a captive
finance subsidiary for the company and provides market-based lease and loan
financing primarily to airlines that purchase or lease commercial aircraft
manufactured by the company or others. bcc competes for aircraft finance
business with other finance companies, commercial banks, insurance companies and
other financial institutions.
bcc also competes in the
commercial equipment leasing and finance markets, primarily in the united
states, against a number of large ticket competitors, mainly heavily capitalized
leasing companies and relationship banks. approximately 22% of bccs
portfolio has been generated from commercial equipment leasing and financing
activities. commercial equipment consists of executive aircraft, machine tools
and production equipment, containers and marine equipment, chemical, oil and gas
equipment and other equipment. new business volume of bcc is funded with debt
obtained in the capital markets, cash from operations, and contributions from
the company.
- 38 -
published sources and
recent market transactions indicate that values for various aircraft types used
as collateral in bccs portfolio remained depressed. at the same time, the
credit ratings of many airlines, particularly in the united states, have
continued to deteriorate. a substantial portion of bccs portfolio is
concentrated among commercial airline customers. certain customers have filed
for bankruptcy protection or requested lease or loan restructurings; these
negotiations were in various stages as of december 31, 2002. these bankruptcies
or restructurings could have a material adverse effect on the companys
earnings, cash flows or financial position.
united filed for
chapter11 bankruptcy protection on december 9, 2002. as of the filing
date, the company has not reached agreement with united on a restructuring of
its various transactions. future negotiations may result in changes to the
agreements under which united has agreed to perform. so long as united remains
in bankruptcy, united has the right to reject or abandon its transaction with
the company. in the event that future negotiations or proceedings result in the
return of a substantial number of aircraft, there could be a material adverse
effect on the companys earnings, cash flows or financial position at least
until such time as the aircraft are sold or redeployed for adequate
consideration.
as of december 31, 2002,
there were $311 million of assets, principally commercial aircraft that were
held for sale or re-lease at bcc, of which $308 million were not yet identified
with a firm contract to sell or place on lease. additionally, approximately $207
million of bccs assets are currently scheduled to come off lease in 2003.
the inability of bcc to sell such assets or place such assets into
revenue-generating service could pose a potential risk to results of operations
should some of these assets be deemed to be impaired.
airlines regularly utilize
a special purpose entity (spe) known as a pass through trust. the pass through
trust enables the airline to aggregate a large number of aircraft secured notes
into one trust vehicle, facilitating the issuance of larger bonds called pass
through certificates (ptcs). the most common form of ptcs issued by airlines is
the eetcs. eetcs provide investors with tranched rights to cash flows from a
financial instrument, as well as a collateral position in the related asset.
while the underlying classes of equipment notes vary by maturity and/or coupon
depending upon tenor or level of subordination of the specific equipment notes
and their corresponding claim on the aircraft, the basic function of the pass
through trust in an eetc remains: to passively hold separate debt investments to
enhance liquidity for investors, whom in turn pass this liquidity benefit
directly to the airline in the form of lower coupon and/or greater debt
capacity. bcc participates in several eetcs as an investor. the eetc investments
are related to customers the company believes have less than investment-grade
credit.
bcc also utilizes certain
spes to isolate individual transactions for legal liability, perfect security
interest from the perspective of the company and a third-party lender in certain
leveraged transactions, and realize certain income and sales tax benefits. these
spes are fully consolidated in the companys financial statements.
in december 2002, bcc
completed an asset securitization that raised $299 million of secured debt
through the use of a bank-sponsored commercial paper conduit (c/p conduit). as
collateral for the debt, bcc transferred $331 million of assets from its
portfolio to the c/p conduit. these portfolio assets consisted of the cash flows
associated with specific financing leases, notes and other receivables and
operating leases. bcc also assigned to the c/p conduit perfected security
interests in $278 million of collateral underlying the transferred portfolio
assets. the collateral pledged indirectly provides the c/p conduit with
additional protection in the event that the cash flows from the leases and notes
are insufficient to cover the total debt outstanding under the transaction. the
secured debt and securitized assets remain on bccs balance sheet.
other
other segment earnings were
$(424) million in 2002, $(354) million in 2001, and $43 million in 2000. as of
december 31, 2002 and 2001, operating earnings of $44 million and $23 million
were attributable to four c-17 transport aircraft on lease to the united kingdom
royal air force. these leases began in 2001. offsetting the operating earnings
of the c-17 leases were increases in losses during both 2002 and 2001 primarily
due to increases in intercompany guarantees and asset impairments, lease
accounting differences and other subsidies related to bcc. see note 24. research
and development expense attributable to the other segment was $129 million in
2002, $294 million in 2001, and $84 million in 2000. research and development
activities in the other segment relate primarily to connexion by
boeingsm and, to a lesser extent, air traffic management.
astro ltd., a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the company, operates as a captive insurance company. this
subsidiary enables the companys exposures to be insured at the lowest
possible cost to the company regardless of whether the market is overpriced. in
addition, it provides flexibility to the company in handling its changing risk
financing needs and provides access to the reinsurance markets. currently, astro
ltd. insures aviation liability, workers compensation, general liability,
property, as well as various smaller risk liability insurances.
- 39 -
events of september 11, 2001
on september 11, 2001, the united
states was the target of severe terrorist attacks that involved the use of u.s.
commercial aircraft manufactured by the company.  these attacks resulted in a significant loss of life and
property and caused major disruptions in business activities and in the u.s. economy overall. see note 3.
employees and labor relations
as of december 31, 2002,
the companys principal collective bargaining agreements were with the
international association of machinists and aerospace workers (iam) representing
20% of employees (current agreements expiring in may 2004, and september and
october 2005); the society of professional engineering employees in aerospace
(speea) representing 13% of employees (current agreements expiring february 2004
and december 2005); and the united automobile, aerospace and agricultural
implement workers of america (uaw) representing 4% of employees (current
agreements expiring may 2003, april 2004, and september 2005).
the companys
workforce level was 166,000 at december 31, 2002.
contingent items
various legal proceedings,
claims and investigations related to products, contracts and other matters are
pending against the company. most significant legal proceedings are related to
matters covered by insurance. major contingencies are discussed below.
the company is subject to
federal and state requirements for protection of the environment, including
those for discharge of hazardous materials and remediation of contaminated
sites. due in part to their complexity and pervasiveness, such requirements have
resulted in the company being involved with related legal proceedings, claims
and remediation obligations since the 1980s.
the company routinely
assesses, based on in-depth studies, expert analyses and legal reviews, its
contingencies, obligations and commitments for remediation of contaminated
sites, including assessments of ranges and probabilities of recoveries from
other responsible parties who have and have not agreed to a settlement and of
recoveries from insurance carriers. the companys policy is to immediately
accrue and charge to current expense identified exposures related to
environmental remediation sites based on estimates of investigation, cleanup and
monitoring costs to be incurred.
the costs incurred and
expected to be incurred in connection with such activities have not had, and are
not expected to have, a material impact to the companys financial
position. with respect to results of operations, related charges have averaged
less than 2% of annual net earnings. such accruals as of december 31, 2002,
without consideration for the related contingent recoveries from insurance
carriers, are less than 2% of total liabilities.
because of the regulatory
complexities and risk of unidentified contaminated sites and circumstances, the
potential exists for environmental remediation costs to be materially different
from the estimated costs accrued for identified contaminated sites. however,
based on all known facts and expert analyses, the company believes it is not
reasonably likely that identified environmental contingencies will result in
additional costs that would have a material adverse impact to the companys
financial position or operating results and cash flow trends.
the company is subject to
u.s. government investigations from which civil, criminal or administrative
proceedings could result. such proceedings could involve claims by the
government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble damages, restitution
and/or forfeitures. under government regulations, a company, or one or more of
its operating divisions or subdivisions, can also be suspended or debarred from
government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of
investigations. the company believes, based upon all available information, that
the outcome of any such government disputes and investigations will not have a
material adverse effect on its financial position or continuing operations.
in 1991, the u.s. navy
notified mcdonnell douglas (now a subsidiary of the company) and general
dynamics corporation (the team) that it was terminating for default
the teams contract for development and initial production of the a-12
aircraft. the team filed a legal action to contest the navys default
termination, to assert its rights to convert the termination to one for
the convenience of the government, and to obtain payment for work
done and costs incurred on the a-12 contract but not paid to date. as of
december 31, 2002, inventories included approximately $583 million of recorded
costs on the a-12 contract, against which the company has established a loss
provision of $350 million. the amount of the provision, which was established in
1990, was based on mcdonnell douglass belief, supported by an opinion of
outside counsel, that the termination for default would be converted to a
termination for convenience, and that the best estimate of possible loss on
termination for convenience was $350 million.
- 40 -
on august 31, 2001, the
u.s. court of federal claims issued a decision after trial upholding the u.s.
governments default termination of the a-12 contract on the grounds that
the team could not meet the revised contract schedule unilaterally imposed by
the u.s. government. this followedan earlier trial court decision in favor
of the contractors and reversal of that initial decision on appeal.the
team appealed that decision to the court of appeals and is awaiting a decision.
the team also obtained a stay of the trial courts judgment to prevent the
navy from collecting any amounts prior to the decision by the court of appeals.
if, after all judicial
proceedings have ended, the courts determine that a termination for default was
appropriate, the company would incur an additional loss of approximately $275
million, consisting principally of remaining inventory costs and adjustments,
and would be required to pay the u.s. government one-half of the unliquidated
progress payments of $1,350 million plus statutory interest from february 1991
(currently totaling approximately $1,040 million). the loss to the company would
total approximately $1,465 million in pre-tax charges.
although the court of
federal claims sustained the default termination in 2001, the company believes
that the courts ruling is contrary to law and fact and that the loss
provision established by mcdonnell douglas in 1990 continues to provide
adequately for the reasonably possible reduction in value of a-12 net contracts
in process as of december 31, 2002. final resolution of the a-12 litigation will
depend upon the outcome of further proceedings or possible negotiations with the
u.s. government.
the company is a defendant
in seven employment discrimination matters in which class certification is
sought or has been granted. these matters are pending in seattle, los
angeles, st. louis, tulsa, and wichita.the company intends to
continue its aggressive defense of these cases. it is not possible to predict
what impact, if any, these cases could have on the financial statements.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative
disclosure about market risk
interest rate risk
the company has financial
instruments that are subject to interest rate risk, principally short-term
investments, fixed-rate debt obligations, and customer financing assets and
liabilities. historically, the company has not experienced material gains or
losses due to interest rate changes. additionally, the company uses interest
rate swaps to manage exposure to interest rate changes.
based on the current
holdings of short-term investments, as well as related swaps, the unhedged
exposure to interest rate risk is not material for these instruments. fixed-rate
debt obligations issued by the company are generally not puttable until maturity
and are not actively traded by the company in the market. therefore, exposure to
interest rate risk is not believed to be material for the companys
fixed-rate debt.
boeing capital
corporations assets and liabilities, both fixed-rate and floating-rate,
may be subject to interest rate risk to the extent that the maturities and
repricing characteristics of the liabilities do not perfectly match those of the
assets. the types and terms of borrowing and hedging instruments that are
available to bcc in the market and possible changes in asset terms limit
bccs ability to match assets and liabilities. bcc attempts to keep this
mismatch risk small, partly through the use of interest rate swaps, and does not
believe it is materially exposed to gains or losses due to interest rate
changes.
bcc has used public market
information and common valuation methods to determine the fair value of its
assets and liabilities. the estimates are not necessarily indicative of the
amounts bcc could realize in a current market exchange, and the use of different
assumptions or valuation methods could have a material effect on the estimated
fair value amounts.
- 41 -
at december 31, 2002, the
book values of bccs assets and liabilities were approximately $13 billion
and $11 billion, respectively. bcc uses duration gap analysis to estimate the
impact of changes in interest rates. potential changes in twelve-month net
interest income and in the current discounted value of the assets and
liabilities are calculated based on the amount and timing of cash flows
projected from each. at december 31, 2002, the company estimated that if market
interest rates for all maturities were affected by an immediate, one-time,
100-basis-point increase, bccs net earnings, taking into account increases
in both revenue and interest expense, would have increased by an amount that is
immaterial to the results of operations. additionally, although the assets and
liabilities impacted by a change in interest rates are generally not traded, bcc
estimated that the net present value of these assets and liabilities would have
changed by an amount that is immaterial to its financial position.
foreign currency exchange rate risk
the company is subject to
foreign currency exchange rate risk relating to receipts from customers and
payments to suppliers in foreign currencies. the company uses foreign currency
forward contracts and options from time to time to hedge the price risk
associated with firmly committed and forecasted foreign denominated payments and
receipts related to its ongoing business and operational financing activities.
foreign currency contracts are sensitive to changes in foreign currency exchange
rates. at december 31, 2002, a 10% unfavorable exchange rate movement in the
companys portfolio of foreign currency forward contracts would have
resulted in an incremental unrealized loss of $30 million. consistent with the
use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of exchange rate fluctuations,
such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or
losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions being
hedged. when taken together, these forward contracts and the offsetting
underlying commitments do not create material market risk.
commodity price risk
the company is subject to
commodity price risk relating principally to energy used in production. the
company periodically uses commodity derivatives, such as fixed-price purchase
commitments, to hedge against potentially unfavorable price changes of
commodities. commodity price exposure related to unhedged contracts is not
material.
- 42 -
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
consolidated statements of operations
(dollars in millions)year ended december 31,
sales and other operating revenues
$
54,069
$
58,198
$
51,321
cost of products and services
45,499
48,778
43,712
8,570
9,420
7,609
income/(loss) from operating investments, net
(128)
general and administrative expense
2,534
2,389
2,335
research and development expense
1,639
1,936
1,441
in-process research and development expense
gain on dispositions, net
share-based plans expense
impact of september 11, 2001, charges/(recoveries)
(2)
earnings from operations
3,868
3,896
3,058
other income/(expense), net
interest and debt expense
(730)
(650)
(445)
earnings before income taxes
3,180
3,564
2,999
income taxes
net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change
2,319
2,826
2,128
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax
(1,827)
net earnings
$
$
2,827
$
2,128
basic earnings per share before cumulative effect of accounting change
$
2.90
$
3.46
$
2.48
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax
(2.28)
basic earnings per share
$
0.62
$
3.46
$
2.48
diluted earnings per share before cumulative effect of accounting change
$
2.87
$
3.41
$
2.44
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax
(2.26)
diluted earnings per share
$
0.61
$
3.41
$
2.44
see notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 47-86.
- 43 -
consolidated statements of financial position
(dollars in millions except per share data)
december 31,
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
2,333
$
accounts receivable
5,007
5,156
current portion of customer and commercial financing
1,289
1,053
deferred income taxes
2,042
2,444
inventories, net of advances, progress billings and reserves
6,184
7,559
total current assets
16,855
16,845
customer and commercial financing, net
10,922
9,345
property, plant and equipment, net
8,765
8,459
goodwill
2,760
5,127
other acquired intangibles, net
1,128
1,320
prepaid pension expense
6,671
5,838
deferred income taxes
2,272
other assets
2,969
2,044
$
52,342
$
48,978
liabilities and shareholders' equity
accounts payable and other liabilities
$
13,739
$
14,237
advances in excess of related costs
3,123
4,021
income taxes payable
1,134
short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt
1,814
1,399
total current liabilities
19,810
20,566
deferred income taxes
accrued retiree health care
5,434
5,367
accrued pension plan liability
6,271
deferred lease income
long-term debt
12,589
10,866
shareholders' equity:
common shares, par value $5.00 -
1,200,000,000 shares authorized;
shares issued - 1,011,870,159 and 1,011,870,159
5,059
5,059
additional paid-in capital
2,141
1,975
treasury shares, at cost - 171,834,950 and 174,289,720
(8,397)
(8,509)
retained earnings
14,262
14,340
accumulated other comprehensive income
(4,045)
(485)
unearned compensation
(3)
sharevalue trust shares - 40,373,809 and 39,691,015
(1,324)
(1,552)
total shareholders' equity
7,696
10,825
$
52,342
$
48,978
see notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 47-86.
- 44 -
consolidated statements of cash flows
(dollars in millions)year ended december 31,
cash flows - operating activities:
net earnings
$
$
2,827
$
2,128
adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
non-cash items:
cumulative effect of accounting change, net
1,827
(1)
share-based plans expense
depreciation
1,409
1,441
1,317
amortization of other acquired intangibles
amortization of debt discount/premium and issuance costs
pension income
(526)
(802)
(355)
in-process research and development expense
non-cash investment/asset impairment charges
other non-cash charges and credits, net
(17)
customer and commercial financing valuation provision
gain on dispositions, net
(44)
(21)
(34)
changes in assets and liabilities:
short-term investments
accounts receivable
(155)
(1,359)
inventories, net of advances, progress billings and reserves
1,510
(27)
accounts payable and other liabilities
(823)
advances in excess of related costs
(898)
1,387
income taxes payable and deferred
(762)
deferred lease income
(80)
prepaid pension expense
(340)
(19)
(30)
goodwill and other acquired intangibles
(1,494)
accrued retiree health care
other
(75)
(412)
(88)
net cash provided by operating activities
4,375
3,894
6,226
cash flows - investing activities:
customer financing and properties on lease, additions
(3,090)
(5,073)
(2,571)
customer financing and properties on lease, reductions
1,297
1,433
property, plant and equipment, net additions
(1,001)
(1,189)
(965)
acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(22)
(22)
(5,727)
proceeds from dispositions
contributions for investments
(505)
(96)
(320)
proceeds from investments
net cash used by investing activities
(3,421)
(4,789)
(7,911)
cash flows - financing activities:
new borrowings
2,814
4,567
2,687
debt repayments
(1,564)
(1,129)
(621)
common shares purchased
(2,417)
(2,357)
stock options exercised, other
dividends paid
(571)
(582)
(504)
net cash provided (used) by financing activities
(659)
net increase in cash and cash equivalents
1,700
(377)
(2,344)
cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
1,010
3,354
cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$
2,333
$
$
1,010
see notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 47-86.
- 45 -
consolidated statements of shareholders' equity
(dollars in millions)
additionalpaid-incapital
treasurystock
sharevaluetrust
accumulatedothercomprehensiveincome
retainedearnings
comprehensiveincome
balance january 1, 2000
$
1,684
$
(4,161)
$
(1,601)
$
$
10,487
share-based compensation
tax benefit related to share-based plans
sharevalue trust market value adjustment
(991)
treasury shares acquired
(2,357)
treasury shares issued for share-based plans, net
(264)
performance shares converted to deferred stock units
(194)
net earnings
2,128
$
2,128
cash dividends declared ($0.56 per share)
(525)
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax of $3
(4)
(4)
unrealized holding loss, net of tax of $7
(12)
(12)
currency translation adjustment
balance december 31, 2000
$
2,693
$
(6,221)
$
(2,592)
$
(2)
$
12,090
$
2,120
share-based compensation
tax benefit related to share-based plans
sharevalue trust market value adjustment
(1,040)
1,040
treasury shares acquired
(2,417)
treasury shares issued for share-based plans, net
(72)
net earnings
2,827
$
2,827
cash dividends declared ($0.68 per share)
(577)
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax of $204
(344)
(344)
unrealized holding loss, net of tax of $9
(16)
(16)
loss on derivative instruments, net of tax of $61
(102)
(102)
currency translation adjustment
(21)
(21)
balance december 31, 2001
$
1,975
$
(8,509)
$
(1,552)
$
(485)
$
14,340
$
2,344
share-based compensation
tax benefit related to share-based plans
sharevalue trust market value adjustment
(228)
treasury shares issued for share-based plans, net
(61)
net earnings
$
cash dividends declared ($0.68 per share)
(570)
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax of $2,084
(3,663)
(3,663)
reclassification adjusment for losses realized in net earnings,net of tax of $(15)
unrealized holding loss, net of tax of $2
(3)
(3)
gain on derivative instruments, net of tax of $(37)
currency translation adjustment
balance december 31, 2002
$
2,141
$
(8,397)
$
(1,324)
$
(4,045)
$
14,262
$
(3,068)
see notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 47-86.
- 46 -
the companys issued common
shares were 1,011,870,159 as of december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000. the par value
of these shares was $5,059 for the same periods. treasury shares as of december
31, 2002, 2001 and 2000 were 171,834,950; 174,289,720 and 136,385,222. there
were no treasury shares acquired for the year ended december 31, 2002. treasury
shares acquired for the years ended december 31, 2001 and 2000, were 40,734,500
and 41,782,234. treasury shares issued for share-based plans for the years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000, were 2,454,770; 2,830,002 and 7,753,909.
sharevalue trust shares as of december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000, were 40,373,809;
39,691,015 and 39,156,280. sharevalue trust shares acquired from dividend
reinvestment were 682,794; 534,734 and 459,991 for the same periods. unearned
compensation was $0, $(3) and $(7) as of december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000. the
changes in unearned compensation for the same periods were $3, $4, and $5,
attributable to amortization and forfeitures.
the boeing company and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
years ended december 31, 2002, 2001, and 2000
(dollars in millions except per share data)
note 1 - summary of significant accounting policies
principles of consolidation
the consolidated financial
statements of the boeing company, together with its subsidiaries (herein
referred to as the company) include the accounts of all
majority-owned subsidiaries. investments in joint ventures for which the company
does not have control, but has the ability to exercise significant influence
over the operating and financial policies, are accounted for under the equity
method. accordingly, the companys share of net earnings and losses from
these ventures is included in the consolidated statements of operations.
intercompany profits, transactions and balances have been eliminated in
consolidation. certain reclassifications have been made to prior periods to
conform with current reporting.
use of estimates
the preparation of
financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted
in the united states of america requires management to make assumptions and
estimates that directly affect the amounts reported in the consolidated
financial statements. significant estimates for which changes in the near term
are considered reasonably possible and that may have a material impact on the
financial statements are addressed in these notes to the consolidated financial
statements.
operating cycle
for classification of
current assets and liabilities, the company elected to use the duration of the
contract as its operating cycle.
contract accounting
contract accounting is used
predominately by the military aircraft and missile systems and space and
communications segments. the majority of the business conducted in these
segments is performed under contracts for the u.s. government and foreign
governments that extend over a number of years.
the process to estimate the
total contract cost-revenue relationship results in the development of gross
margin and cost of sales percentages. these percentages are utilized in the
recognition of earnings and are significant factors in contract accounting. the
amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of
sales percentages to the amount of revenue recognized for each contract.
revenues under contracts
with fixed prices are generally recognized as deliveries are made. for certain
fixed-price contracts that require substantial performance over an extended
period before deliveries begin, revenues are recorded based on the attainment of
performance milestones. revenues under contracts with terms that reimburse for
costs incurred plus an agreed upon profit are recorded as costs are incurred.
contracts may contain provisions to earn incentive and award fees if targets are
achieved. incentive and award fees that can be reasonably estimated are recorded
over the performance period of the contract. incentive and award fees that
cannot be reasonably estimated are recorded when awarded.
- 47 -
program accounting
the company uses program
accounting for its 7-series commercial airplane programs. program accounting is
a method of accounting for the costs of certain products manufactured for
delivery under production type contracts where profitability is realized over
multiple contracts and years. under program accounting, inventoriable production
costs (including overhead), program tooling costs and warranty costs are
accumulated and charged to revenue by program instead of by individual units or
contracts. a program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting
quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production
effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. to establish the
relationship of revenue to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates
of (a) the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period
over which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced, and (c) their
expected selling prices, production costs, program tooling, and warranty costs
for the total program.
the company recognizes
revenue for commercial airplanes when a unit is completed and accepted by the
customer. the revenue recognized is the price negotiated with the customer
including special features adjusted by an escalation formula. the amount
reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales
percentage for the total remaining program to the amount of revenue recognized
for the quarter.
inventories
inventoried costs on
commercial aircraft programs and long-term contracts include direct engineering,
production and tooling costs, and applicable overhead, not in excess of
estimated net realizable value. in accordance with industry practice,
inventoried costs include amounts relating to programs and contracts with long
production cycles, a portion of which is not expected to be realized within one
year.
because of the higher unit
production costs experienced at the beginning of a new airplane program (known
as the learning curve effect) and the substantial investment required for
initial tooling and special equipment, the costs incurred for production of the
early units in the program will exceed the amount reported as cost of sales for
those units. this difference known as deferred production costs is included in
inventory along with unamortized tooling costs.
commercial spare parts and
general stock materials are stated at average cost not in excess of net
realizable value.
research and development
research and development
costs are expensed as incurred unless the costs are related to a contractual
arrangement. costs that are incurred pursuant to a contractual arrangement are
recorded as inventory costs and charged to cost of products and services under
contract accounting.
share-based compensation
the company uses a fair
value based method of accounting for stock-based compensation provided to its
employees in accordance with statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)
no. 123, accounting for stock-based compensation. the company values
stock options issued based upon an option-pricing model and recognizes this
value as an expense over the period in which the options vest. potential
distributions from the sharevalue trust described in note 17 have been valued
based upon an option-pricing model, with the related expense recognized over the
life of the trust. share-based expense associated with performance shares
described in note 17 is determined based on the market value of the
companys stock at the time of the award applied to the maximum number of
shares contingently issuable based on stock price and is amortized over a
five-year period.
income taxes
provisions for federal,
state and foreign income taxes are calculated on reported financial statement
pre-tax income based on current tax law and also include, in the current period,
the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in
determining deferred tax assets and liabilities. such provisions differ from the
amounts currently payable because certain items of income and expense are
recognized in different time periods for financial reporting purposes than for
income tax purposes.
postretirement plans
the company sponsors
various pension plans covering substantially all employees. the company also
provides postretirement benefit plans other than pensions, consisting
principally of health care coverage, to eligible retirees and qualifying
dependents. the liabilities and annual income or expense of the companys
pension and other postretirement plans are determined using methodologies that
involve several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the
discount rate, the long-term rate of asset return, and medical trend (rate of
growth for medical costs). not all net periodic pension income or expense is
recognized in net earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to
production as product costs, and a portion remains in inventory at the end of a
reporting period.
the companys funding
policy for pension plans is to contribute, at a minimum, the statutorily
required amount to an irrevocable trust. benefits under the plans are generally
based on age at retirement, the employees annual earnings indexed at the
u.s. treasury 30-year bond rate, and years of service. the actuarial cost method
used in determining the net periodic pension cost is the projected unit credit
method.
- 48 -
cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents
consist of highly liquid instruments, such as certificates of deposit, time
deposits, treasury notes and other money market instruments, which generally
have maturities of less than three months. the company has adopted the net
bank method as described in financial accounting standards board (fasb)
interpretation no. 39, offsetting of amounts related to certain
contracts, in determining the cash accruals for each month. the net
bank method nets the current cash balances by bank and totals all negative
balances to determine the companys overdraft position. this accrual is
included in accounts payable.
long-lived assets
as of january 1, 2002, the
company adopted sfas no. 144, accounting for the impairment or disposal of
long-lived assets. long-lived assets deemed held for sale are stated at the
lower of cost or fair value. long-lived assets held for use are subject to an
impairment assessment if the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon
the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset. the amount of the impairment is
the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
property, plant and equipment
property, plant and
equipment are recorded at cost, including applicable construction-period
interest, and depreciated principally over the following estimated useful lives:
new buildings and land improvements, from 20 to 45 years; and machinery and
equipment, from 3 to 18 years. the principal methods of depreciation are as
follows: buildings and land improvements, 150% declining balance; and machinery
and equipment, sum-of-the-years digits. the company periodically evaluates
the appropriateness of remaining depreciable lives assigned to long-lived assets
subject to a management plan for disposition.
investments
investments are classified
as other assets on the consolidated statements of financial
position. the company classifies investments as either operating or
non-operating. operating investments are strategic in nature, which means they
are integral components of the companys operations. non-operating
investments are those the company holds for non-strategic purposes. earnings
from operating investments, including the companys share of income or loss
from certain equity method investments, income from cost method investments,
impairment charges on investments, and any gain/loss on the disposition of
investments, are recorded in income/(loss) from operating investments,
net. earnings from non-operating investments are included in other
income/(expense), net on the consolidated statements of operations.
certain investments are
accounted for under sfas no. 115, accounting for certain investments in debt
and equity securities. available-for-sale securities are recorded at their
fair values and unrealized gains and losses are reported as part of
accumulated other comprehensive income on the consolidated
statements of financial position. held-to-maturity securities include enhanced
equipment trust certificates and debentures for which the company has the
positive intent and ability to hold to maturity. held-to-maturity securities are
reported at amortized cost. debt and equity securities are continually assessed
for impairment. other than temporary losses on operating investments are
recorded in income/(loss) from operating investments, net and other
than temporary losses on non-operating investments are recorded in other
income/(expense), net.
goodwill and acquired intangibles
as of january 1, 2002, upon
the adoption of sfas no. 142, goodwill and other intangible assets,
goodwill, which now includes assembled workforce, and indefinite-lived
intangible assets are no longer amortized. prior to the adoption of sfas no.
142, goodwill was amortized on a straight-line method over 20 to 30 years.
assembled workforce was amortized on a straight-line method over 5 to 15 years.
the companys indefinite-lived intangible asset, a tradename, was amortized
on a straight-line method over 20 years.
the companys
finite-lived acquired intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line method
and include the following: developed technology, 5 to 15 years; product
know-how, 30 years; customer base, 10 to 15 years; and data repositories, 10 to
20 years.
- 49 -
derivatives
the company accounts for
derivatives pursuant to sfas no. 133, accounting for derivative instruments
and hedging activities, as amended. all derivative instruments are
recognized in the financial statements and measured at fair value regardless of
the purpose or intent for holding them. changes in the fair value of derivative
instruments are either recognized periodically in income or shareholders
equity (as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income), depending on
their use and designation.
aircraft valuation
used aircraft under trade-in agreements
the company enters into
certain trade-in agreements to purchase used aircraft from customers at a
specific price at a future point in time when those customers purchase new
aircraft from the company. in the event the company accepts an aircraft under a
trade-in agreement, the aircraft purchased by the company serves as collateral
to offset amounts paid by the company to the customer.
obligations recorded from
trade-in aircraft agreements are measured as the difference between gross
amounts payable to customers and the estimated fair value of the collateral. the
fair value of collateral is determined using a process based on the net present
value of expected future cash flows from the trade-in aircraft, assuming the
most likely market placement of the aircraft. the first step in this process
uses the companys assessment of the market for each trade-in aircraft,
which in most instances begins years before the return of the aircraft. there
are several possible markets to which the company continually pursues
opportunities to place used aircraft. these markets include, but are not limited
to, (1) the resale market, which could potentially include the cost of long-term
storage, (2) the leasing market, with the potential for refurbishment costs to
meet the leasing customers requirements, or (3) the scrap market.
collateral valuation varies significantly depending on which market the company
determines is most likely for each aircraft. on a quarterly basis, the company
updates its valuation analysis based on the actual activities associated with
placing each aircraft into a market. this quarterly collateral valuation process
yields results that are typically lower than residual value estimates by
independent sources and tends to more accurately reflect results upon the actual
placement of the aircraft.
asset valuation for equipment under operating lease, held for
re-lease and collateral on receivablesthe fair value of owned assets (equipment under operating leases and assets
held for re-lease) and collateral on receivables is periodically assessed to
determine if the fair value is less than the carrying value. differences between
carrying value and fair value are considered in determining the allowance for
losses on receivables and, in certain circumstances, recorded as impairment for
owned assets.
the company uses the
average published value from multiple sources based on the type and age of the
aircraft to determine the fair value of aircraft. under certain circumstances,
the company applies judgment based on the attributes of the specific aircraft to
determine fair value, usually when the features or utilization of the aircraft
varies significantly from the more generic aircraft attributes covered by
outside publications.
impairment review for equipment under operating leases and held for
re-leasethe company reviews these
assets for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying
amount of these assets may not be recoverable. an asset under operating lease or
held for re-lease is considered impaired when the expected undiscounted cash
flow over the remaining useful life is less than the book value. various
assumptions are used when determining the expected undiscounted cash flow. these
assumptions include lease rates, lease term(s), periods in which the asset may
be held in preparation for a follow-on lease, maintenance costs, remarketing
costs and the life of the asset. the determination of expected lease rates is
generally based on outside publications. the company uses historical information
and current economic trends to determine the remaining assumptions. when
impairment is indicated for an asset, the amount of impairment loss is the
excess of carrying value over fair value.
allowance for losses on receivables
the allowance for losses on
receivables (valuation allowance) is a valuation account used to provide for
potential impairment of receivables on the balance sheet. the balance is an
accounting estimate of probable but unconfirmed losses in the receivable
portfolio. the valuation allowance relates to two components of receivables: (a)
specifically identified receivables that are evaluated individually for
impairment, and (b) pools of receivables that are evaluated for impairment.
a specific receivable is
reviewed for impairment when, based on current information and events, it is
probable that the company will be unable to collect amounts due according to the
contractual terms of the receivable agreement. factors considered in assessing
uncollectibility include a customers extended delinquency, requests for
restructuring and filing for bankruptcy. a specific impairment allowance is
provided based on the difference between the carrying value of the receivable
and the estimated fair value of the related collateral.
- 50 -
the company reviews the
adequacy of the general valuation allowance attributable to the remaining pool
of receivables by assessing both the collateral exposure and the applicable
default rate. collateral exposure for a particular receivable is the excess of
the carrying value over the applicable collateral value of the related asset. a
receivable with an estimated collateral value in excess of the carrying value is
considered to have no collateral exposure. the applicable default rate is
determined using two components: customer credit ratings and weighted-average
remaining portfolio term. credit ratings are identified for each customer in the
portfolio. customer credit ratings are updated based on current rating agency
information or the companys best estimates.
for each credit rating
category, the collateral exposure is multiplied by an applicable historical
default rate, yielding a credit-adjusted collateral exposure. historical default
rates are published by standard & poors reflecting both the customer
credit rating and the weighted-average remaining portfolio term. the sum of the
credit-adjusted collateral exposures generates an initial estimate of the
general valuation allowance. in recognition of the uncertainty of the ultimate
loss experience and relatively long duration of the portfolio, a range of
reasonably possible outcomes of the portfolios credit-adjusted collateral
exposure is calculated by varying the applicable default rate by approximately
plus and minus 15%. the valuation allowance recorded represents the best
estimate within the resulting range of credit-adjusted collateral exposure,
factoring in considerations of risk of individual credits, current and projected
economic and political conditions, and prior loss experience.
postemployment plans
the company accounts for
postemployment benefits, such as severance or job training, under sfas no.112,
employers accounting for postemployment benefits. a liability for
postemployment benefits is recorded when payment is probable, the amount is
reasonably estimable, and the obligation relates to rights that have vested or
accumulated.
note 2 - standards issued and not yet implemented
in june 2001, the fasb
issued sfas no. 143, accounting for asset retirement obligations, which
is effective january 1, 2003. this standard addresses financial accounting and
reporting for obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived
assets and the associated retirement costs. the company has determined that the
implementation of this standard will not have a material effect on its financial
statements.
in july 2002, the fasb
issued sfas no. 146, accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal
activities. this standard requires costs associated with exit or disposal
activities to be recognized when they are incurred. the requirements of sfas no.
146 apply prospectively to activities that are initiated after december 31,
2002, and as such, the company cannot reasonably estimate the impact of adopting
these new rules until and unless it undertakes relevant activities in future
periods.
in november 2002, the fasb
issued interpretation no. 45 (fin 45), guarantors accounting and
disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of the
indebtedness of others, which clarifies the requirements of sfas no. 5,
accounting for contingencies, relating to a guarantors accounting
for and disclosures of certain guarantees issued. fin 45 requires enhanced
disclosures for certain guarantees. it also will require certain guarantees that
are issued or modified after december 31, 2002, including certain third-party
guarantees, to be initially recorded on the balance sheet at fair value. for
guarantees issued on or before december 31, 2002, liabilities are recorded when
and if payments become probable and estimable. the company expects fin 45 to
have the general effect of delaying recognitionfor a portion of the
revenue forproduct sales that are accompanied by certain third-party
guarantees. the financial statement recognition provisions are effective
prospectively, and the company cannot reasonably estimate the impact of adopting
fin 45 until guarantees are issued or modified in future periods, at which time
their results will be initially reported in the financial statements. see note
20.
in january 2003, the fasb
issued interpretation no. 46 (fin 46), consolidation of variable interest
entities, which clarifies the application of accounting research bulletin
no. 51, consolidated financial statements, relating to consolidation of
certain entities. first, fin 46 will require identification of the
companys participation in variable interests entities (vie), which are
defined as entities with a level of invested equity that is not sufficient to
fund future activities to permit them to operate on a standalone basis, or whose
equity holders lack certain characteristics of a controlling financial interest.
then, for entities identified as vie, fin 46 sets forth a model to evaluate
potential consolidation based on an assessment of which party to the vie, if
any, bears a majority of the exposure to its expected losses, or stands to gain
from a majority of its expected returns. fin 46 also sets forth certain
disclosures regarding interests in vie that are deemed significant, even if
consolidation is not required. the company is currently assessing the
application of fin 46 as it relates to its variable interests. see note 20.
- 51 -
note 3 - accounting for the impact of the september 11, 2001 terrorist attacks
on september 11, 2001, the
united states was the target of severe terrorist attacks that involved the use
of u.s. commercial aircraft manufactured by the company. these attacks resulted
in a significant loss of life and property and caused major disruptions in
business activities and in the u.s. economy overall.
to address the widespread
financial impact of the attacks, the emerging issues task force (eitf) released
issue no. 01-10, accounting for the impact of terrorist attacks of september
11, 2001. this issue specifically prohibits treating costs and losses
resulting from the events of september 11, 2001, as extraordinary items;
however, it observes that any portion of these costs and losses deemed to be
unusual or infrequently occurring should be presented as a separate line item in
income from continuing operations.
during the year ended
december 31, 2002, the company reassessed the impact of the events of september
11, 2001, and recorded a net reduction to expense of $2 in the caption
impact of september 11, 2001, charges/(recoveries). these
adjustments related to the commercial airplanes segment.
for the year ended december
31, 2001, the company recorded a charge of $935 in the caption impact of
september 11, 2001, charges/(recoveries). of this charge, $908 is related
to the commercial airplanes segment and $27 is related to the other segment.
the following table
summarizes the expense (reduction to expense) recorded in the caption
impact of september 11, 2001, charges/(recoveries) for the year
ended december 31:
employee severance
$
(5)
$
717 forward loss
used aircraft valuation
inventory valuation
vendor penalties
(12)
guarantees
(7)
$
(2)
$
a description of the nature
of the charges incurred as a result of the events of september 11, 2001, is
listed below.
employee severance
the company incurred
employment reductions resulting from the decrease in aircraft demand, which
directly related to the attacks of september 11, 2001. for the year ended
december 31, 2002, the company revised its estimate related to its employee
severance obligations and recorded a reduction to expense of $5. for the year
ended december 31, 2001, the company recorded a charge of $285 related to these
obligations.
- 52 -
717 forward loss
as a result of the decrease
in aircraft demand subsequent to september 11, 2001, the company was forced to
sharply decrease its production rate on multiple airplane programs during the
fourth quarter of 2001 due to changes in the order forecast and customer
delivery requirements. although all airplane programs were affected by the
events of september 11, 2001, through reduced margins on future deliveries, the
717 program was the only program in a forward loss position.
due to a lack of firm
demand for the 717 aircraft subsequent to september 11, 2001, the company
reduced the program quantity to 135 units from 200 units and decreased the 717
production rate from 3.5 per month to 1.0 per month. this decrease in the
production rate in conjunction with its order quantity reduction significantly
impacted the 717 annual revenue and cost structure. decreasing the number of
airplanes in the program quantity accelerates tooling and special equipment
costs over a reduced number of units, thereby reducing the gross margin of the
program. as a function of reducing the number of employees and other production
disruptions, costs to be incurred for the program increased. all of these
factors, which were directly attributable to the events of september 11, 2001,
contributed to the program incurring an additional $250 forward loss. the
estimates for the revised accounting quantity assume that the 717 would remain
an ongoing program.
used aircraft valuation
the events of september 11,
2001, resulted in a significant decrease in the market value of used aircraft
held for resale as well as asset purchase obligations relating to trade-in of
used aircraft. for the year ended december 31, 2002, the company recorded a
charge of $22 related to a further decrease in used airplane values. for the
year ended december 31, 2001, the company recorded a charge of $185.
inventory valuation
subsequent to september 11,
2001, commercial airline customers worldwide removed a substantial number of
aircraft from service. the ultimate realization of future sales for specific
spare parts held in inventory is highly dependent on the active aircraft fleet
in which that spare part supports. the revised projections for future demand of
certain spare parts indicated that current inventory quantities were in excess
of total expected future demand. for the year ended december 31, 2001, the
company recorded a charge of $98 relating to excess and obsolete commercial
airplane spares inventory.
vendor penalties
the decrease in production
rates on certain commercial airplane models and related products triggered
contractual penalty clauses with various vendors and subcontractors. the
decrease in production rates resulted directly from the change in aircraft
demand after the events of september 11, 2001. for the year ended december 31,
2002, the company revised its estimate related to its outstanding vendor
penalties obligations and recorded a reduction to expense of $12. for the year
ended december 31, 2001, the company recorded a charge of $68 for these
penalties.
guarantee commitments
the company has extended
certain guarantees and commitments, such as asset related guarantees, discussed
in note 20. the events of september 11, 2001, adversely impacted aircraft market
prices and aircraft demand of customers who are counterparties in these
guarantees. for the year ended december 31, 2002, the company recorded a net
reduction to expense of $7 as a result of favorable contract negotiations. for
the year ended december 31, 2001, the company recorded a charge of $49 related
to the adverse exposure.
outstanding liabilities
as of december 31, 2002,
the companys outstanding liabilities attributable to the events of
september 11, 2001, were $146. of this amount, $53 relates to liabilities to be
primarily settled in cash and the remaining $93 was recorded as asset
impairments to reflect the decrease in the anticipated fair value of aircraft
under purchase commitments. as of december 31, 2001, the outstanding liabilities
were $542. of this amount, $402 related to liabilities to be primarily settled
in cash and $140 related to used aircraft purchase commitments.
- 53 -
liabilities to be primarily
settled in cash attributable to the events of september 11, 2001, as of december
31 were as follows:
payments
change inestimate
employee severance
$
$
(248)
$
(5)
$
vendor penalties
(44)
(12)
guarantees
(33)
(7)
$
$
(325)
$
(24)
$
ongoing assessment
the company will continue
to assess other losses and costs it might incur in relation to the events of
september 11, 2001. any costs or adjustments in estimates will continue to be
recognized as a separate component of earnings from operations entitled
impact of september 11, 2001, charges/(recoveries).
note 4 - acquisitions
on october 6, 2000, the
company acquired the hughes electronics corporation (hughes) space and
communications and related businesses. the acquisition was accounted for under
the purchase method, by which the purchase price was allocated to the net assets
acquired based on their fair values. the original purchase price was $3,849,
initial goodwill was valued at $740 and the other intangible assets were valued
at $631. the initial recording relied on asset and liability values reported by
hughes as of the date of the acquisition with adjustments based on preliminary
valuation assessments of property and equipment, purchased intangibles and
retirement plan assets and liabilities. during the period from acquisition to
the third quarter of 2001, the company completed its assessment of the net
assets acquired and goodwill increased to $2,166. the increased goodwill
reflects finalization of fair value assessments for the net assets acquired and
the impact of the companys accounting policies on acquired balances.
changes to the fair value for the net assets acquired primarily relate to the
valuation of acquired long-term contracts and completion of the valuation of
property and equipment. the impact of the companys accounting policies on
acquired balances relate primarily to the application of the companys
recognition of contract revenue using percentage completion based on completed
work effort.
note 5 - goodwill and acquired intangibles
effective january 1, 2002,
the company adopted sfas no. 142. this statement changed the accounting for
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets from an amortization approach to
an impairment-only approach. as a result of the adoption of sfas no. 142, the
company recorded a transitional goodwill impairment charge during the first
quarter of 2002 of $2,410 ($1,827 net of tax), presented as a cumulative effect
of accounting change. this charge related to the companys segments as
follows: space and communications $1,586; commercial airplanes $430; and other
$394. the other segment charge related to connexion by boeingsm and
air traffic management.
the sfas no. 142 goodwill
impairment model is a two-step process. first, it requires a comparison of the
book value of net assets to the fair value of the related operations that have
goodwill assigned to them. the company estimates the fair values of the related
operations using discounted cash flows. the cash flow forecasts are adjusted by
an appropriate discount rate derived from the companys market
capitalization plus a suitable control premium at the date of evaluation. if the
fair value is determined to be less than book value, a second step is performed
to compute the amount of the impairment. in this process, a fair value for
goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair value of the operations used in
the first step, and is compared to its carrying value. the shortfall of the fair
value below carrying value represents the amount of goodwill impairment. sfas
no. 142 requires goodwill to be tested for impairment annually at the same time
every year, and when an event occurs or circumstances change such that it is
reasonably possible that an impairment may exist. the company selected april 1
as its annual testing date.
- 54 -
as a result of the
companys assessment as of april 1, 2002, no impairment was indicated and
no impairment triggers have been identified as of december 31, 2002. effective
january 1, 2003, the company has reorganized its military aircraft and missile
systems and space and communications segments into integrated defense systems.
this reorganization as well as the impact of several other variables, such as
the decline in the companys stock price, has triggered a goodwill
impairment analysis as of january 1, 2003. the company is currently completing
step one of this analysis and as of the filing date does not know the impact, if
any, to its financial position and results of operations.
the following tables
reconcile net earnings, basic earnings per share and diluted earnings per share
adjusted for sfas no. 142 for the year ended december 31:
net earnings:
net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change
$
2,319
$
2,826
$
2,128
add back: goodwill and assembled workforce amortization, net of tax
add back: tradename amortization, net of tax
adjusted net earnings before cumulative effect of acounting change
2,319
2,989
2,239
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax
(1,827)
adjusted net earnings
$
$
2,990
$
2,239
basic earnings per share:
basic earnings per share before cumulative effect of accounting change
$
2.90
$
3.46
$
2.48
add back: goodwill and assembled workforce amortization, net of tax
0.19
0.13
add back: tradename amortization, net of tax
0.01
adjusted basic earnings per share before cumulative effect of accounting change
2.90
3.66
2.61
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax
(2.28)
adjusted basic earnings per share
$
0.62
$
3.66
$
2.61
diluted earnings per share:
diluted earnings per share before cumulative effect of accounting change
$
2.87
$
3.41
$
2.44
add back: goodwill and assembled workforce amortization, net of tax
0.19
0.13
add back: tradename amortization, net of tax
0.01
adjusted diluted earnings per share before cumulative effect of accounting change
2.87
3.61
2.57
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax
(2.26)
adjusted diluted earnings per share
$
0.61
$
3.61
$
2.57
- 55 -
as a result of the adoption
of sfas no. 142 and the transition provisions of sfas no. 141, business
combinations, the company reclassified assembled workforce with goodwill,
ceased amortization of goodwill and recorded an impairment loss. the balance of
goodwill subsequent to the recognition of the first quarter 2002 transitional
impairment charge discussed above was $2,751. during the fourth quarter of 2002,
goodwill increased by $9 as a result of an acquisition. the changes in the
carrying amount of goodwill by reportable segment for the year ended december
31, 2002, were as follows:
december 312001
goodwilladjustments (1)
reclassificationof assembledworkforce
impairmentlosses
december 312002
space and communications
$
3,264
$
(115)
$
$
(1,586)
$
1,696
commercial airplanes
1,032
(430)
military aircraft and missile systems
other
(394)
$
5,127
$
(111)
$
$
(2,410)
$
2,760
(1)
the goodwill
adjustments primarily represent post-acquisition adjustments of deferred tax
assets established in purchase accounting relating to the hughes
acquisition and goodwill related to an acquisition.
included in goodwill are
certain claims submitted to hughes for resolution as contractual purchase price
contingencies relating to the acquisition of hughes electronics corporation
space and communications and related businesses in october 2000. the company
anticipates finalizing the hughes purchase price allocation at the conclusion of
arbitration procedures related to these contingencies.
in conjunction with the
adoption of sfas no. 142, the company reassessed the useful lives and the
classification of its finite-lived acquired intangible assets and determined
that no revisions were necessary. the companys finite-lived acquired
intangible assets are being amortized on a straight-line basis over the
following weighted-average useful lives:
weighted-averageuseful life
product know-how
customer base
developed technology
other
the gross carrying amounts
and accumulated amortization of the companys acquired intangible assets as
of december 31, 2002 and december 31, 2001, were as follows:
december 31, 2002
december 31, 2001
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
grosscarryingamount
accumulatedamortization
developed technology
$
$
$
$
product know-how
assembled workforce
customer base
other
$
1,125
$
$
1,247
$
- 56 -
amortization expense for
acquired finite-lived intangible assets for the year ended december 31, 2002,
was $88. estimated amortization expense for the five succeeding years are as
follows:
estimatedamortizationexpense
$
$
$
$
$
as of december 31, 2002 and
december 31, 2001, the company had one indefinite-lived intangible asset, a
trademark, with a carrying amount of $197.
note 6 - earnings per share
the weighted average number
of shares outstanding (in millions) used to compute earnings per share are as
follows:
basic weighted average shares outstanding
799.0
816.2
859.5
dilutive securities:
stock options
2.0
5.1
5.9
stock units
7.4
5.7
3.4
sharevalue trust
2.3
2.5
diluted potential common shares
9.4
13.1
11.8
diluted weighted average shares outstanding
808.4
829.3
871.3
basic earnings per share
are calculated based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding,
excluding treasury shares and the outstanding shares held by the sharevalue
trust. diluted earnings per share are calculated based on that same number of
shares plus additional dilutive shares representing stock distributable under
stock option and stock unit plans computed using the treasury stock method, plus
contingently issuable shares from other share-based plans on an as-if converted
basis.
options to purchase 22.9,
10.8 and 9.3 shares of common stock were outstanding during the years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively, and not included in the
computation of diluted earnings per share because to do so would have been
antidilutive. for the years ended december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000,
respectively, 19.0, 13.3 and 7.5 units of performance shares were not included
in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the average market
price did not exceed, or was not maintained, above the conversion threshold
price. for the year ended december 31, 2002, potentially distributable shares
held by the sharevalue trust were not included in the computation of diluted
earnings per share because the average market price did not exceed the threshold
price. however, these options, performance shares and sharevalue trust
potentially distributable shares could be dilutive in the future.
- 57 -
note 7 - income taxes
the provision for taxes on income consisted of the following:
year ended december 31,
u.s. federal
taxes paid or currently payable
$
$
$
1,517
change in deferred taxes
(770)
state
taxes paid or currently payable
(78)
change in deferred taxes
(122)
(33)
income tax provision
$
$
$
the following is a
reconciliation of the tax derived by applying the u.s. federal statutory rate of
35% to the earnings beforeincome taxes and comparing that to the recorded
income tax provision:
year ended december 31,
u.s. federal statutory tax
$
1,113
$
1,247
$
1,050
foreign sales corporation/extraterritorial income tax benefit
(195)
(222)
(291)
research benefit
(28)
(383)
non-deductibility of goodwill
state income tax provision, net of effect on u.s. federal tax
(21)
other provision adjustments
(8)
(16)
(5)
income tax provision
$
$
$
the effective income tax
rate for 2002 was 27.1% compared with 20.7% in 2001 and 29.0% in 2000. the 2002
effective income tax rate of 27.1% varies from the federal statutory tax rate of
35%, principally due to foreign sales corporation (fsc) and extraterritorial
income (eti) exclusion tax benefits. this rate also reflects tax credits, state
income taxes and favorable resolution of certain audit issues.
the effective income tax
rates of 20.7% for 2001 and 29.0% for 2000 also vary from the federal statutory
tax rate principally due to fsc and eti benefits. offsetting these benefits are
state income taxes and the non-deductibility of certain goodwill, principally
the goodwill acquired by the acquisition of the aerospace and defense units from
rockwell international corporation in 1996. the 2001 income tax rate also
reflects a one-time benefit of $343 reflecting a settlement with the internal
revenue service (irs) relating to research credit claims on mcdonnell douglas
corporation fixed price government contracts applicable to the 1986-1992 federal
income tax returns.
- 58 -
the components of net deferred tax assets at december 31 were as follows:
deferred tax assets
$
9,024
$
6,181
valuation allowance
(19)
deferred tax liabilities
(4,691)
(3,914)
net deferred tax assets
$
4,314
$
2,267
at december 31, the
deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, resulted from temporary
differences associated withthe following:
inventory and long-term contract methods of income recognition
$
1,785
$
1,561
in-process research and development related to acquisitions
pension benefit accruals
(2,079)
(1,798)
retiree health care accruals
1,978
1,970
other employee benefits accruals
customer and commercial financing
(760)
(761)
other comprehensive income provision (net of valuation allowance of $19)
2,316
net deferred tax assets
$
4,314
$
2,267
income taxes have been
settled with the irs for all years through 1978, and irs examinations have been
completed through 1991. in connection with these examinations, the company
disagrees with irs proposed adjustments, and the years 1979 through 1987 are in
litigation. the irs examination for mcdonnell douglas corporation for the years
1993 through 1995 has been settled and the company received a refund of $102 in
2002. the company believes adequate provision for all outstanding issues has
been made for all open years.
in december 1996, the
boeing company filed suit in the u.s. district court for the western district of
washington for the refund of over $400 in federal income taxes and related
interest. if the company were to prevail, the refund of the amount in dispute
would include interest computed to the payment date. however, the company cannot
predict the likelihood of a favorable outcome. the suit challenged the irs
method of allocating research and development costs for the purpose of
determining tax incentive benefits on export sales through the companys
domestic international sales corporation (disc) and its fsc for the years 1979
through 1987. the company prevailed with the district court, but lost an appeals
decision with the ninth circuit court of appeals. the company appealed to the
supreme court and is awaiting their decision, which is expected in the first
half of 2003. the companys financial statements will not be negatively
impacted as a result of the suits outcome.
income tax payments, net of
tax refunds, were $(49), $1,521 and $405 in 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively.
- 59 -
note 8 - accounts receivable
accounts receivable at december 31 consisted of the following:
u.s. government contracts
$
2,860
$
2,597
commercial contracts
1,390
1,535
other
1,088
less valuation allowance
(111)
(64)
$
5,007
$
5,156
the following table
summarizes the companys accounts receivable under u.s. government
contracts that were not billable orrelated to outstanding claims as of december
31:
unbillable
current
$
$
expected to be collected after one year
$
$
claims
current
$
$
expected to be collected after one year
$
$
unbillable receivables on
u.s. government contracts arise when the sales or revenues based on performance
attainment, though appropriately recognized, cannot be billed yet under terms of
the contract. accounts receivable related to claims are items that the company
believes are earned, but are subject to uncertainty concerning their
determination or ultimate realization.
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, installment receivables due under u.s. government and commercial contracts
totaled $295 and $185, respectively.
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, other accounts receivable included $474 and $450 of reinsurance
receivables relating to astro ltd., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company,
that operates as a captive insurance company. currently, astro ltd. insures
aviation liability, workers compensation, general liability, property, as well
as various other smaller risk liability insurances.
note 9 - inventories
inventories at december 31 consisted of the following:
commercial aircraft programs
$
7,665
$
11,084
long-term contracts in progress
9,695
7,307
commercial spare parts,
used aircraft, general stockmaterials and other, net of reserves
2,522
2,629
19,882
21,020
less advances and progress billings
(13,698)
(13,461)
$
6,184
$
7,559
- 60 -
inventory production costs incurred
on in-process and delivered units in excess of the estimated average cost of
such units determined as described in note 1 represent deferred production
costs. as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, there were no significant excess
deferred production costs or unamortized tooling costs not recoverable from
existing firm orders for the 737 next-generation and 777 programs.
the unamortized tooling and
deferred production costs included in inventory at december 31 are summarized in
the following table:
unamortized tooling
737 next-generation
$
$
deferred production costs
737 next-generation
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, the balance of deferred production costs and unamortized tooling related
to the 717, 747, 757 and 767 programs was insignificant.
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, the commercial airplanes segment inventory had a small quantity of
airplanes that were completed but unsold. as of december 31, 2002 and 2001,
these aircraft were valued at $246 and $183.
during the years ended
december 31, 2002 and 2001, the company purchased $508 and $524, respectively,
of used aircraft. used aircraft in inventory totaled $506 and $316 as of
december 31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
inventory balances included
$233 subject to claims or other uncertainties primarily relating to the a-12
program as of december 31, 2002 and 2001. see note 23.
note 10 - customer and commercial financing
aircraft financing and
commercial equipment financing operating lease equipment is recorded at cost and
depreciated over its useful life, primarily on a straight-line basis, to an
estimated salvage value.
commercial equipment
consists of executive aircraft, machine tools and production equipment,
containers and marine equipment, chemical, oil and gas equipment and other
equipment, which the company believes has adequate collateral value.
customer and commercial financing at december 31 consisted of the following:
aircraft financing
notes receivables
$
2,036
$
1,401
investment in sales-type/financing leases
3,529
2,796
operating lease equipment, at cost,
less accumulated depreciation of
$553 and $337
4,353
3,843
commercial equipment financing
notes receivables
1,008
investment in sales-type/financing leases
operating lease equipment, at cost,
less accumulated depreciation of
$99 and $85
less valuation allowance
(342)
(142)
$
12,211
$
10,398
- 61 -
interest rates on
fixed-rate notes ranged from 5.99% to 14.68%, and effective interest rates on
variable-rate notes ranged from 2.40% to 7.42%.
the change in the valuation
allowance for the years ended december 31, 2002 and 2001, consisted of the following:
valuationallowance
beginning balance - december 31, 2000
$
(173)
charged to costs and expenses
(42)
reduction in customer and commercial financing assets
beginning balance - december 31, 2001
(142)
charged to costs and expenses
(219)
reduction in customer and commercial financing assets
ending balance - december 31, 2002
$
(342)
during the years ended
december 31, 2002 and 2001, $39 and $42 were recorded to increase the valuation
allowance due to the normal growth of the customer financing portfolio. however,
during the year ended december 31, 2002, an additional pre-tax expense of $180
was recorded to increase the valuation allowance due to deteriorated airline
credit ratings and depressed aircraft values based on the companys
quarterly assessments of the adequacy of customer financing reserves.
the valuation allowance
includes amounts recorded either as specific impairment allowances on
receivables or general valuation allowances. as of december 31, 2002 and 2001,
carrying amounts of impaired receivables were $1,367 and $195, respectively.
specific impairment allowances for losses of $50 and $11 were allocated to $146
and $55 of impaired receivables as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
remaining allowance balances of $292 and $131 were recorded as general valuation
allowances as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
the average recorded
investment in impaired receivables as of december 31, 2002 and 2001 was $277 and
$155, respectively. income recognition is generally suspended for receivables at
the date when a full recovery of income and principal becomes doubtful. income
recognition is resumed when the receivables become contractually current and
performance is demonstrated by the customer. the amount of interest income
recognized on such receivables during the period in which they were considered
impaired was $24 and $7 for the years ended december 31, 2002 and 2001, of which
$17 and $4 was recognized on a cash basis. interest income recognized on
impaired receivables in 2000 was insignificant.
the components of investment in sales-type/financing
leases at december 31 were as follows:
minimum lease payments receivable
$
6,183
$
5,221
estimated residual value of leased assets
1,302
unearned income
(3,098)
(2,640)
definitive initial direct costs
$
4,409
$
3,572
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, sales-type/financing leases and operating leases attributable to aircraft
financing included $1,858 and $1,499 attributable to 717 model aircraft ($597
and $692 accounted for as operating leases) and $835 and $1,030 attributable to
md-11 model aircraft ($695 and $810 accounted for as operating leases).
- 62 -
aircraft financing is
collateralized by security in the related asset, and the company has not
experienced problems in accessing such collateral. however, the value of the
collateral is closely tied to commercial airline performance and may be subject
to reduced valuation with market decline. the operating lease aircraft category
primarily includes new and used jet and commuter aircraft. as of december 31,
2002 and 2001, aircraft financing operating lease equipment included $786 and
$510 of equipment available for re-lease. during 2002, amr corporation returned
24 717s to the company. as of december 31, 2002, two of the returned aircraft
have been placed out on lease and 22 of the returned aircraft have firm
commitments to be placed, subject to completion of modifications. the 22
aircraft with firm commitments are classified as equipment available for
re-lease.
for the year ended december
31, 2002, impairment charges of $117 were recorded in operating earnings. this
amount included a $66 charge on the 717s returned to the company by amr
corporation recorded during the fourth quarter of 2002. these impairments
primarily resulted from deteriorated aircraft values and airline customer credit
ratings for sales-type/financing lease assets and reduced estimated cash flows
for operating lease assets. impairments for the years ended december 31, 2001
and 2000, were not significant.
see note 21 for a
discussion regarding the creditworthiness of counterparties in customer and
commercial financing arrangements.
scheduled payments on customer and commercial financing are as follows:
year
principalpayments onnotes receivable
sales-type/financing leasepaymentsreceivable
operatingleasepaymentsreceivable
$
$
$
beyond 2007
3,633
1,038
customer and commercial
financing assets that are leased by the company under capital leases and have
been subleased to others totaled $533 and $437 as of december 31, 2002 and 2001.
note 11 - property, plant and equipment
property, plant and equipment at december 31 consisted of the following:
land
$
$
buildings
9,081
8,598
machinery and equipment
11,105
10,642
construction in progress
1,099
21,484
20,828
less accumulated depreciation
(12,719)
(12,369)
$
8,765
$
8,459
depreciation expense was
$1,094, $1,140 and $1,159 for the years ended december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000,
respectively. interest capitalized as construction-period property, plant and
equipment costs amounted to $71, $72 and $70 for the years ended december 31,
2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively.
- 63 -
rental expense for leased
properties was $519, $318 and $280 for the years ended december 31, 2002, 2001
and 2000, respectively. these expenses, substantially all minimum rentals, are
net of sublease income. minimum rental payments under operating and capital
leases with initial or remaining terms of one year or more aggregated $1,915 and
$67, respectively, for the year ended december 31, 2002. payments, net of
sublease amounts, due during the next five years are as follows:
operating leases
$
$
$
$
$
capital leases
note 12 - investments
joint ventures and other investments
all investments are
recorded in other assets. as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, other assets
included $124 and $274 attributable to investments in joint ventures. this
change is attributable to a joint venture investment that was acquired and
consolidated in 2002. the company also held other non-marketable securities of
$103 and $274 at december 31, 2002 and 2001.
the principal joint venture
arrangements are united space alliance; hrl laboratories, llc; apb winglets
company, llc; bata leasing, llc; and sea launch. the company has a 50%
partnership with lockheed martin in united space alliance, which is responsible
for all ground processing of the space shuttle fleet and for space-related
operations with the u.s. air force. united space alliance also performs
modifications, testing and checkout operations that are required to ready the
space shuttle for launch. the company is entitled to 33% of the earnings from
hrl laboratories, llc, which conducts applied research in the electronics and
information sciences; and creates new products and services for space,
telecommunications, defense and automotive applications. the company has a 45%
ownership of apb winglets company, llc, which was established for the purposes
of designing, developing, manufacturing, installing, certifying, retrofitting,
marketing, selling, and providing after-sales support with respect to winglets
for retrofit aircraft. the company has a 50% partnership with american trans
air, inc. in bata leasing, llc, which was established to acquire aircraft and
market and lease the aircraft to third-parties.
the sea launch venture, in
which the company is a 40% partner with rsc energia (25%) of russia, kvaerner
asa (20%) of norway, and kb yuzhnoye/po yuzhmash (15%) of ukraine, provides
ocean-based launch services to commercial satellite customers. the venture had
one successful launch in 2002. the companys investment in this venture as
of december 31, 2002, is reported at zero, which reflects the recognition of
losses reported by sea launch in prior years. the venture incurred losses in
2002, due to the relatively low volume of launches, reflecting a depressed
satellite market. the company has financial exposure with respect to the
venture, which relates to guarantees by the company provided to certain sea
launch creditors, performance guarantees provided by the company to a sea launch
customer and financial exposure related to accounts receivable/inventory
reflected in the consolidated financial statements. see note 20.
during the year ended
december 31, 2002, a $100 impairment charge was recorded to write off a
cost-method investment in teledesic, llc, which stopped work on its satellite
constellation and announced its intent to reduce staff. in addition, the company
recorded a $48 impairment charge related to its bata leasing, llc, joint venture
investment. this charge was the companys share of the adjustment to
estimated fair market value for the joint ventures 727 aircraft.
investments in debt and equity securities
the following table shows
the impact of investments accounted for pursuant to sfas no. 115.
available-for-sale securities are recorded in other assets at estimated fair
value. unrealized gains/losses of available-for-sale securities are recorded in
accumulated other comprehensive income; however, losses deemed other than
temporary are recorded in net earnings. held-to-maturity securities are recorded
at amortized cost. the unrealized gains/losses of held-to-maturity securities
are not recorded in the consolidated financial statements and are shown in the
table below for informational purposes only.
investments consisted of the following at december 31:
cost
grossunrealizedgain
grossunrealizedloss
estimatedfairvalue
cost
grossunrealizedloss
estimatedfairvalue
available-for-sale
equity
$
$
$
-
$
$
$
$
debt
held-to-maturity
debt
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
- 64 -
there were no gross
unrealized gains as of december 31, 2001.
included in
held-to-maturity investments carried at amortized cost as of december 31, 2002
and 2001, were $455 and $128 of equipment trust certificates (etcs), of which
$455 and $52 were enhanced equipment trust certificates (eetcs). eetcs are
secured by aircraft on lease to commercial airlines. eetcs provide investors
with tranched rights to cash flows from a financial instrument, as well as a
collateral position in the related asset. while the underlying classes of
equipment notes vary by maturity and/or coupon depending upon tenor or level of
subordination of the specific equipment notes and their corresponding claim on
the aircraft, the basic function of an eetc remains: to passively hold separate
debt investments to enhance liquidity for investors, whom in turn pass this
liquidity benefit directly to the airline in the form of lower coupon and/or
greater debt capacity. boeing capital corporation (bcc), a corporation
wholly-owned by the company, participates in several eetcs as an investor. the
eetc investments are related to customers the company believes have less than
investment-grade credit.
during the third quarter of
2002, an impairment of $79 was recorded in income/(loss) from operating
investments related to a long-held investment in etcs secured by aircraft on
lease to united airlines. this debt investment was classified as
held-to-maturity and had declined in value for a period that was determined to
be other than temporary.
maturities of debt securities at december 31, 2002, were as follows:
available-for-sale
held-to-maturity
amortizedcost
estimatedfair value
amortizedcost
estimatedfair value
due in 1 year or less
$
-
$
-
$
$
due from 1 to 5 years
due from 5 to 10 years
due after 10 years
$
$
$
$
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, $13 and $20 of unrealized loss was recorded in accumulated other
comprehensive income related to debt securities that were reclassified from
available-for-sale to held-to-maturity at their fair values. the unrealized loss
will be amortized to earnings over the remaining life of each security.
during the year ended
december 31, 2002, $40 ($25 net of tax) of unrealized loss was reclassified from
accumulated other comprehensive income to other income due to other than
temporary impairments of available-for-sale investments.
note 13 - accounts payable and other liabilities
accounts payable and other liabilities at december 31 consisted of the following:
accounts payable
$
4,431
$
4,793
accrued compensation and employee benefit costs
2,876
2,590
pension liabilities
1,177
product warranty liabilities
1,012
lease and other deposits
dividends payable
other
3,934
4,600
$
13,739
$
14,237
- 65 -
accounts payable included
$301 and $351 as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, attributable to checks written
but not yet cleared by the bank. other liabilities as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, included $146 and $542 attributable to the special charges due to the
events of september 11, 2001, described in note 3.
note 14 - deferred lease income
in 2001, the company
delivered four c-17 transport aircraft to the united kingdom royal air force
(ukraf), which were accounted for as operating leases. the lease term is seven
years, at the end of which the ukraf has the right to purchase the aircraft for
a stipulated value, continue the lease for two additional years, or return the
aircraft. concurrent with the negotiation of this lease, the company and the
ukraf arranged to assign the contractual lease payments to an independent
financial institution. the company received proceeds from the financial
institution in consideration of the assignment of the future lease receivables
from the ukraf. the assignment of lease receivables is non-recourse to the
company. the initial proceeds represented the present value of the assigned
total lease receivables discounted at a rate of 6.6%. as of december 31, 2002
and 2001, the balance of $542 and $622 represented the present value of the
remaining deferred lease income.
- 66 -
note 15 - debt
debt at december 31 consisted of the following:
boeing capital corporation debt:
non-recourse debt and notes
2.540% - 14.280% notes due through 2012
$
$
senior debt securities
1.400% - 7.375% notes due through 2013
5,006
4,737
senior medium-term notes
1.440% - 7.530% notes due through 2017
3,113
2,039
euro medium-term notes
3.410% due through 2004
subordinated notes
3.900% - 8.310% due through 2012
capital lease obligations due through 2008
retail notes
commercial paper securitized due 2012
commercial paper
subtotal boeing capital corporation
$
9,465
$
7,295
other boeing debt:
non-recourse debt and notes
enhanced equipment trust
$
$
unsecured debentures and notes
49, 7.565% due mar. 30, 2002
120, 9.250% due apr. 1, 2002
300, 6.750% due sep. 15, 2002
300, 6.350% due jun. 15, 2003
200, 7.875% due feb. 15, 2005
199, 0.000% due may 31, 2005
300, 6.625% due jun. 1, 2005
250, 6.875% due nov. 1, 2006
175, 8.100% due nov. 15, 2006
350, 9.750% due apr. 1, 2012
400, 8.750% due aug. 15, 2021
300, 7.950% due aug. 15, 2024
250, 7.250% due jun. 15, 2025
250, 8.750% due sep. 15, 2031
175, 8.625% due nov. 15, 2031
300, 6.625% due feb. 15, 2038
100, 7.500% due aug. 15, 2042
175, 7.875% due apr. 15, 2043
125, 6.875% due oct. 15, 2043
senior medium-term notes
6.840% - 7.460% due through 2006
capital lease obligations due through 2005
other notes
subtotal other boeing debt
$
4,938
$
4,970
total debt
$
14,403
$
12,265
- 67 -
the $199 note due may 31,
2005, is a promissory note to flightsafety international for the purchase of its
50% interest in flightsafety boeing training international (fsbti). the
promissory note carries a zero percent interest rate.
capital lease obligations
include three aircraft that the company will purchase in 2003.
the $300 debentures due
august 15, 2024, are redeemable at the holders option on august 15, 2012.
all other debentures and notes are not redeemable prior to maturity.
additional disclosure information
maturities of long-term debt for the next five years are as follows:
bcc
$
1,153
$
1,042
$
1,076
$
1,242
$
1,196
other boeing
$
1,814
$
1,138
$
1,790
$
1,725
$
1,234
the company has $4,500
currently available under credit line agreements with a group of commercial
banks. bcc is named a subsidiary borrower for up to $2,000 under these
arrangements. the company continues to be in full compliance with all covenants
contained in various debt agreements.
total debt interest,
including amounts capitalized, was $749, $730 and $527 for the years ended
december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000, and interest payments were $720, $587 and
$599, respectively.
short-term debt and current
portion of long-term debt as of december 31, 2002, consisted of the following:
consolidated total
bcc only
c/p conduit
$
$
senior medium-term notes
commercial paper
unsecured debentures and notes
capital lease obligations
non-recourse debt and notes
other notes
$
1,814
$
1,153
- 68 -
at december 31, 2002 and
2001, bcc had borrowings under its commercial paper program totaling $73 and
$43. the weighted average interest rate on short-term borrowings at december 31,
2002 and 2001, was 2.8% and 4.4%.
financing activities
on february 16, 2001, bcc
filed a public shelf registration of $5,000 with the securities and exchange
commission (sec), which was declared effective on february 26, 2001. as of
december31, 2002, bcc had received proceeds from the issuance of $3,250,
in aggregate, of senior notes. effective october31, 2001, bcc allocated
$1,000 to the seriesxi medium-term note program. effective june20,
2002, the remaining $750 under the shelf registration was allocated to this
program. as of the filing date hereof, an aggregate amount of $427 remains
available under the series xi medium-term program for potential debt issuance.
on february 22, 2002, bcc
filed a public shelf registration of $5,000 with the sec, which was declared
effective on march 4, 2002. bcc allocated $1,000 to establish a new retail
medium-term note program involving the sale of notes with a minimum denomination
of one thousand dollars. as of the filing date hereof, an aggregate amount of
$3,895, of which $495 is retail notes, remains available for potential debt
issuance.
on june 6, 2002, bcc
established a $1,500 euro medium-term note program. as of the filing date
hereof, an aggregate amount of $1,440 remains available for potential debt
issuance.
on september 13, 2002, the
company filed a public shelf registration of $1,000 with the sec, which was
declared effective on september 20, 2002. on february 11, 2003, the company had
received proceeds from the issuance of $1,000 of unsecured notes. this issuance
was made up of two offerings; $600, 5.125% note due 2013, and $400, 6.125% note
due 2033.
on may 24, 2001, american
airlines issued eetcs, and the company through bcc received proceeds
attributable to monetization of lease receivables associated with 32 md-83
aircraft owned by bcc and on lease to american airlines. these borrowings of
$566 as of december 31, 2002, are non-recourse to the company and are
collateralized by the aircraft. the effective interest rates range from 6.82% to
7.69%. bcc accounts for this transaction as a leveraged lease, therefore, this
debt balance is netted against the bcc sales-type/financing lease assets.
in december 2002, bcc
completed an asset securitization that raised $299 of secured debt through the
use of a bank-sponsored commercial paper conduit (c/p conduit). as collateral
for the debt, bcc transferred $331 of assets from its portfolio to the c/p
conduit. these portfolio assets consisted of the cash flows associated with
specific financing leases, notes and other receivables and operating leases. bcc
also assigned to the c/p conduit perfected security interests in $278 of
collateral underlying the transferred portfolio assets. the collateral pledged
indirectly provides the c/p conduit with additional protection in the event that
the cash flows from the leases and notes are insufficient to cover the total
debt outstanding under the transaction. the secured debt and securitized assets
remain on bccs balance sheet.
note 16 - postretirement plans
the companys
postretirement benefits other than pensions consist principally of health care
coverage for eligible retirees and qualifying dependents, and to a lesser
extent, life insurance to certain groups of retirees. retiree health care is
provided principally until age 65 for approximately half those retirees who are
eligible for health care coverage. certain employee groups, including employees
covered by most united auto workers bargaining agreements, are provided lifetime
health care coverage.
the following table
reconciles the funded status of both pensions and the other postretirement
benefits (opb), principally retiree health care, to the balance on the
consolidated statements of financial position. plan assets consist primarily of
equities, fixed income obligations and cash equivalents. the pension
benefit obligations and plan assets shown in the table are valued as of
september 30.
- 69 -
pensions
other postretirment benefits
benefit obligation
beginning balance
$
32,693
$
29,102
$
6,800
$
6,268
service cost
interest cost
2,261
2,187
plan participants' contributions
amendments
(63)
actuarial loss
2,273
2,562
1,464
acquisitions/dispositions, net
(13)
(34)
settlement/curtailment
(90)
(57)
benefits paid
(2,073)
(1,949)
(440)
(375)
ending balance
$
35,971
$
32,693
$
8,308
$
6,800
plan assets -- fair value
beginning balance
$
33,810
$
42,856
$
$
acquisitions/dispositions, net
(20)
actual return on plan assets
(3,273)
(7,150)
company contribution
plan participants' contributions
benefits paid
(2,037)
(1,918)
(7)
(5)
exchange rate adjustment
(15)
ending balance
$
28,834
$
33,810
$
$
reconciliation of funded status to net amounts recognized
funded status -- plan assets in excess of (less than)
projected benefit obligation
$
(7,137)
$
1,117
$
(8,260)
$
(6,761)
unrecognized net actuarial loss
11,952
2,897
2,980
1,652
unrecognized prior service costs
1,442
1,465
(338)
(360)
unrecognized net transition asset
(1)
(5)
adjustment to fourth quarter contributions
net amount recognized
$
6,264
$
5,481
$
(5,498)
$
(5,367)
amount recognized in statement of financial position
prepaid benefit cost
$
6,671
$
5,838
intangible asset
accumulated other comprehensive income
6,271
accounts payable and other liabilities
(1,177)
(745)
$
(64)
accrued retiree health care
(5,434)
$
(5,367)
accrued pension plan liability
(6,271)
(555)
net amount recognized
$
6,264
$
5,481
$
(5,498)
$
(5,367)
as of december 31, 2002,
accounts payable and other liabilities included $64 for the companys
reserves for claims incurred, but not reported (ibnr).
- 70 -
components of net periodic
benefit costs and other supplemental information were as follows:
year ended december 31,
components of net periodic benefit cost -- pensions
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
2,261
2,187
2,079
expected return on plan assets
(3,558)
(3,452)
(3,117)
amortization of net transition asset
(3)
(26)
(103)
amortization of prior service costs
recognized net actuarial gain
(35)
(370)
(72)
settlement/curtailment
net periodic benefit income
$
(404)
$
(920)
$
(428)
year ended december 31,
components of net periodic benefit cost -- opb
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(4)
(3)
(2)
amortization of prior service costs
(57)
(69)
(66)
recognized net actuarial loss
settlement/curtailment
(27)
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
weighted average assumptions as of december 31,
discount rate: pensions and opb
6.50%
7.00%
7.75%
expected return on plan assets
9.00%
9.25%
9.25%
rate of compensation increase
5.50%
5.50%
5.50%
effect of 1% change in assumed health care costs
effect on total of service and interest cost
1% increase
$
$
$
1% decrease
(57)
(60)
(57)
effect on postretirement benefit obligation
1% increase
$
$
$
1% decrease
(686)
(542)
(517)
postretirement net periodic
costs were calculated based on assumed cost growth for retiree health care costs
of a 12% annual rate for 2003, decreasing to a 5% annual growth rate by 2010.
for 2002, benefit costs for retiree health care were calculated based on an
annual growth rate of 9%, decreasing to a 5% annual growth rate by 2010.
- 71 -
the company has various
pension plans covering substantially all employees. all major pension plans are
funded, and all but one have accumulated benefit obligations that exceed plan
assets. the following table shows the key information for the plans with
accumulated benefit obligations in excess of plan assets.
december 31,
accumulated benefit obligation
$
23,729
$
3,159
effect of future salary growth
1,393
projected benefit obligation
25,122
3,301
fair value of plan assets
19,709
2,481
funded status -- projected benefit obligation in excess
of fair value of plan assets
$
(5,413)
$
(820)
unrecognized net actuarial loss
7,651
unrecognized prior service cost
adjustment for fourth quarter contributions expense
prepaid pension expense
$
3,015
$
net periodic pension (income)/expense
$
(365)
$
certain of the pension
plans provide that, in the event there is a change in control of the company
which is not approved by the board of directors and the plans are terminated
within five years thereafter, the assets in the plan first will be used to
provide the level of retirement benefits required by the employee retirement
income security act, and then any surplus will be used to fund a trust to
continue present and future payments under the postretirement medical and life
insurance benefits in the companys group insurance benefit programs.
the company has an
agreement with the u.s. government with respect to certain of the company
pension plans. under the agreement, should the company terminate any of the
plans under conditions in which the plans assets exceed that plans
obligations, the u.s. government will be entitled to a fair allocation of any of
the plans assets based on plan contributions that were reimbursed under
u.s. government contracts. also, the revenue reconciliation act of 1990 imposes
a 20% non-deductible excise tax on the gross assets reverted if the company
establishes a qualified replacement plan or amends the terminating plan to
provide for benefit increases; otherwise, a 50% tax is applied. any net amount
retained by the company is treated as taxable income.
the company provides
certain defined contribution plans to all eligible employees. the principal
plans are the company-sponsored 401(k) plans and a funded plan for unused sick
leave. the provision for these defined contribution plans was $448, $452 and
$406 in 2002, 2001, and 2000, respectively.
note 17 - share-based compensation
the share-based plans
expense caption on the consolidated statements of operations represents
the total expense recognized for all company plans that are payable only in
stock. these plans are described below.
certain deferred stock
compensation plans are reflected in general and administrative expense. the
company has issued 7,244,094 stock units as of december 31, 2002, that are
convertible to either stock or a cash equivalent, of which 6,639,457 are vested,
and the remainder vest with employee service. these stock units principally
represent a method of deferring employee compensation by which a liability is
established based upon the current stock price. an expense or reduction in
expense is recognized associated with the change in that liability balance. the
reduction in expense (expense) related to deferred stock compensation was $42,
$163 and $(75) in 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively.
- 72 -
the following summarizes
share-based expense for the years ended december 31, 2002, 2001 and 2000,
respectively:
performance shares
$
$
$
sharevalue trust
stock options, other
$
$
$
performance shares
performance shares are
stock units that are convertible to common stock contingent upon stock price
performance. if, at any time up to five years after award, the stock price
reaches and maintains a price equal to 161.0% of the stock issue price at the
date of the award (representing a growth rate of 10% compounded annually for
five years), 25% of the performance shares awarded are convertible to common
stock. likewise, at stock prices equal to 168.5%, 176.2%, 184.2%, 192.5% and
201.1% of the stock price at the date of award, the cumulative portion of
awarded performance shares convertible to common stock are 40%, 55%, 75%, 100%
and 125%, respectively. performance shares awards not converted to common stock
expire five years after the date of the award; however, the compensation
committee of the board of directors may, at its discretion, allow vesting of up
to 100% of the target performance shares if the companys total shareholder
return (stock price appreciation plus dividends) during the five-year
performance period exceeds the average total shareholder return of the s&p
500 over the same period.
no performance share awards
were converted to common stock or deferred stock units in 2002 or 2001. during
2000, 75% of the performance share awards expiring february 22, 2004, were
converted to common stock or deferred stock units (cumulative 3,402,874
performance shares), and 55% of the performance share awards expiring february
28, 2005, were converted to common stock or deferred stock units (cumulative
3,495,725 performance shares).
the following table
summarizes information about performance shares outstanding at december 31,
2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively.
(shares in thousands)
performance shares outstanding
grant date
expiration date
issue price
2/23/98
2/23/03
$5011/16
3,572
3,528
3,490
2/22/99
2/22/04
361/4
1,155
1,142
1,131
2/28/00
2/28/05
2,286
2,262
2,264
10/09/00
2/28/05
2/26/01
2/26/06
623/4
5,810
5,797
2/25/02
2/25/07
4415/16
5,643
sharevalue trust
the sharevalue trust,
established effective july 1, 1996, is a 14-year irrevocable trust that holds
boeing common stock, receives dividends, and distributes to employees
appreciation in value above a 3% per annum threshold rate of return. as of
december 31, 2002, the trust held 40,373,809 shares of the companys common
stock, split equally between two funds, fund 1 and fund
2. if on june 30, 2004, the market value of fund 2 exceeds $913 (the
threshold representing a 3% per annum rate of return), the amount in excess of
the threshold will be distributed to employees. the june 30, 2004, market value
of fund 2 after distribution (if any) will be the basis for determining any
potential distribution on june 30, 2008. similarly, if on june 30, 2006, the
market value of fund 1 exceeds $1,004, the amount in excess of the threshold
will be distributed to employees. shares held by the trust on june 30, 2010,
after final distribution will revert back to the company.
the sharevalue trust is
accounted for as a contra-equity account and stated at market value. market
value adjustments are offset to additional paid-in capital.
- 73 -
stock options
the companys 1997
incentive stock plan (1997 plan) permits the grant of stock options, stock
appreciation rights (sars) and restricted stock awards (denominated in stock or
stock units) to any employee of the company or its subsidiaries and contract
employees. under the terms of the plan, 64,000,000 shares are authorized for
issuance upon exercise of options, as payment of sars and as restricted stock
awards, of which no more than an aggregate of 6,000,000 shares are available for
issuance as restricted stock awards and no more than an aggregate of 3,000,000
shares are available for issuance as restricted stock that is subject to
restrictions based on continuous employment for less than three years. this
authorization for issuance under the 1997 plan will terminate on april 30, 2007.
as of december 31, 2002, no sars have been granted under the 1997 plan. the 1993
incentive stock plan permitted the grant of options, sars and stock to employees
of the company or its subsidiaries. the 1988 and 1984 stock option plans
permitted the grant of options or sars to officers or other key employees of the
company or its subsidiaries. no further grants may be awarded under these three
plans.
options have been granted
with an exercise price equal to the fair market value of the companys
stock on the date of grant and expire ten years after the date of grant. vesting
is generally over a five-year period with portions of a grant becoming
exercisable at one year, three years and five years after the date of grant.
information concerning
stock options issued to directors, officers and other employees is presented in
the following table:
(shares in thousands)
shares
weightedaverageexerciseprice
shares
weightedaverageexerciseprice
shares
weightedaverageexerciseprice
number of shares under option:
oustanding at beginning of year
28,186
$42.97
27,904
$40.58
29,228
$38.02
granted
2,745
40.69
2,812
56.94
3,693
45.63
exercised
(1,998)
24.47
(2,316)
30.58
(4,673)
28.30
canceled or expired
(265)
46.17
(214)
48.13
(328)
46.20
exercised as sars
(16)
21.56
outstanding at end of year
28,668
44.01
28,186
42.97
27,904
40.58
exercisable at end of year
20,384
42.75
19,416
39.45
18,710
37.32
as of december 31, 2002,
14,323,687 shares were available for grant under the 1997 plan, and 3,715,168
shares were available for grant under the incentive compensation plan.
the following table
summarizes information about stock options outstanding at december 31, 2002
(shares in thousands):
options outstanding
options exercisable
range ofexercise prices
shares
weightedaverageremainingcontractuallife (years)
weightedaverageprice
shares
weightedaverageprice
$10 to $19
1,602
1.4
$15.10
1,602
$15.10
$20 to $29
2,279
1.9
23.39
2,277
23.39
$30 to $39
3,622
6.2
39.08
2,168
38.95
$40 to $49
9,120
6.3
42.00
5,462
42.23
$50 to $59
11,792
5.7
54.58
8,773
53.85
$60 to $69
8.2
63.79
63.81
28,668
20,384
- 74 -
the company has determined
the weighted average fair values of stock-based arrangements granted, including
sharevalue trust, during 2002, 2001 and 2000 to be $16.78, $21.35 and $18.18,
respectively. the fair values of stock-based compensation awards granted and of
potential distributions under the sharevalue trust arrangement were estimated
using a binomial option-pricing model with the following assumptions:
grant date
option term
expected volatility
dividend yield
risk freeinterest rate
7/19/02
9 years
30%
1.1%
4.5%
7/20/01
9 years
23%
1.1%
5.1%
6/21/00
9 years
22%
1.1%
6.1%
10/9/00
9 years
23%
1.1%
5.8%
10/10/00
9 years
23%
1.1%
5.8%
other stock unit awards
the total number of stock
unit awards that are convertible only to common stock and not contingent upon
stock price were 1,823,591, 1,597,343 and 1,880,544 as of december 31, 2002,
2001 and 2000, respectively.
note 18 - shareholders' equity
in august 1998, the board
of directors approved a resolution authorizing management to repurchase up to
15% of the companys issued and outstanding stock as of june 30, 1998
(excluding shares held by the sharevalue trust), which amounted to 145,899,000
shares. this repurchase program was completed in 2000. in december 2000 an
additional repurchase program was authorized by the board of directors. under
this resolution, management is authorized to repurchase up to 85,000,000 shares.
the company did not repurchase any shares during the year ended december 31,
2002. as of december 31, 2001, the company had repurchased 40,734,500 shares.
twenty million shares of
authorized preferred stock remain unissued.
note 19 - derivative financial instruments
derivative and hedging activities
as adopted january 1, 2001,
the company accounts for derivatives pursuant to sfas no. 133, accounting for
derivative instruments and hedging activities, as amended. this standard
requires that all derivative instruments be recognized in the financial
statements and measured at fair value regardless of the purpose or intent for
holding them. the adoption of sfas no. 133 in 2001 resulted in a transition gain
of $1 on the consolidated statements of operations shown under the caption
cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax, and a net loss
of $18 ($11 net of tax) recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income.
the company is exposed to a
variety of market risks, including the effects of changes in interest rates,
foreign currency exchange rates, and commodity prices. these exposures are
managed, in part, with the use of derivatives. interest rate swap contracts
under which the company agrees to pay fixed rates of interest are generally
designated as cash flow hedges of variable-rate debt obligations. the company
uses interest rate swaps to adjust the amount of total debt that is subject to
variable and fixed interest rates. the following is a summary of the
companys risk management strategies and the effect of these strategies on
the consolidated financial statements.
fair value hedges
for derivatives designated
as hedges of the exposure to changes in the fair value of a recognized asset or
liability or a firm commitment (referred to as fair value hedges), the gain or
loss is recognized in earnings in the period of change together with the
offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the risk being
hedged. the effect of that accounting is to reflect in earnings the extent to
which the hedge is not effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair value.
interest rate swaps under
which the company agrees to pay variable rates of interest are designated as
fair value hedges of fixed-rate debt. the company also holds forward-starting
interest rate swap agreements to fix the cost of funding a firmly committed
lease for which payment terms are determined in advance of funding. this hedge
relationship mitigates the changes in fair value of the hedged portion of the
firm commitment caused by changes in interest rates. the net change in fair
value of the derivatives and the hedged items is reported in earnings. for the
year ended december 31, 2002, ineffectiveness losses of $8 were recorded in
interest expense related to the forward-starting interest rate swaps.
ineffectiveness was insignificant for the year ended december 31, 2001.
- 75 -
for the years ended
december 31, 2002 and 2001, $5 and $1 of gains related to the basis adjustment
of certain terminated interest rate swaps were amortized to earnings. during
2003, the company expects to amortize $8 of gains from the amount recorded in
the basis adjustment of certain terminated fair value hedge relationships to
earnings.
cash flow hedges
for derivatives designated
as hedges of the exposure to variable cash flows of a forecasted transaction
(referred to as cash flow hedges), the effective portion of the
derivatives gain or loss is initially reported in shareholders
equity (as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income) and
subsequently reclassified into earnings. the ineffective portion of the gain or
loss is reported in earnings immediately.
cash flow hedges used by
the company include certain interest rate swaps, foreign currency forward
contracts, and commodity purchase contracts. interest rate swap contracts under
which the company agrees to pay fixed rates of interest are designated as cash
flow hedges of variable-rate debt obligations. the company uses foreign currency
forward contracts to manage currency risk associated with certain forecasted
transactions, specifically sales and purchase commitments made in foreign
currencies. the companys foreign currency forward contracts hedge
forecasted transactions principally occurring up to five years in the future.
commodity derivatives, such as fixed-price purchase commitments, are used by the
company to hedge against potentially unfavorable price changes for items used in
production.
the company entered into
certain commitments to purchase electricity at fixed prices over the next two
years, a percentage of which are designated as cash flow hedges. the changes in
fair value of the percentage of the commodity derivatives that are not
designated in a hedging relationship are recorded in earnings immediately. there
were no significant changes in fair value reported in earnings for the years
ended december 31, 2002 and 2001.
at december 31, 2002 and
2001, net losses of $74 ($47 net of tax) and $172 ($108 net of tax) were
recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income associated with the
companys cash flow hedging transactions. for the years ended december 31,
2002 and 2001, losses of $46 and $14 (net of tax) were reclassified to cost of
products and services. during the next year, the company expects to reclassify
to cost of products and services a loss of $22 (net of tax).
derivative financial instruments not receiving hedge treatment
the company also holds certain
non-hedging instruments, such as interest exchange agreements, interest rate
swaps, warrants, conversion feature of convertible debt, and foreign currency
forward contracts. the changes in fair value of these instruments are recorded
in earnings. for the years ended december 31, 2002 and 2001, these non-hedging
instruments resulted in gains of $25 and $15.
note 20 - arrangements with off-balance sheet risk
the company is a party to
certain arrangements with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of
business, as discussed below.
guarantees
in november 2002, the fasb
issued interpretation no. 45 (fin 45), guarantors accounting and
disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of the
indebtedness of others, which clarifies the requirements of sfas no. 5,
accounting for contingencies, relating to a guarantors accounting
for and disclosures of certain guarantees issued. refer to note 2 for more
information about the impact of fin 45 on the companys financial
statements.
third-party guarantees
the following tables
provide quantitative data regarding the companys third-party guarantees.
the maximum potential payments represent a worst-case scenario, and
do not necessarily reflect results expected by the company. estimated proceeds
from collateral and recourse represent the anticipated values of assets the
company could liquidate or receive from other parties to offset its payments
under guarantees. the carrying amount of liabilities recorded on the balance
sheet reflects the companys best estimate of future payments it may incur
as part of fulfilling its guarantee obligations. portions of certain liabilities
were established in prior periods as part of the companys special charges
due to the events of september 11, 2001.
- 76 -
as of december 31, 2002
maximumpotentialpayments
estimatedproceeds fromcollateral/recourse
carryingamounts ofliabilities*
portion ofliabilitiesrelated to theevents of
septemer 11, 2001
asset-related guarantees
$
$
$
$
credit guarantees related to thesea launch venture
other credit guarantees
equipment trust certificates
performance guarantees
as of december 31, 2001
maximumpotentialpayments
estimatedproceeds fromcollateral/recourse
carryingamounts ofliabilities*
portion ofliabilitiesrelated to theevents of
septemer 11, 2001
asset-related guarantees
$
$
$
$
credit guarantees related to thesea launch venture
other credit guarantees
equipment trust certificates
performance guarantees
*amounts included in accounts payable and other liabilities
the company has issued
various asset-related guarantees, principally to facilitate the sale of certain
commercial aircraft. under these arrangements, the company is obligated to make
payments to a guaranteed party in the event the related aircraft fair values
fall below a specified amount at a future point in time. these obligations are
collateralized principally by commercial aircraft, and expire within the next 16
years. no aircraft have been delivered with these types of guarantees in several
years.
the company has issued
credit guarantees to creditors of the sea launch venture, of which the company
is a 40% owner, to assist the venture in obtaining financing. in the event the
company is required to perform on these guarantees, it has the right to recover
a portion of the loss from another venture partner, and has collateral rights to
certain assets of the venture. in addition, the company has issued credit
guarantees, principally to facilitate the sale of certain commercial aircraft.
under these arrangements, the company is obligated to make payments to a
guaranteed party in the event that lease or loan payments are not made by the
original debtor or lessee. the companys commercial aircraft credit-related
guarantees are collateralized by the underlying commercial aircraft. a
substantial portion of these guarantees have been extended on behalf of original
debtors or lessees with less than investment-grade credit. current outstanding
credit guarantees expire within the next 13 years.
as a liquidity provider for
etc pass-through arrangements, the company has certain obligations to investors
in the trusts, which requires funding to the trust to cover interest due to such
investors resulting from an event of default by united airlines. in the event of
funding, the company receives a first priority position in the etc collateral in
the amount of the funding. on february 7, 2003, the company advanced $101 to the
trust perfecting its collateral position and terminating its liquidity
obligation. the trust currently has collateral value that significantly exceeds
the amount due to the company.
also relating to its etc
investments, the company has potential obligations relating to shortfall
interest payments in the event that the interest rates in the underlying
agreements are reset below a certain level according to the terms of these
agreements. these obligations would cease if united airlines were to default on
its interest payments to the trust. these guarantees will expire within the next
12 years.
the company has outstanding
performance guarantees issued in conjunction with joint venture investments.
pursuant to these guarantees, the company would be required to make payments in
the event a third-party fails to perform specified services. current performance
guarantees expire within the next 15 years.
- 77 -
product warranties
the company provides
product warranties in conjunction with certain product sales.
the majority of the
companys warranties are issued by the commercial airplanes segment.
generally, aircraft sales are accompanied by a 3 to 4 year standard warranty for
systems, accessories, equipment, parts, and software manufactured by the company
or manufactured to certain standards under its authorization. these warranties
cover factors such as non-conformance to specifications and defects in material
and design. warranties issued by the space and communications and military
aircraft and missile systems segments principally relate to sales of military
aircraft and weapons hardware. these sales are generally accompanied by a six to
twelve-month warranty period and cover systems, accessories, equipment, parts,
and software manufactured by the company to certain contractual specifications.
these warranties cover factors such as non-conformance to specifications and
defects in material and workmanship.
estimated standard warranty
costs are recorded in the period in which the related product sales occur. the
warranty liability recorded at each balance sheet date reflects the estimated
number of months of warranty coverage outstanding for products delivered times
the average of historical monthly warranty payments, as well as additional
amounts for certain major warranty issues that exceed a normal claims level. the
following table summarizes product warranty activity recorded during 2002.
as of december 31,
additionsfor newwarranties
reductionsforpaymentsmade
changesinestimate
product warranty liabilities*
$
1,012
$
$
(289)
$
$
*amounts included in accounts payable and other liabilities
material variable interests in unconsolidated entities
the company is currently
assessing the application of fin 46 as it relates to its variable interests.
while the company is currently not required to consolidate the full amount of
the etcs, eetcs or the sea launch venture in which it has invested, it is unable
to definitively conclude at this time whether consolidation or disclosure will
be required for these investments upon full adoption of fin 46. the
companys investment in etcs and eetcs aggregated $455 at december 31,
2002. the companys total maximum exposure to loss from etcs and eetcs is
$637, comprised of the $455 investment balance, rights to collateral estimated
at $101 related to liquidity obligations satisfied in february 2003, and a
maximum potential exposure of $81 relating to potential shortfall interest
payments. during the year ended december 31, 2002, the company recorded revenues
of $25, cash inflows of $41, and impairment expense of $79 relating to these
investments. as of december 31, 2002, the vie (etcs and eetcs) in which the
company has invested have total assets of approximately $4,200 and total debt
(which is non-recourse to the company) of approximately $3,700. related to the
sea launch venture, the companys total maximum exposure to loss is $621
assuming no estimated proceeds from collateral or recourse from other venture
partners, comprised of $335 of exposure related to guarantees to certain sea
launch creditors ($535 net of $200 in established reserves), $33 of exposure
related to performance guarantees provided by the company to a sea launch
customer and $253 of financial exposure related to accounts receivable/inventory
reflected in the consolidated financial statements. the total assets and total
liabilities of the sea launch venture each represent less than 4% of the
companys consolidated total assets and total liabilities as of december
31, 2002. the company made no additional capital contributions to the sea launch
venture during the year ended december 31, 2002.
other commitments
the company enters into
certain trade-in agreements to purchase used aircraft from customers at a
specific price at a future point in time when those customers purchase new
aircraft from the company. in the event the company accepts an aircraft under a
trade-in agreement, the aircraft purchased by the company serves as collateral
to offset amounts paid by the company to the customer. as of december 31, 2002
and 2001, accounts payable and other liabilities included $156 and $189 related
to trade-in commitments, of which $93 and $140 was related to the events of
september 11, 2001. the total contractual trade-in value of all aircraft that
customers had the right to sell to the company was $1,993 and $3,262 as of
december 31, 2002 and 2001. the company estimated the fair value of those
aircraft was $1,837 and $3,073 as of december 31, 2002 and 2001. there is a high
degree of uncertainty inherent in the assessment of the likelihood of trade-in
commitments. updates on the likelihood that trade-in commitments will be
exercised using both quantitative information from valuation sources and
qualitative information from other sources are continually assessed. the company
continues to monitor all trade-in commitments for adverse developments.
- 78 -
irrevocable financing
commitments related to aircraft on order, including options, scheduled for
delivery through 2007 totaled $3,223 and $7,508 as of december 31, 2002 and
2001. the company anticipates that not all of these commitments will be utilized
and that it will be able to arrange for third-party investors to assume a
portion of the remaining commitments, if necessary. the company has other
additional commitments to arrange for equipment financing totaling $106 and $344
as of december 31, 2002 and 2001.
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, future lease commitments on aircraft not recorded on the condensed
consolidated statements of financial position totaled $246 and $323. these lease
commitments extend through 2015, and the companys intent is to recover
these lease commitments through sublease arrangements. as of december 31, 2002
and 2001, accounts payable and other liabilities included $130 ($2 related to
the events of september 11, 2001) and $116 ($1 related to the events of
september 11, 2001) attributable to adverse commitments under these lease
arrangements.
as of december 31, 2002,
the company had extended a $69 credit line agreement to one of its joint venture
partners. to date, $33 had been drawn on this agreement, which was recorded as
an additional investment in the joint venture.
note 21 - significant group concentrations of risk
credit risk
financial instruments involving
potential credit risk are predominantly with commercial aircraft customers and
the u.s. government. of the $17,218 in accounts receivable and customer
financing included in the consolidated statements of financial position, $8,837
related to commercial aircraft customers ($315 of accounts receivable and $8,522
of customer financing) and $2,860 related to the u.s. government. of the $8,522
of aircraft customer financing, $7,606 related to customers the company believes
have less than investment-grade credit. amr corporation, airtran airways and ual
corporation were associated with 11%, 12% and 14% of all financial instruments
related to customer financing. financing for aircraft is collateralized by
security in the related asset, and historically the company has not experienced
a problem in accessing such collateral.
as of december 31, 2002,
off-balance sheet financial instruments described in note 20 predominantly
related to commercial aircraft customers. similarly, of the $3,223 of
irrevocable financing commitments related to aircraft on order including
options, $3,128 related to customers the company believes have less than
investment-grade credit.
other risk
the commercial airplanes
segment is subject to both operational and external business environment risks.
operational risks that can disrupt the companys ability to make timely
delivery of its commercial jet aircraft and meet its contractual commitments
include execution of internal performance plans, product performance risks
associated with regulatory certifications of the companys commercial
aircraft by the u.s. government and foreign governments, other regulatory
uncertainties, collective bargaining labor disputes, performance issues with key
suppliers and subcontractors and the cost and availability of energy resources,
such as electrical power. aircraft programs, particularly new aircraft models
such as the 717 program, face the additional risk of pricing pressures and cost
management issues inherent in the design and production of complex products.
financing support may be provided by the company to airlines, some of which are
unable to obtain other financing. external business environment risks include
adverse governmental export and import policies, factors that result in
significant and prolonged disruption to air travel worldwide, and other factors
that affect the economic viability of the commercial airline industry. examples
of factors relating to external business environment risks include the
volatility of aircraft fuel prices, global trade policies, worldwide political
stability and economic growth, acts of aggression that impact the perceived
safety of commercial flight, escalation trends inherent in pricing the
companys aircraft, and a competitive industry structure which results in
market pressure to reduce product prices.
in addition to the
foregoing risks associated with the commercial airplanes segment, the military
aircraft and missile systems segment and the space and communications segment
are subject to changing priorities or reductions in the u.s. government defense
and space budget, and termination of government contracts due to unilateral
government action (termination for convenience) or failure to perform
(termination for default). civil, criminal or administrative proceedings
involving fines, compensatory and treble damages, restitution, forfeiture and
suspension or debarment from government contracts may result from violations of
business and cost classification regulations on u.s. government contracts.
the commercial launch and
satellite service markets have some degree of uncertainty since global demand is
driven in part by the launch customers access to capital markets.
additionally, some of the companys competitors for launch services receive
direct or indirect government funding. the satellite market includes some degree
of risk and uncertainty relating to the attainment of technological
specifications and performance requirements.
risk associated with the
boeing capital corporation segment includes interest rate risks, asset valuation
risks, specifically, aircraft valuation risks, and credit and collectability
risks of counterparties.
- 79 -
as of december 31, 2002,
the companys principal collective bargaining agreements were with the
international association of machinists and aerospace workers (iam) representing
20% of employees (current agreements expiring in may 2004, and september and
october 2005); the society of professional engineering employees in aerospace
(speea) representing 13% of employees (current agreements expiring february 2004
and december 2005); and the united automobile, aerospace and agricultural
implement workers of america (uaw) representing 4% of employees (current
agreements expiring may 2003, april 2004, and september 2005).
note 22 - disclosures about fair value of financial instruments
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, the carrying amount of accounts receivable was $5,007 and $5,156,
respectively, and the fair value of accounts receivable was estimated to be
$4,772 and $5,054, respectively. the lower fair value reflects a discount due to
deferred collection for certain receivables that will be collected over an
extended period. the carrying value of accounts payable is estimated to
approximate fair value.
as of december 31, 2002,
the carrying amount of notes receivable, net of valuation allowance, was $2,954
and the fair value was estimated to be $3,258. as of december 31, 2001, the
carrying amount of notes receivable, net of valuation allowance, was estimated
to approximate fair value. although there are generally no quoted market prices
available for customer financing notes receivable, the valuation assessments
were based on the respective interest rates, risk-related rate spreads and
collateral considerations.
as of december 31, 2002 and
2001, the carrying amount of debt, net of capital leases, was $13,704 and
$11,805, respectively, and the fair value of debt, based on current market rates
for debt of the same risk and maturities, was estimated at $14,604 and $12,274,
respectively. the companys debt, however, is generally not callable until
maturity.
with regard to financial
instruments with off-balance sheet risk, it is not practicable to estimate the
fair value of future financing commitments because there is not a market for
such future commitments. other off-balance sheet financial instruments,
including asset-related guarantees, credit guarantees, and interest rate
guarantees related to an equipment trust certificate, are estimated to have a
fair value of $358 at december 31, 2002.
note 23 - contingencies
legal
various legal proceedings, claims
and investigations related to products, contracts and other matters are pending
against the company. most significant legal proceedings are related to matters
covered by insurance. major contingencies are discussed below.
the company is subject to
u.s. government investigations from which civil, criminal or administrative
proceedings could result. such proceedings could involve claims by the
government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble damages, restitution
and/or forfeitures. under government regulations, a company, or one or more of
its operating divisions or subdivisions, can also be suspended or debarred from
government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of
investigations. the company believes, based upon all available information, that
the outcome of any such government disputes and investigations will not have a
material adverse effect on its financial position or continuing operations.
in 1991, the u.s. navy
notified mcdonnell douglas (now a subsidiary of the company) and general
dynamics corporation (the team) that it was terminating for default
the teams contract for development and initial production of the a-12
aircraft. the team filed a legal action to contest the navys default
termination, to assert its rights to convert the termination to one for
the convenience of the government, and to obtain payment for work
done and costs incurred on the a-12 contract but not paid to date. as of
december 31, 2002, inventories included approximately $583 of recorded costs on
the a-12 contract, against which the company has established a loss provision of
$350. the amount of the provision, which was established in 1990, was based on
mcdonnell douglass belief, supported by an opinion of outside counsel,
that the termination for default would be converted to a termination for
convenience, and that the best estimate of possible loss on termination for
convenience was $350.
on august 31, 2001, the
u.s. court of federal claims issued a decision after trial upholding the u.s.
governments default termination of the a-12 contract on the grounds that
the team could not meet the revised contract schedule unilaterally imposed by
the u.s. government. the court did not, however, enter a money judgment for the
u.s. government on its claim for unliquidated progress payments. this
followedan earlier trial court decision in favor of the contractors and
reversal of that initial decision on appeal.the team appealed that
decision to the court of appeals and is awaiting a decision. the team also
obtained a stay of the trial courts judgment to prevent the navy from
collecting any allegedly due amounts prior to the decision by the court of
appeals.
- 80 -
if, after all judicial
proceedings have ended, the courts determine contrary to the companys
belief that a termination for default was appropriate, the company would incur
an additional loss of approximately $275, consisting principally of remaining
inventory costs and adjustments, and if contrary to the companys belief
the courts further hold that a money judgment should be entered against the
team, the company would be required to pay the u.s. government one-half of the
unliquidated progress payments of $1,350 plus statutory interest from february
1991 (currently totaling approximately $1,040). the loss to the company would
total approximately $1,465 in pre-tax charges. should, however, the trial
courts decision on termination be reversed on appeal and its 1998 judgment
in favor of the team be reinstated, the company would receive approximately
$957, including interest.
the company believes,
supported by an opinion of outside counsel, that the trial courts rulings
with respect to the enforceability of the unilateral schedule and the
termination for default are contrary to law and fact and that the loss provision
established by mcdonnell douglas in 1990 continues to provide adequately for the
reasonably possible reduction in value of a-12 net contracts in process as of
december 31, 2002. final resolution of the a-12 litigation will depend upon the
outcome of further proceedings or possible negotiations with the u.s.
government.
the company is a defendant
in seven employment discrimination matters in which class certification is
sought or has been granted. three matters are pending in the federal
district court for the western district of washington in seattle; one case is
pending in the federal district court for the central district of california in
los angeles; one case is pending in the federal district court in st. louis,
missouri; one case is pending in the federal district court in tulsa, oklahoma;
and the final case is pending in the federal district court in wichita, kansas.
the company intends to continue its aggressive defense of these cases. it is not
possible to predict what impact, if any, these cases could have on the financial
statements.
other contingencies
the company is subject to
federal and state requirements for protection of the environment, including
those for discharge of hazardous materials and remediation of contaminated
sites. due in part to their complexity and pervasiveness, such requirements have
resulted in the company being involved with related legal proceedings, claims
and remediation obligations since the 1980s.
the company routinely
assesses, based on in-depth studies, expert analyses and legal reviews, its
contingencies, obligations and commitments for remediation of contaminated
sites, including assessments of ranges and probabilities of recoveries from
other responsible parties who have and have not agreed to a settlement and of
recoveries from insurance carriers. the companys policy is to immediately
accrue and charge to current expense identified exposures related to
environmental remediation sites based on estimates of investigation, cleanup and
monitoring costs to be incurred.
the costs incurred and
expected to be incurred in connection with such activities have not had, and are
not expected to have, a material impact to the companys financial
position. with respect to results of operations, related charges have averaged
less than 2% of annual net earnings. such accruals as of december 31, 2002,
without consideration for the related contingent recoveries from insurance
carriers, are less than 2% of total liabilities.
because of the regulatory
complexities and risk of unidentified contaminated sites and circumstances, the
potential exists for environmental remediation costs to be materially different
from the estimated costs accrued for identified contaminated sites. however,
based on all known facts and expert analyses, the company believes it is not
reasonably likely that identified environmental contingencies will result in
additional costs that would have a material adverse impact to the companys
financial position or operating results and cash flow trends.
the company has entered
into standby letters of credit agreements and surety bonds with financial
institutions primarily relating to the guarantee of future performance on
certain contracts. contingent liabilities on outstanding letters of credit
agreements and surety bonds aggregated approximately $1,663 at december 31,
2002.
note 24 - segment information
the company is organized
based on the products and services it offers and operates in four principal
segments: commercial airplanes, military aircraft and missile systems, space and
communications, and bcc. all other activities fall within the other segment,
principally made up of boeing technology, connexion by boeingsm and
air traffic management. commercial airplanes operations principally involve
development, production and marketing of commercial jet aircraft and providing
related support services, principally to the commercial airline industry
worldwide. military aircraft and missile systems operations principally involve
research, development, production, modification and support of the following
products and related systems: military aircraft, both land-based and
aircraft-carrier-based, including fighter, transport and attack aircraft with
wide mission capability, and vertical/short takeoff and landing capability;
helicopters and missiles. space and communications operations principally
involve research, development, production, modification and support of the
following products and related systems: space systems, missile defense systems,
satellites and satellite launching vehicles, rocket engines, and information and
battle management systems. although some military aircraft and missile systems
and space and communications products are contracted in the commercial
environment, the primary customer is the u.s. government. bcc is primarily
engaged in the financing of commercial and private aircraft, and commercial
equipment. financing activities other than bcc, consisting principally of four
c-17 transport aircraft under lease to the united kingdom royal air force, are
included within the other segment classification.
- 81 -
in the second quarter of
2001, the company established an other segment classification which principally
includes the activities of connexion by boeingsm, a two-way broadband
data communications service for global travelers; air traffic management, a
business unit developing new approaches to a global solution to address air
traffic management issues; and boeing technology, an advanced research and
development organization focused on innovative technologies, improved processes
and the creation of new products. the 2001 and 2000 results have been
reclassified to conform to the revised segment classifications.
in the first quarter of
2002, the company began separately reporting bcc which was originally included
in the customer and commercial financing segment classification. the 2001 and
2000 results have been restated to conform to the revised segment classification
with the remaining balance reclassified to the other segment.
on july 10, 2002, the
company announced the creation of integrated defense systems (ids), a business
unit merging the companys total space, defense, government, intelligence
and communications capabilities into one organization. prior to the
announcement, these operations were contained in the companys military
aircraft and missile systems and space and communications reportable segments.
since the formation of ids, the composition and review structure of internal
financial information related to these operations has remained unchanged. hence,
at present, segment disclosures remain on the same basis. beginning in the first
quarter of 2003, the company will no longer report results for military aircraft
and missile systems segment and space and communications segment and will report
consolidated ids results and the results of its four reporting segments: (1)
aircraft and weapon systems; (2) network systems; (3) launch and orbital
systems; and (4) support systems.
while the companys
principal operations are in the united states, canada, and australia, some key
suppliers and subcontractors are located in europe and japan. sales and other
operating revenue by geographic area consisted of the following:
year ended december 31,
asia, other than china
$
7,614
$
7,112
$
5,568
china
1,442
1,504
1,026
europe
5,871
8,434
9,038
oceania
1,813
africa
western hemisphere, other than the united states
17,934
19,393
17,620
united states
36,135
38,805
33,701
total sales
$
54,069
$
58,198
$
51,321
commercial airplanes
segment sales were approximately 78%, 70% and 86% of total sales in europe and
approximately 87%, 89% and 90% of total sales in asia, excluding china, for
2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively. military aircraft and missile systems segment
and space and communications segment combined sales were approximately 20%, 29%
and 13% of total sales in europe for 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively. military
aircraft and missile systems segment and space and communications segment
combined sales were approximately 12%, 10% and 9% of total sales in asia,
excluding china, for the same respective years. exclusive of these amounts,
military aircraft and missile systems segment and space and communications
segment sales were principally to the u.s. government and represented 42%, 33%
and 34% of consolidated sales for 2002, 2001 and 2000, respectively.
approximately 5% of operating assets are located outside the united states.
- 82 -
the information in the
following tables is derived directly from the segments internal financial
reporting used for corporate management purposes.
sales and other operating revenues
year ended december 31,
commercial airplanes
$
28,387
$
35,056
$
31,171
military aircraft and missile systems
13,990
12,451
11,924
space and communications
10,967
10,364
8,039
boeing capital corporation
other
accounting differences/eliminations
(813)
(901)
(844)
$
54,069
$
58,198
$
51,321
net earnings
year ended december 31,
commercial airplanes
$
2,847
$
2,632
$
2,736
military aircraft and missile systems
1,652
1,346
1,245
space and communications
(243)
boeing capital corporation
other
(424)
(354)
accounting differences/eliminations
(406)
(368)
(442)
share-based plans expense
(447)
(378)
(316)
unallocated expense
(193)
(163)
(362)
earnings from operations
3,868
3,896
3,058
other income/(expense), net
interest and debt expense:
boeing capital corporation
(410)
(324)
(229)
other
(320)
(326)
(216)
earnings before taxes
3,180
3,564
2,999
income taxes
$
2,319
$
2,826
$
2,128
depreciation and amortization
year ended december 31,
commercial airplanes
$
$
$
military aircraft and missile systems
space and communications
boeing capital corporation
other
unallocated
$
1,509
$
1,752
$
1,480
- 83 -
for internal reporting
purposes, the company records commercial airplanes segment revenues and
operating profits for airplanes transferred to other segments, and such
transfers may include airplanes accounted for as operating leases that are
considered transferred to bcc. the revenues for these transfers are eliminated
in the accounting differences/eliminations caption. in the event an
airplane accounted for as an operating lease is subsequently sold, the
accounting differences/eliminations caption would reflect the
recognition of revenue and operating profit for the consolidated financial
statements.
the company records cost of
sales for 7-series commercial airplane programs under the program method of
accounting described in note 1. for internal measurement purposes, the
commercial airplanes segment records cost of sales based on the cost of specific
units delivered, and to the extent that inventoriable costs exceed estimated
revenues, a loss is not recognized until delivery is made, which is not in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. for the 717 program,
the cost of the specific units delivered is reduced, on a per-unit basis, by the
amount previously recognized for forward losses. proceeds from certain
commercial airplanes segment suppliers attributable to participation in
development efforts are accounted for as a reduction in the cost of inventory
received from the supplier under the program accounting method, and as an
expense reduction in the period the proceeds are received for internal
measurement purposes. these adjustments between the internal measurement method
and the program accounting method are included in the accounting
differences/eliminations caption of net earnings. these adjustments
totaled $(830), $(721) and $(637) for the years ended december 31, 2002, 2001
and 2000, respectively.
bcc segment revenues
consist principally of interest from financing receivables and lease income from
operating lease equipment. additionally, segment earnings reflect depreciation
on leased equipment and expenses recorded against the valuation allowance
presented in note10. no interest expense on debt is included in bcc
segment earnings for 2002. beginning in 2003, interest expense on debt will be
included in bcc segment earnings.
the company provides bcc
with certain intercompany guarantees and other subsidies. intercompany
guarantees primarily relate to residual value guarantees and credit guarantees
(first loss deficiency guarantees and rental guarantees). residual value
guarantees provide bcc a specified asset value at the end of a lease agreement
with a third party in the event of a decline in market value of the financed
aircraft. first loss deficiency guarantees cover a specified portion of
bccs losses on financed aircraft in the event of a loss upon disposition
of the aircraft following a default by the third party lessee. rental guarantees
are whole or partial guarantees covering bcc against the third party
lessees failure to pay rent under the lease agreement. in addition to
guarantees, other subsidies are also provided to bcc mainly in the form of
rental payments on restructured third party leases and interest rate subsidies.
as a result of guaranteed
residual values of assets or guaranteed income streams under credit guarantees,
bcc is abated from asset impairments on the guaranteed aircraft to the extent of
guarantee coverage. if an asset impairment is calculated on a guaranteed
aircraft, the impairment charge is generally recorded in the other segment. if
the guarantee amount is insufficient to cover the full impairment loss, the
shortage is recorded by bcc.
due to intercompany
guarantees, the bcc accounting classification of certain third party leases may
differ from the accounting classification in the consolidated company financial
statements (i.e. sales-type lease at bcc, operating lease in the consolidated
financial statements; or leveraged lease at bcc, sales-type lease in the
consolidated financial statements). in these cases, the accounting treatment at
bcc is eliminated and the impact of the consolidated accounting treatment is
recorded in the other segment.
the following table
provides the financial statement impacts of intercompany guarantees and asset
impairments, lease accounting differences, and other subsidies. these amounts
have been recorded in the other segment.
year ended december 31
three months endeddecember 31
guarantees and asset impairments
$
$
$
$
lease accounting differences
(1)
(46)
other subsidies
$
$
$
$
- 84 -
during the year ended
december 31, 2002, the other segment recorded asset impairment charges of $66
related to the impairment of a long-held investment in equipment trust
certificates secured by aircraft on lease to united airlines, $66 related to the
impairment of 717s returned to the company by amr, and $80 related to an
increase in the customer financing valuation allowance resulting from guarantees
provided to bcc. the 717 impairment charge was offset by a $60 amr lease
termination fee recorded in earnings during the fourth quarter by the other
segment in the lease accounting differences caption above.
the accounting
differences/eliminations caption of net earnings also includes the impact
of cost measurement differences between generally accepted accounting principles
and federal cost accounting standards. this includes the following: the
difference between pension costs recognized under sfas no. 87,
employers accounting for pensions, and under federal cost
accounting standards, principally on a funding basis; the differences between
retiree health care costs recognized under sfas no. 106, employers
accounting for postretirement benefits other than pensions, and under
federal cost accounting standards, principally on a cash basis; and the
differences in timing of cost recognition related to certain activities, such as
facilities consolidation, undertaken as a result of mergers and acquisitions
whereby such costs are expensed under generally accepted accounting principles
and deferred under federal cost accounting standards. additionally, the
amortization of costs capitalized in accordance with sfas no. 34,
capitalization of interest cost, is included in the accounting
differences/eliminations caption.
unallocated expense
includes corporate costs not allocated to the operating segments, including, for
the period ended december 31, 2001, goodwill amortization resulting from
acquisitions prior to 1998. for the period ended december 31, 2002, unallocated
expense does not include goodwill amortization as a result of the company
adopting sfas no. 142, as described in note 5. unallocated expense also includes
the recognition of an expense or a reduction to expense for deferred stock
compensation plans resulting from stock price changes as described in note 17.
the cost attributable to share-based plans expense is not allocated to other
business segments except for the portion related to bcc. depreciation and
amortization relate primarily to shared services assets.
in-process research and
development for the year ended december 31, 2000, included $505 associated with
the space and communications segment and $52 associated with the commercial
airplanes segment.
unallocated assets
primarily consist of cash and short-term investments, prepaid pension expense,
goodwill acquired prior to 1997, deferred tax assets, and capitalized interest.
unallocated liabilities include various accrued employee compensation and
benefit liabilities, including accrued retiree health care, income taxes payable,
and debentures and notes payable. unallocated capital expenditures relate
primarily to shared services assets. the segment assets, liabilities, capital
expenditures and backlog are summarized in the tables below.
- 85 -
assets
december 31,
commercial airplanes
$
9,726
$
10,851
$
10,367
military aircraft and missile systems
2,232
2,162
2,950
space and communications
10,521
10,299
9,629
boeing capital corporation
11,840
9,250
5,391
other
3,213
1,686
1,854
unallocated
14,810
14,730
13,313
$
52,342
$
48,978
$
43,504
liabilities
december 31,
commercial airplanes
$
6,051
$
8,211
$
8,539
military aircraft and missile systems
1,499
1,297
1,104
space and communications
3,406
3,123
2,903
boeing capital corporation
other
unallocated
32,759
24,474
19,698
$
44,646
$
38,153
$
32,484
capital expenditures, net
year ended december 31,
commercial airplanes
$
$
$
military aircraft and missile systems
space and communications
boeing capital corporation
other
unallocated
$
1,001
$
1,189
$
1,965
contractual backlog(unaudited)
december 31,
commercial airplanes
$
68,159
$
75,850
$
89,780
military aircraft and missile systems
21,073
17,630
17,113
space and communications
14,941
13,111
13,707
$
104,173
$
106,591
$
120,600
- 86 -
quarterly financial data (unaudited)
(dollars in millions except per share data)
quarter
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
sales and other operating revenues
$
13,701
$
12,690
$
13,857
$
13,821
$
15,702
$
13,686
$
15,516
$
13,293
earnings from operations
1,039
1,275
1,066
1,367
1,218
net earnings before cumulative effectof accounting change
1,236
cumulative effect of accountingchange, net of tax
(1,827)
net earnings (loss)
(1,249)
1,237
total comprehensive income
(3,048)
(1,210)
(297)
1,213
basic earnings per share before
cumulative effect of accounting change
0.74
0.47
0.97
0.72
0.13
0.81
1.02
1.48
cumulative effect of accountingchange, net of tax
(2.28)
basic earnings (loss) per share
0.74
0.47
0.97
(1.56)
0.13
0.81
1.02
1.48
diluted earnings per share before
cumulative effect of accounting change
0.73
0.46
0.96
0.72
0.12
0.80
0.99
1.45
cumulative effect of accountingchange, net of tax
(2.26)
diluted earnings (loss) per share
0.73
0.46
0.96
(1.54)
0.12
0.80
0.99
1.45
cash dividends paid per share
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.17
market price:
high
36.02
45.28
50.05
51.07
39.42
59.80
69.85
65.60
low
28.53
33.20
41.00
37.65
31.58
27.60
53.92
49.70
quarter end
32.99
34.13
45.00
48.25
38.78
33.50
55.60
55.71
- 87 -
independent
auditors report
board of directors and shareholders
the boeing company
chicago, illinois
we have audited the
accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of the boeing company
and subsidiaries (the company) as of december 31, 2002 and 2001, and
the related consolidated statements of operations, shareholders equity,
and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31,
2002. these financial statements are the responsibility of the companys
management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits.
we conducted our audits in
accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the united states of
america. those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. an audit also includes
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
in our opinion, the
consolidated financial statements (located at pages 33-36 and
pages 59-83) referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the boeing company and subsidiaries as of
december 31, 2002 and 2001, and the results of their operations and their cash
flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2002, in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america.
as discussed in note 5 and
note 19 to the consolidated financial statements, the company changed its method
of accounting for goodwill and other intangible assets effective january 1, 2002
to conform to statement of financial accounting standards no. 142, goodwill
and other intangible assets, and its method of accounting for derivative
financial instruments effective january 1, 2001 to conform to statement of
financial accounting standards no. 133, accounting for derivative instruments
and hedging activities, as amended.
/s/deloitte & touche, llp
deloitte & touche, llp
chicago, illinois
january 30, 2003
- 88 -
report of
management
to the shareholders of the boeing company:
the accompanying
consolidated financial statements of the boeing company and subsidiaries have
been prepared by management who are responsible for their integrity and
objectivity. the statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united states of america and include
amounts based on managements best estimates and judgments. financial
information elsewhere in this annual report is consistent with that in the
financial statements.
management has established
and maintains a system of internal control designed to provide reasonable
assurance that errors or irregularities that could be material to the financial
statements are prevented or would be detected within a timely period. in
addition, management also has established and maintains a system of disclosure
controls designed to provide reasonable assurance that information required to
be disclosed is accumulated and reported in an accurate and timely manner. the
systems of internal control and disclosure control include widely communicated
statements of policies and business practices which are designed to require all
employees to maintain high ethical standards in the conduct of company affairs.
the internal controls and disclosure controls are augmented by organizational
arrangements that provide for appropriate delegation of authority and division
of responsibility and by a program of internal audit with management follow-up.
the financial statements
have been audited by deloitte & touche llp, independent certified public
accountants. their audit was conducted in accordance with auditing standards
generally accepted in the united states of america and included a review of
internal controls and selective tests of transactions. the independent
auditors report appears in this report.
the audit committee of the
board of directors, composed entirely of outside directors, meets periodically
with the independent certified public accountants, management and internal
auditors to review accounting, auditing, internal accounting controls,
litigation and financial reporting matters. the independent certified public
accountants and the internal auditors have free access to this committee without
management present.
philip m. condit
michael m. sears
james a. bell
chairman of the board and chiefexecutive officer
executive vice presidentoffice of the chairman andchief financial officer
senior vice president finance andcorporate controller
- 89 -
item 9. changesin and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
part iii
item 10. directorsand executive officers
of the registrant
no family relationships
exist among any of the executive officers, directors or director nominees. the
directors and executive officers of the company as of february 27, 2003, are as
follows:
directors
name
age
positions and offices held and business experience
philip m. condit
chairman of the board since february 1997. chief executive officer since
april 1996. president from august 1992 through january 1997. also a director of hewlett-packard company.
kenneth m. duberstein
chairman and chief executive officer of the duberstein group
(consulting firm) since 1989.  white house chief of staff in 1988 and
1989. also a director of conocophillips, fannie mae, fleming
companies, inc., and st. paul companies and a governor of the
american stock exchange and the nasd, inc.
w. james mcnerney, jr.
chairman and chief executive officer of 3m since january 1, 2001.
since 1982, served in management positions at general electric
company, with his most recent position being president and chief
executive officer of ge aircraft engines, 1997-2000.
lewis e. platt
president and chief executive officer of hewlett-packard company
(measurement, computing and communications equipment) from november 1992 until
july 1999, and director and chairman from september 1993 until his retirement in
december 1999. in 1995, appointed to the advisory committee on trade policy
negotiations by president clinton. chief executive officer and a director of
kendall-jackson wine estates limited until june 2001. also a director of
7-eleven, inc. and serves on the wharton school board of overseers and as a
trustee of the david and lucile packard foundation.
paul e. gray
president emeritus and professor of electrical engineering at
massachusetts institute of technology (mit). prior thereto, chairman of the
corporation of mit (education) from 1990 to 1997 and president from 1980 until
1990.
john f. mcdonnell
chairman of mcdonnell douglas corporation (aerospace) from 1988 until
its merger with boeing in 1997 and chief executive officer from 1988
to 1994. also a director of zoltek companies, inc. and chairman of
the board of trustees of washington university in st. louis.
john m. shalikashvili
retired chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, u.s. department of
defense. prior thereto, the thirteenth chairman of the joint chiefs
of staff (armed forces) from 1993 to 1997. previously, he served as
commander in chief of all u.s. forces in europe and as nato's tenth
supreme allied commander in europe. general shalikashvili is a
visiting professor at stanford university's center for international
security and cooperation. additionally, he serves as a director of
frank russell trust company, l-3 communications holdings, inc., plug
power inc., and united defense industries inc.
harry c. stonecipher
served as vice chairman of the board from may 2001 until july 2002 and as
president and chief operating officer of boeing from 1997 until may
2001. mr. stonecipher served as president and chief executive officer of
mcdonnell douglas corporation (aerospace) from 1994 until its merger with
boeing in 1997. he was chairman of the board, president and chief
executive officer of sundstrand corporation (aerospace) from 1991 to
1994. mr. stonecipher is also a director of milacron, inc. and paccar,
inc.
john h. biggs
chairman and chief executive of tiaa-cref (national teachers' pension
fund) from january 1993 until november 2002. trustee of washington
university in st. louis, an at-large trustee of the international
accounting standards board foundation.
john e. bryson
chairman of the board, president and chief executive officer, edison
international. chairman and chief executive officer of edison
international and predecessor companies since 1990. director of the walt
disney company, w.m. keck foundation, and pacific american income shares,
inc.
rozanne l. ridgway
former assistant secretary of state for europe and canada. prior
thereto, co-chair of the atlantic council of the united states (an association
to promote better understanding of international issues) from 1993 to 1996 and
was its president from 1989 through 1992. served 32 years with the u. s. state
department, including service as ambassador to the german democratic republic
and to finland, and, from 1985 until her retirement in 1989, as assistant
secretary of state for europe and canada. also a director of emerson electric
company, 3m, the sara lee corporation, the new perspective fund, and manpower,
inc. trustee of national geographic society and the center for naval analyses.
- 90 -
executive officers
name
age
positions and offices held and business experience
philip m. condit
chairman of the board since february 1997. chief executive officer since
april 1996. president from august 1992 through january 1997. also a director of hewlett-packard company.
james f. albaugh
executive vice president of boeing since august 2002. president
and ceo, integrated defense systems since july 2002. prior thereto, senior vice
president of boeing, president, space and communications group from september
1998 (named ceo of space and communications group in march 2001). prior thereto,
president, boeing space transportation from april 1998. prior thereto, president
of rocketdyne propulsion and power, now a business of integrated defense
systems, from march 1997.
douglas g. bain
senior vice president and general counsel since august 2000. prior
thereto, vice president and general counsel from november 1999. prior
thereto, vice president of legal, contracts, ethics and government
relations for boeing commercial airplanes group from 1996.
scott carson
senior vice president of the company and president, connexion by
boeing since november 2000. prior thereto, executive vice president and chief
financial officer of boeing commercial airplanes group, from september 1998.
prior thereto, executive vice president of business resources for boeing
information, space and defense systems from november 1997. prior thereto,
executive vice president of boeing commercial space company.
rudy f. de leon
senior vice president-government relations, washington, d.c. operations since july
2001. prior thereto, deputy secretary of defense (2000-2001). prior thereto, under
secretary of defense for personnel and readiness, from 1997-2000. confirmed as
under secretary of the air force (1994-1997). served as the special assistant to
secretary of defense (1993-1994).
john b. hayhurst
senior vice president of the company and president, air traffic
management since november 2000. prior thereto, vice president of business
development for the commercial aviation services unit of boeing commercial
airplanes group from june 2000. prior thereto, vice president and general
manager of 737 programs and general manager of the renton, wa production site
from october 1998. prior thereto, vice president and general manager of north
and south america sales from february 1997. prior thereto, vice president and
general manager of the 747x program from june 1996. prior thereto, vice
president of boeing commercial airplane group product development from december
1994.
laurette t. koellner
chief people and administration officer, executive vice president
since august 2002. member of the office of the chairman since march 2002. prior
thereto, chief people and administration officer, senior vice president, from
march 2002. prior thereto, senior vice president of the company and president,
shared services group from november 2000. prior thereto, vice president and
corporate controller from march 1999. prior thereto, vice president and general
auditor from august 1997. prior thereto, vice president of auditing at mcdonnell
douglas corporation from may 1996. prior thereto, division director of human
resources at mcdonnell douglas aerospace company from may 1994. current director
of exostar and sara lee corporation.
alan r. mulally
executive vice president, president and ceo, commercial airplanes
since august 2002. prior thereto, senior vice president of the company from
february 1997 and president of boeing commercial airplanes group from september
1998 (named ceo of boeing commercial airplanes group in march 2001). prior
thereto, president of boeing information, space & defense systems from
august 1997 through august 1998. prior thereto, president of boeing defense
& space group from january 1997. prior thereto, senior vice president of
airplane development and definition, boeing commercial airplane group from 1994.
james f. palmer
senior vice president of the company and president, boeing capital corporation
since november 2000. prior thereto, senior vice president of the company and president
of shared services group from august 1997. prior thereto, senior vice president
and chief financial officer of mcdonnell douglas corporation from july 1995.
thomas r. pickering
senior vice president, international relations since january
2001. prior thereto, u.s. under secretary of state for political affairs from may
1997. prior thereto, president of the eurasia foundation, which makes grants and
loans in the states of the former soviet union, from december 1996 through april
1997. prior thereto, u.s. ambassador to the russian federation from may 1993
through november 1996.
michael m. sears
executive vice president and chief financial officer since august
2002. member of the office of the chairman since march 2002. prior thereto,
senior vice president and chief financial officer of the company from may 2000.
prior thereto, senior vice president of the company and president, military
aircraft and missiles systems group from september 1998. prior thereto,
executive vice president of boeing information, space & defense systems, and
president of mcdonnell aircraft and missile systems from august 1997. prior
thereto, president of mcdonnell douglas aerospace from february 1997. prior
thereto, president of douglas aircraft company from april 1996.
bonnie w. soodik
senior vice president of the company, and president, shared services group
since march 2002. prior thereto, vice president of human resources for boeing
space and communications group. prior thereto, vice president and general
manager of shared services group. prior thereto, vice president of product
assurance and services at aircraft & missiles from april 1997. prior thereto,
vice president of quality at douglas aircraft from 1995.
david o. swain
executive vice president and chief technology officer since august
2002. member of office of the chairman since march 2002. prior thereto, senior
vice president of engineering & technology of the company since september
1999 and chief technology officer of the company since june 2001. prior thereto,
president of phantom works from 1999. prior thereto, vice president of
engineering of the company and executive vice president of phantom works from
1997. prior thereto, vice president and general manager of advanced systems and
technology-phantom works, mcdonnell douglas corporation from 1994.
- 91 -
other information required
by item 10 involving the identification and election of directors is
incorporated herein by reference to the registrants definitive proxy
statement, which will be filed with the commission within 120 days after the
close of the fiscal year.
item 11.
executive compensation *
item 12. security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management *
item 13. certain
relationships and related transactions *
*
certain information required
by items 5, 11, 12 and 13 is incorporated herein by reference
to the registrants definitive proxy statement, which will be filed with
the commission within 120 days after the close of the fiscal year.
item 14.
controls and procedures
(a)
evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures.
the company's
principal executive officer and its principal financial officer, based on their
evaluation of the company's disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act
rules 13a -14 (c)) as of a date within 90 days prior to the filing of this
annual report on form 10-k, have concluded that the company's disclosure controls
and procedures are adequate and effective for the purposes set forth in the
definition in exchange act rules.
(b)
changes in internal controls.
there were no
significant changes in the company's internal controls or in other factors that could significantly
affect the company's internal controls subsequent to the date of their evaluation.
- 92 -
part iv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
(a)
list of documents
filed as part of this report:
1.
financial statements
all consolidated financial statements of the company as set forth under item 8 of
this report on form 10-k.
2.
financial statement schedules
schedule
description
page
ii
valuation and qualifying accounts
the
auditors report with respect to the above-listed financial statement
schedule appears in exhibit 23 of this report. all other financial statements and
schedules not listed are omitted either because they are not applicable, not
required, or the required information is included in the consolidated financial
statements.
- 93 -
3. exhibits
(2)
plan of acquisition, reorganization,
arrangement, liquidation or succession.
(i)
agreement and plan of merger dated
as of july 31, 1996, among rockwell international
corporation, the boeing company and boeing na, inc. (exhibit 2.1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-4 (file no. 333-15001) filed october 29, 1996
(herein referred to as form s-4).)
(ii)
agreement and plan
of merger, dated as of december 14, 1996, among the boeing company,
west acquisition corp. and mcdonnell douglas corporation. (exhibit (2)(ii) to the
company's annual report on form 10-k (file no. 1-442) for the year ended december 31,
1996, (herein referred to as "1996 form 10-k").)
(3)
articles of
incorporation and by-laws.
(i)
restated
certificate of incorporation, filed with the secretary of state of delaware
on august 14, 1997. (exhibit (3)(iii) to the company's form 10-q for the quarter ended
june 30, 1997.)
(ii)
by-laws, as
amended and restated on june 25, 2001. (exhibit (3)(i) to the company's
form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2001.)
(4)
instruments defining
the rights of security holders, including indentures.
(i)
indenture, dated
as of august 15, 1991, between the company and the chase manhattan
bank (national association), trustee. (exhibit (4) to the company's current report on
form 8-k (file no. 1-442) dated august 27, 1991.)
(10)
material contracts.
the boeing company bank credit agreements.
(i)
u.s. $3 billion 364-day
credit agreement dated as of november 22, 2002, among the
boeing company, as borrower, the lenders party thereto, salomon smith barney inc. and
jpmorgan securities inc., as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, the
jpmorgan chase bank, as syndication agent, and citibank, n.a., as administrative
agent for the lenders. filed herewith.
(ii)
u.s. $700 million five-year credit agreement dated as of september 27, 2000, among the boeing company,
as borrower, the lenders party thereto, salomon smith barney inc. and chase
securities, inc., as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, the chase manhattan
bank, as syndication agent, and citibank, n.a., as administrative agent for the
lenders. (exhibit (10) (ii) (bank credit agreements) to the company's form 10-q for
the quarter ended september 30, 2000.)
(iii)
u.s. $ one billion five hundred million (reduced to $ eight hundred million) 7-year bank credit
agreement among the boeing company, as borrower, the banks party thereto, citibank,
n.a., as administrative agent, and he chase manhattan bank, as syndication agent,
dated as of december 8, 1997. (exhibit (10)(i) to the company's annual report on form
10-k (file no. 1-442) for the year ended december 31, 1997 (herein referred to as
"1997 form 10-k").)
management contracts and compensatory plans.
(iv)
1988 stock option plan.
(a)
plan, as amended on december 14, 1992. (exhibit (10)(vii)(a) of the company's annual report on form 10-k
for the year ended december 31, 1992 (herein referred to as "1992 form 10-k").)
(b)
form of notice of terms of stock
option grant. (exhibit (10)(vii)(b) of the 1992 form 10-k.)
(v)
1992 stock option plan for nonemployee directors.
(a)
plan. (exhibit (19) of the
company's form 10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 1992.)
(b)
form of stock option agreement.
(exhibit (10)(viii)(b) of the 1992 form 10-k.)
(vi)
supplemental benefit
plan for employees of the boeing company, as amended on february 22, 1998. (exhibit (10)(i)
of the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended
march 31, 1998 (herein referred to as 1st quarter 1998 form 10-q).)
(vii)
supplemental retirement
plan for executives of the boeing company. (exhibit (10)(ii)
of the company's form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 1997.)
(viii)
deferred compensation
plan for employees of the boeing company, as amended on february
23, 1998. (exhibit (10)(ii) to the 1st quarter 1998 form 10-q.)
- 94 -
(ix)
deferred compensation
plan for directors of the boeing company, as amended on august 29, 2000. (exhibit (10)(i)
(management contracts) to the company's form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2000.)
(x)
1993 incentive stock plan for employees.
(a)
plan, as amended on
december 13, 1993. (exhibit (10)(ix)(a) to the company's
annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 1993 (herein referred
to as "1993 form 10-k").)
(b)
form of notice of stock option grant.
(i)
regular annual grant.
(exhibit (10)(ix)(b)(i) to the 1993 form 10-k.)
(ii)
supplemental grant.
(exhibit (10)(ix)(b)(ii) to the 1993 form 10-k.)
(xi)
incentive compensation
plan for officers and employees of the company and
subsidiaries, as amended on april 28, 1997. (exhibit (10)(i) to the company's form
10-q for the quarter ended march 31, 1997.)
(xii)
1997 incentive stock
plan, as amended on may 1, 2000. (exhibit 99.1 of the company's
registration statement on form s-8 (file no. 333-41920), filed july 21, 2000.)
(xiii)
employment agreement
with harry c. stonecipher dated august 1, 1997. (exhibit (10)(i)
to the company's form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 1997.)
(a)
amendment no. 1, dated as
of june 26, 2000, to employment agreement with harry c. stonecipher dated august 1, 1997.
(exhibit (10)(i) to the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2000.)
(xiv)
boeing company executive
layoff benefits plan, as amended on june 28, 1999. (exhibit
(10) to the company's form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 1999.)
(xv)
the mcdonnell douglas
1994 performance and equity incentive plan. (exhibit 99.1 of
registration statement no. 333-32567 on form s-8 filed on july 31, 1997.)
(xvi)
the boeing company
sharevalue program, as amended on december 20, 1996. (exhibit
(10)(xiii) to the 1996 form 10-k.)
(xvii)
stock purchase and restriction agreement dated as of july 1, 1996, between the boeing
company and wachovia bank of north carolina, n.a. as trustee, under the sharevalue
trust agreement dated as of july 1, 1996. (exhibit 10.20 to the form s-4.)
(xviii)
1999 bonus and retention
award plan, as adopted on april 26, 1999. (exhibit (10)(ii)
to the company's form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2000.)
(xix)
supplemental pension
agreement with michael m. sears, dated february 16, 2000.
(exhibit (10)(xxiii) to the company's annual report on form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 1999.)
(xx)
restricted stock
unit grant agreement with james f. albaugh, dated december 7, 1999.
(exhibit (10)(xix) to the company's annual report on form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2000.)
(xxi)
restricted stock
unit grant agreement with alan r. mulally, dated june 30, 1998.
(exhibit (10)(xx) to the company's annual report on form 10-k for the year ended
december 31, 2000.)
(xxii)
restricted stock unit
grant agreement with michael m. sears, effective as of october 18, 1999. (exhibit
(10)(xxi) to the company's annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2000.)
(xxiii)
the boeing company
executive layoff benefits plan as amended and restated effective april 1, 2001.
(exhibit (10)(i) to the company's form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 2001.)
(12)
computation of ratio of
earnings to fixed charges.
(13)
portions of the 2002
annual report to shareholders incorporated by reference herein. filed
herewith.
(21)
list of company subsidiaries.
(23)
independent auditors'
consent and report on financial statement schedule for use in connection
with filings on form s-8 and on form s-3 under the securities act of 1933.
(99)
additional exhibits
(i)
commercial program method
of accounting. (exhibit (99)(i) to the 1997 form 10-k.)
(ii)
post-merger combined
statements of operations and financial position. (exhibit (99)(i) to the
company's form 10-q for the quarter ended june 30, 1997.)
(iii)
certification of
chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of sarbanes-oxley act of 2002. filed
herewith as exhibit (99.1).
(iv)
certification of chief
financial officer pursuant to section 906 of sarbanes-oxley act of 2002. filed
herewith as exhibit (99.2).
(b)
reports on form 8-k filed
during the quarter ended december 31, 2002:
on october 4, 2002, the
company filed a form 8-k to announce that it updated its
assessment of its financing units portfolio and would recognize, on a
pre-tax basis, certain non-cash charges which will reduce operating earnings
approximately $250 million for the quarter ending september 30, 2002.
on october 21, 2002,
the company filed a form 8-k to announce it had revised its
procedure for establishing requirements of, and internal responsibilities for,
the companys process for doing business with foreign sales consultants and
to highlight the significant changes implemented by the revised procedure.
- 95 -
signatures
pursuant to the requirements
of section 13 of the securities exchange act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on the date indicated.
the boeing
company(registrant)
by:
/s/philip m. condit
by:
/s/michael m. sears
philip m. condit - chairman of the board,
chief executive officer and director
michael m. sears - executive vice
president, office of the chairman and
chief financial officer
by:
/s/james a. bell
james a. bell - senior vice president
finance and corporate controller
date:february 24, 2003
pursuant to the
requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities
and on the date indicated.
/s/john h. biggs
/s/w. james mcnerney, jr.
john h. biggs - director
w. james mcnerney, jr. - director
/s/john e. bryson
/s/lewis e. platt
john e. bryson - director
lewis e. platt - director
/s/kenneth m. duberstein
/s/rozanne l. ridgway
kenneth m. duberstein - director
rozanne l. ridgway - director
/s/paul e. gray
/s/john m. shalikashvili
paul e. gray - director
john m. shalikashvili - director
/s/john f. mcdonnell
/s/harry c. stonecipher
john f. mcdonnell - director
harry c. stonecipher - director
- 96 -
the boeing company
certification pursuant to
rule 13a-14 of the securities exchange act of 1934,
as adopted pursuant to
section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certification
i, philip m. condit, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed
this annual report on form 10-k of the boeing company;
2.
based on my knowledge,
this annual report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to
state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge,
the financial statements, and other financial information included in this annual
report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows
of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual report;
4.
the registrant's
other certifying officer and i are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act rules 13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and have:
a)
designed such disclosure
controls and procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness
of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures as of a date within 90
days prior to the filing date of this annual report (the "evaluation date"); and
c)
presented in this annual
report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrant's
other certifying officer and i have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors
(or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
all significant deficiencies
in the design or operation of internal controls which could adversely affect
the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data
and have identified for the registrant's auditors any material weaknesses in internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not
material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role
in the registrant's internal controls; and
6.
the registrant's
other certifying officer and i have indicated in this annual report whether there were
significant changes in internal controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal controls
subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including any corrective actions with regard to
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date:february 24, 2003
/s/philip m. condit
philip m. condit
chairman of the board,
chief executive officer and director
- 97 -
the boeing company
certification pursuant to
rule 13a-14 of the securities exchange act of 1934,
as adopted pursuant to
section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002
certification
i, michael m. sears, certify that:
1.
i have reviewed
this annual report on form 10-k of the boeing company;
2.
based on my knowledge,
this annual report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to
state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual report;
3.
based on my knowledge,
the financial statements, and other financial information included in this annual
report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows
of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual report;
4.
the registrant's
other certifying officer and i are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act rules 13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and have:
a)
designed such disclosure
controls and procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)
evaluated the effectiveness
of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures as of a date within 90
days prior to the filing date of this annual report (the "evaluation date"); and
c)
presented in this annual
report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5.
the registrant's
other certifying officer and i have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation, to the
registrant's auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors
(or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
all significant deficiencies
in the design or operation of internal controls which could adversely affect
the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data
and have identified for the registrant's auditors any material weaknesses in internal controls; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not
material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role
in the registrant's internal controls; and
6.
the registrant's
other certifying officer and i have indicated in this annual report whether there were
significant changes in internal controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal controls
subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including any corrective actions with regard to
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
date:february 24, 2003
/s/michael m. sears
michael m. sears
executive vice president,
office of the chairman and
chief financial officer
- 98 -
schedule ii
- valuation and qualifying accounts
the boeing
company and subsidiaries
allowance for doubtful accounts and customer financing
(deducted from assets to which they apply)
(dollars in millions)
balance at january 1
$
$
$
charges to costs and expenses
deductions from reserves (accounts charged off)
(30)
(91)
(151)
balance at december 31
$
$
$
- 99 -
