10-k
a201412dec3110k.htm
10-k
2014 12 dec 31 10k
united statessecurities and exchange commissionwashington, d.c. 20549form 10-k(mark one)xannual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934for the fiscal year ended december31, 2014 ortransition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934for the transition period from  to commission file number 1-442the boeing company(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)delaware91-0425694state or other jurisdiction ofincorporation or organization(i.r.s. employer identification no.)100 n. riverside plaza, chicago, il60606-1596(address of principal executive offices)(zip code)registrants telephone number, including area code (312)544-2000securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:common stock, $5 par valuenew york stock exchange(title of each class)(name of each exchange on which registered)securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act.yesx no indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the act.yes no xindicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yesxno indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t ( 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). yesx no indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k (229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form10-k. xindicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.large accelerated filer xacceleratedfiler non-accelerated filer (do not check if a smaller reporting company)smallerreportingcompany indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act).yesno xas of june30, 2014, there were 721,356,642 common shares outstanding held by nonaffiliates of the registrant, and the aggregate market value of the common shares (based upon the closing price of these shares on the new york stock exchange) was approximately $91.8 billion.the number of shares of the registrants common stock outstanding as of february5, 2015 was 704,387,613.documents incorporated by referencepart iii incorporates information by reference to the registrants definitive proxy statement, to be filed with the securities and exchange commission within 120 days after the close of the fiscal year ended december31, 2014.the boeing companyindex to the form 10-kfor the fiscal year ended december31, 2014part ipageitem1.business1item1a.risk factors6item1b.unresolved staff comments15item2.properties16item3.legal proceedings16item4.mine safety disclosures16partiiitem5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities17item6.selected financial data18item7.managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations19item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk46item8.financial statements and supplementary data47item9.changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure111item9a.controls and procedures111item9b.other information111part iiiitem10.directors, executive officers and corporate governance112item11.executive compensation114item12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters115item13.certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence115item14.principal accounting fees and services115part ivitem15.exhibits, financial statement schedules116signatures120part iitem1. businessthe boeing company, together with its subsidiaries (herein referred to as boeing, the company, we, us, our), is one of the worlds major aerospace firms.we are organized based on the products and services we offer. we operate in five principal segments:commercial airplanes;our defense, space & security (bds) business comprises three segments:boeing military aircraft (bma),network& space systems (n&ss) andglobal services& support (gs&s); andboeing capital (bcc).the unallocated activities of engineering, operations& technology (eo&t) and shared services group (ssg), corporate and intercompany guarantees provided to bcc are included in unallocated items, eliminations and other. eo&t provides boeing with technical and functional capabilities, including information technology, research and development, test and evaluation, technology strategy development, environmental remediation management and intellectual property management.commercial airplanes segmentthe commercial airplanes segment develops, produces and markets commercial jet aircraft and provides related support services, principally to the commercial airline industry worldwide. we are a leading producer of commercial aircraft and offer a family of commercial jetliners designed to meet a broad spectrum of global passenger and cargo requirements of airlines. this family of commercial jet aircraft in production includes the 737 narrow-body model and the 747, 767, 777 and 787 wide-body models. development continues on the 787-10 and 737 max derivatives. in november 2013, we launched the 777x, which features a new composite wing, new engines and folding wing-tips all designed to deliver greater efficiency and significant fuel savings. the commercial airplanes segment also offers aviation services support, aircraft modifications, spare parts, training, maintenance documents and technical advice to commercial and government customers worldwide.defense, space& securityour bds operations principally involve research, development, production, modification and support of the products and related systems as described below. bds' primary customer is the united states department of defense (u.s. dod) with approximately 65% of bds 2014 revenues being derived from this customer (excluding foreign military sales through the u.s. government). other significant bds revenues were derived from the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), international defense markets, civil markets and commercial satellite markets. bds consists of three capabilities-driven businesses: bma, n&ss and gs&s.additionally, the phantom works group is an integrated team that works with the three businesses via product development, rapid prototyping and customer engagement through experimentation and enterprise technology investment strategies.boeing military aircraft segmentthis segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of manned and unmanned military aircraft and weapons systems for global strike, including fighter aircraft and missile 1table of contentssystems; vertical lift, including rotorcraft and tilt-rotor aircraft; unmanned airborne systems programs; and mobility, surveillance and engagement, including command and control, battle management, airborne, anti-submarine, transport and tanker aircraft. the major programs in this segment include for global strike: ea-18g growler airborne electronic attack, f/a-18e/f super hornet, f-15 strike eagle and joint direct attack munition; for vertical lift: ch-47 chinook, ah-64 apache, and v-22 osprey; for unmanned airborne systems programs: scaneagle; and for mobility, surveillance and engagement: c-17 globemaster iii, p-8a poseidon, india p-8i, and kc-46a tanker. the c-17 globemaster iii program is scheduled to end production in late 2015. network& space systems segmentthis segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of the following products and related services: electronics and information solutions, including command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (c4isr), cyber and information solutions, and intelligence systems; strategic missile and defense systems; space and intelligence systems, including satellites and commercial satellite launch vehicles; and space exploration. the major programs in this segment include for strategic missile and defense systems: ground-based midcourse defense (gmd); for space and intelligence systems: commercial, civil and military satellites; and for space exploration: space launch system (sls), commercial crew and international space station. this segment also includes our joint venture operations related to united launch alliance. global services& support segmentthis segment provides customers with mission readiness through total support solutions. our global services business sustains aircraft and systems with a full spectrum of products and services through integrated logistics, including supply chain management and engineering support; maintenance, modification and upgrades for aircraft; and training systems and government services, including pilot and maintenance training. gs&s international operations include boeing defence u.k. ltd., and boeing defence australia, as well as alsalam aircraft company, aviation training international, ltd and boeing sikorsky international services llc, joint ventures.integrated logistics comprises an integrated array of services that address the complete life cycle of aircraft and systems. major programs include the f/a-18e/f support program and domestic and international performance based logistic programs for the ah-64 apache, ch-47 chinook and other bds platforms.maintenance, modification and upgrades for aircraft are performed at centers throughout the united states and around the world, providing rapid cycle time and aircraft services for military customers on a wide variety of bds and non-bds platforms. major support programs include the c-17 globemaster iii integrated sustainment program and f-15 support programs for the united states air force (usaf) and several international customers. aircraft programs include the airborne early warningand control (aew&c) peace eagle contract with turkey and airborne warning and control systems (awacs) program.training systems and government services comprise a full range of training capabilities for domestic and international customers, including the design and development of trainers for multiple aircraft platforms and logistics and asset management solutions.2table of contentsboeing capital segmentbcc ensures that boeing customers have the financing they need to buy and take delivery of their boeing product and manages overall financing exposure. bccs portfolio consists of equipment under operating leases, finance leases, notes and other receivables, assets held for sale or re-lease and investments. financial and other business informationsee the summary of business segment data and note 21 to our consolidated financial statements for financial information, including revenues and earnings from operations, for each of our business segments.intellectual propertywe own numerous patents and have licenses for the use of patents owned by others, which relate to our products and their manufacture. in addition to owning a large portfolio of intellectual property, we also license intellectual property to and from third parties. for example, the u.s. government has licenses in our patents that are developed in performance of government contracts, and it may use or authorize others to use the inventions covered by such patents for government purposes. unpatented research, development and engineering skills, as well as certain trademarks, trade secrets, and other intellectual property rights, also make an important contribution to our business. while our intellectual property rights in the aggregate are important to the operation of each of our businesses, we do not believe that our business would be materially affected by the expiration of any particular intellectual property right or termination of any particular intellectual property patent license agreement.non-u.s. revenuessee note 21 to our consolidated financial statements for information regarding non-u.s. revenues.research and developmentresearch and development expenditures involve experimentation, design, development and related test activities for defense systems, new and derivative jet aircraft including both commercial and military, advanced space and other company-sponsored product development. these are expensed as incurred including amounts allocable as reimbursable overhead costs on u.s. government contracts.our total research and development expense, net amounted to $3.0 billion, $3.1 billion and $3.3 billion in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.research and development costs also include bid and proposal efforts related to government products and services, as well as costs incurred in excess of amounts estimated to be recoverable under cost-sharing research and development agreements. bid and proposal costs were $289 million, $285 million and $326 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.3table of contentsemployeestotal workforce level at december31, 2014 was approximately 165,500.as of december31, 2014, our principal collective bargaining agreements were with the following unions:unionpercentofour employees representedstatus of the agreements with major unionthe international association of machinists and aerospace workers (iam)21%we have two major agreements; one expiring in june 2022 and one in september 2024.the society of professional engineering employees in aerospace (speea)13%we have two major agreements expiring in october 2016.the united automobile, aerospace and agricultural implement workers of america (uaw)1%we have one major agreement expiring in september 2015 and one in october 2022.competitionthe commercial jet aircraft market and the airline industry remain extremely competitive. we face aggressive international competitors who are intent on increasing their market share, such as airbus, embraer and bombardier, and other entrants from russia, china and japan. we are focused on improving our processes and continuing cost reduction efforts. we intend to continue to compete with other airplane manufacturers by providing customers with greater value products, services, and support. we continue to leverage our extensive customer support services network which spans the life cycle of the airplane: aircraft acquisition, readying for service, maintenance and engineering, enhancing and upgrading, and transitioning to the next model - as well as the daily cycle of gate-to-gate operations. this enables us to provide a high level of customer satisfaction and productivity.bds faces strong competition in all market segments, primarily from lockheed martin corporation, northrop grumman corporation, raytheon company and general dynamics corporation. non-u.s. companies such as bae systems and airbus group, continue to build a strategic presence in the u.s. market by strengthening their north american operations and partnering with u.s. defense companies. in addition, certain competitors have occasionally formed teams with other competitors to address specific customer requirements. bds expects the trend of strong competition to continue into 2015.regulatory mattersour businesses are heavily regulated in most of our markets. we deal with numerous u.s. government agencies and entities, including but not limited to all of the branches of the u.s. military, nasa, the federal aviation administration (faa) and the department of homeland security. similar government authorities exist in our international markets.government contracts. the u.s. government, and other governments, may terminate any of our government contracts at their convenience, as well as for default, based on our failure to meet specified performance requirements. if any of our u.s. government contracts were to be terminated for convenience, we generally would be entitled to receive payment for work completed and allowable termination or cancellation costs. if any of our government contracts were to be terminated for default, generally the u.s. government would pay only for the work that has been accepted and could require us to pay the difference between the original contract price and the cost to re-procure the contract items, net of the work accepted from the original contract. the u.s. government can also hold us liable for damages resulting from the default.4table of contentscommercial aircraft. in the u.s., our commercial aircraft products are required to comply with faa regulations governing production and quality systems, airworthiness and installation approvals, repair procedures and continuing operational safety. internationally, similar requirements exist for airworthiness, installation and operational approvals. these requirements are generally administered by the national aviation authorities of each country and, in the case of europe, coordinated by the european joint aviation authorities.environmental. we are subject to various federal, state, local and non-u.s. laws and regulations relating to environmental protection, including the discharge, treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. we continually assess our compliance status and management of environmental matters to ensure our operations are in substantial compliance with all applicable environmental laws and regulations. investigation, remediation, operation and maintenance costs associated with environmental compliance and management of sites are a normal, recurring part of our operations. these costs often are allowable costs under our contracts with the u.s. government. it is reasonably possible that costs incurred to ensure continued environmental compliance could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition or cash flows if additional work requirements or more stringent clean-up standards are imposed by regulators, new areas of soil, air and groundwater contamination are discovered and/or expansions of work scope are prompted by the results of investigations.a potentially responsible party (prp) has joint and several liability under existing u.s. environmental laws. where we have been designated a prp by the environmental protection agency or a state environmental agency, we are potentially liable to the government or third parties for the full cost of remediating contamination at our facilities or former facilities or at third-party sites. if we were required to fully fund the remediation of a site for which we were originally assigned a partial share, the statutory framework would allow us to pursue rights to contribution from other prps. for additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.international. our international sales are subject to u.s. and non-u.s. governmental regulations and procurement policies and practices, including regulations relating to import-export control, investment, exchange controls and repatriation of earnings. international sales are also subject to varying currency, political and economic risks.raw materials, parts, and subassemblieswe are highly dependent on the availability of essential materials, parts and subassemblies from our suppliers and subcontractors. the most important raw materials required for our aerospace products are aluminum (sheet, plate, forgings and extrusions), titanium (sheet, plate, forgings and extrusions) and composites (including carbon and boron). although alternative sources generally exist for these raw materials, qualification of the sources could take one year or more. many major components and product equipment items are procured or subcontracted on a sole-source basis with a number of companies.supplierswe are dependent upon the ability of a large number of suppliers and subcontractors to meet performance specifications, quality standards and delivery schedules at our anticipated costs. while we maintain an extensive qualification and performance surveillance system to control risk associated with such reliance on third parties, failure of suppliers or subcontractors to meet commitments could adversely affect production schedules and program/contract profitability, thereby jeopardizing our ability to fulfill commitments to our customers. we are also dependent on the availability of energy sources, such as electricity, at affordable prices.5table of contentsseasonalityno material portion of our business is considered to be seasonal.executive officers of the registrantsee item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance in part iii.other informationboeing was originally incorporated in the state of washington in 1916 and reincorporated in delaware in 1934. our principal executive offices are located at 100 n. riverside plaza, chicago, illinois 60606 and our telephone number is (312)544-2000.general information about us can be found at www.boeing.com. the information contained on or connected to our website is not incorporated by reference into this annual report on form 10-k and should not be considered part of this or any other report filed with the securities and exchange commission (sec). our annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q and current reports on form 8-k, as well as any amendments to those reports, are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish them to, the sec. these reports may also be obtained at the secs public reference room at 100 f street, n.e., washington, d.c. 20549. the sec also maintains a website at www.sec.gov that contains reports, proxy statements and other information regarding sec registrants, including boeing.forward-looking statementsthis report, as well as our annual report to shareholders, quarterly reports, and other filings we make with the sec, press releases and other written and oral communications, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. words such as may, should, expects, intends, projects, plans, believes, estimates, targets, anticipates and similar expressions are used to identify these forward-looking statements. examples of forward-looking statements include statements relating to our future financial condition and operating results, as well as any other statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact.forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and assumptions, which may not prove to be accurate. these statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. many factors, including those set forth in the risk factors section below could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely from these forward-looking statements. any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we assume no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.item1a. risk factorsan investment in our common stock or debt securities involves risks and uncertainties and our actual results and future trends may differ materially from our past or projected future performance. we urge investors to consider carefully the risk factors described below in evaluating the information contained in this report.6table of contentsour commercial airplanes business depends heavily on commercial airlines, and is subject to unique risks.market conditions have a significant impact on demand for our commercial aircraft. the commercial aircraft market is predominantly driven by long-term trends in airline passenger and cargo traffic. the principal factors underlying long-term traffic growth are sustained economic growth and political stability both in developed and emerging markets. demand for our commercial aircraft is further influenced by airline profitability, availability of aircraft financing, world trade policies, government-to-government relations, technological changes, price and other competitive factors, fuel prices, terrorism, epidemics and environmental regulations. traditionally, the airline industry has been cyclical and very competitive and has experienced significant profit swings and constant challenges to be more cost competitive. in addition, availability of financing to non-u.s. customers depends in part on the export-import bank of the united states. significant deterioration in the global economic environment, the airline industry generally, or in the financial stability of one or more of our major customers could result in fewer new orders for aircraft or could cause customers to seek to postpone or cancel contractual orders and/or payments to us, which could result in lower revenues, profitability and cash flows and a reduction in our contractual backlog. in addition, because our commercial aircraft backlog consists of aircraft scheduled for delivery over a period of several years, any of these macroeconomic, industry or customer impacts could unexpectedly affect deliveries over a long period.we enter into firm fixed-price aircraft sales contracts with indexed price escalation clauses which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns or if increases in our costs exceed the applicable escalation rate. commercial aircraft sales contracts are often entered into years before the aircraft are delivered. in order to account for economic fluctuations between the contract date and delivery date, aircraft pricing generally consists of a fixed amount as modified by price escalation formulas derived from labor, commodity and other price indices. our revenue estimates are based on current expectations with respect to these escalation formulas, but the actual escalation amounts are outside of our control. escalation factors can fluctuate significantly from period to period. changes in escalation amounts can significantly impact revenues and operating margins in our commercial airplanes business.we derive a significant portion of our revenues from a limited number of commercial airlines. we can make no assurance that any customer will exercise purchase options, fulfill existing purchase commitments or purchase additional products or services from us. in addition, fleet decisions, airline consolidations or financial challenges involving any of our major commercial airline customers could significantly reduce our revenues and limit our opportunity to generate profits from those customers.our commercial airplanes business depends on our ability to maintain a healthy production system, achieve planned production rate targets, successfully develop new aircraft or new derivative aircraft, and meet or exceed stringent performance and reliability standards.the commercial aircraft business is extremely complex, involving extensive coordination and integration with suppliers, highly-skilled labor from thousands of employees and other partners, and stringent regulatory requirements and performance and reliability standards. in addition, the introduction of new aircraft programs and/or derivatives, such as the 787-10, 737 max and 777x, involves increased risks associated with meeting development, testing, production and certification schedules. as a result, our ability to deliver aircraft on time, satisfy regulatory and customer requirements, and achieve or maintain, as applicable, program profitability is subject to significant risks.we must meet planned production rate and productivity improvement targets in order to satisfy customer demand and maintain our profitability. we continue to increase production rates for the 737 and 787 programs, while at the same time engaging in significant ongoing development of the 787-10, 737 max and 777x aircraft. in addition, we continue to seek opportunities to reduce the costs of building our aircraft, including working with our suppliers to reduce supplier costs, identifying and implementing productivity 7table of contentsimprovements, and optimizing how we manage inventory. if production rate ramp-up efforts at any of our commercial aircraft assembly facilities are delayed or if our suppliers cannot timely deliver components to us at the cost and rates necessary to achieve our targets, we may be unable to meet delivery schedules and the financial performance of one or more of our programs may suffer.operational challenges impacting the production system for one or more of our commercial aircraft programs could result in production delays and/or failure to meet customer demand for new aircraft, either of which would negatively impact our revenues and operating margins. our commercial aircraft production system is extremely complex. operational issues, including delays or defects in supplier components, failure to meet internal performance plans, or delays or failures to achieve required regulatory certifications, could result in significant out-of-sequence work and increased production costs, as well as delayed deliveries to customers, impacts to aircraft performance and/or increased warranty or fleet support costs. further, if we cannot efficiently and cost-effectively incorporate design changes into already-completed 787 production aircraft, we may face further profitability pressures on this program.if our commercial airplanes fail to satisfy performance and reliability requirements, we could face additional costs and/or lower revenues. developing and manufacturing commercial aircraft that meet or exceed our performance and reliability standards, as well as those of customers and regulatory agencies, can be costly and technologically challenging. these challenges are particularly significant with newer aircraft programs. any failure of any boeing aircraft to satisfy performance or reliability requirements could result in disruption to our operations, higher costs and/or lower revenues.changes in levels of u.s. government defense spending or overall acquisition priorities could negatively impact our financial position and results of operations.we derive a substantial portion of our revenue from the u.s. government, primarily from defense related programs with the u.s. dod. levels of u.s. defense spending in future periods are very difficult to predict and subject to significant risks. in addition, significant budgetary delays and constraints have already resulted in reduced spending levels, and additional reductions may be forthcoming. in august 2011, the budget control act (the act) established limits on u.s. government discretionary spending, including a reduction of defense spending by approximately $490 billion between the 2012 and 2021 u.s. government fiscal years. the act also provided that the defense budget would face sequestration cuts of up to an additional $500 billion during that same period to the extent that discretionary spending limits are exceeded. the impact of sequestration cuts was reduced with respect to fy2014 and fy2015 following the enactment of the bipartisan budget act in december 2013. however, significant uncertainty remains with respect to overall levels of defense spending and it is likely that u.s. government discretionary spending levels will continue to be subject to significant pressure, including risk of future sequestration cuts.in addition, there continues to be significant uncertainty with respect to program-level appropriations for the u.s. dod and other government agencies (including nasa) within the overall budgetary framework described above. while the fy2015 appropriations enacted december 2014 included funding for boeings major programs, such as f/a-18, ch-47 chinook, ah-64 apache, kc-46a tanker and p-8 programs, uncertainty remains about how defense budgets in fy2016 and beyond will affect boeings programs. we also expect that ongoing concerns regarding the u.s. national debt will continue to place downward pressure on u.s. dod spending levels. future budget cuts, including cuts mandated by sequestration, or future procurement decisions associated with the authorizations and appropriations process could result in reductions, cancellations, and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. any of these impacts could have a material effect on the results of the companys operations, financial position and/or cash flows. in addition, as a result of the significant ongoing uncertainty with respect to both u.s. defense spending levels and the nature of the threat environment, we expect the u.s. dod to continue to emphasize cost-cutting and other efficiency initiatives in its procurement processes. if we can no longer adjust successfully 8table of contentsto these changing acquisition priorities and/or fail to meet affordability targets set by the u.s. dod customer, our revenues and market share would be further impacted.we conduct a significant portion of our business pursuant to u.s. government contracts, which are subject to unique risks.in 2014, 30% of our revenues were earned pursuant to u.s. government contracts, which include foreign military sales through the u.s. government. business conducted pursuant to such contracts is subject to extensive procurement regulations and other unique risks.our sales to the u.s. government are subject to extensive procurement regulations, and changes to those regulations could increase our costs. new procurement regulations, or changes to existing requirements, could increase our compliance costs or otherwise have a material impact on the operating margins of our bds business. these requirements may result in increased compliance costs, and we could be subject to additional costs in the form of withheld payments and/or reduced future business if we fail to comply with these requirements in the future. compliance costs attributable to current and potential future procurement regulations such as these could negatively impact our financial condition and operating results.the u.s. government may modify, curtail or terminate one or more of our contracts. the u.s. government contracting party may modify, curtail or terminate its contracts and subcontracts with us, without prior notice and either at its convenience or for default based on performance. in addition, funding pursuant to our u.s. government contracts may be reduced or withheld as part of the u.s. congressional appropriations process due to fiscal constraints, changes in u.s. national security strategy and/or priorities or other reasons. further uncertainty with respect to ongoing programs could also result in the event that the u.s. government finances its operations through temporary funding measures such as continuing resolutions rather than full-year appropriations. any loss or anticipated loss or reduction of expected funding and/or modification, curtailment, or termination of one or more large programs could have a material adverse effect on our earnings, cash flow and/or financial position.we are subject to u.s. government inquiries and investigations, including periodic audits of costs that we determine are reimbursable under u.s. government contracts. u.s. government agencies, including the defense contract audit agency and the defense contract management agency, routinely audit government contractors. these agencies review our performance under contracts, cost structure and compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and standards, as well as the adequacy of and our compliance with our internal control systems and policies. any costs found to be misclassified or inaccurately allocated to a specific contract will be deemed non-reimbursable, and to the extent already reimbursed, must be refunded. any inadequacies in our systems and policies could result in withholds on billed receivables, penalties and reduced future business. furthermore, if any audit, inquiry or investigation uncovers improper or illegal activities, we could be subject to civil and criminal penalties and administrative sanctions, including termination of contracts, forfeiture of profits, suspension of payments, fines, and suspension or debarment from doing business with the u.s. government. we also could suffer reputational harm if allegations of impropriety were made against us, even if such allegations are later determined to be false.we enter into fixed-price contracts which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns.our bds business generated approximately 71% of its 2014 revenues from fixed-price contracts. while fixed price contracts enable us to benefit from performance improvements, cost reductions and efficiencies, they also subject us to the risk of reduced margins or incurring losses if we are unable to achieve estimated costs and revenues. if our estimated costs exceed our estimated price, we recognize reach-forward losses which can significantly affect our reported results. for example, during the second quarter of 2014, we recorded a reach-forward loss of $425 million on the usaf kc-46a tanker contract, primarily due to initial engineering and design issues. the long term nature of many of our contracts makes the process of 9table of contentsestimating costs and revenues on fixed-price contracts inherently risky. fixed-price contracts often contain price incentives and penalties tied to performance which can be difficult to estimate and have significant impacts on margins. in addition, some of our contracts have specific provisions relating to cost, schedule and performance.fixed-price development contracts are generally subject to more uncertainty than fixed-price production contracts. many of these development programs have highly complex designs. in addition, technical or quality issues that arise during development could lead to schedule delays and higher costs to complete, which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. examples of significant bds fixed-price development contracts include aew&c, commercial crew, india p-8i, saudi f-15, usaf kc-46a tanker, and commercial and military satellites.we enter into cost-type contracts which also carry risks.our bds business generated approximately 29% of its 2014 revenues from cost-type contracting arrangements. some of these are development programs that have complex design and technical challenges. these cost-type programs typically have award or incentive fees that are subject to uncertainty and may be earned over extended periods. in these cases the associated financial risks are primarily in reduced fees, lower profit rates or program cancellation if cost, schedule or technical performance issues arise.programs whose contracts are primarily cost-typeinclude gmd, proprietary and sls programs.we enter into contracts that include in-orbit incentive payments that subject us to risks.contracts in the commercial satellite industry and certain government satellite contracts include in-orbit incentive payments. these in-orbit payments may be paid over time after final satellite acceptance or paid in full prior to final satellite acceptance. in both cases, the in-orbit incentive payment is at riskif the satellite does not perform to specifications for up to 15 years after acceptance. the net present value of in-orbit incentive feeswe ultimately expect to realizeis recognized as revenue in the construction period. if the satellite fails to meet contractual performance criteria, customers will not be obligated to continue making in-orbit payments and/or we may be required toprovide refunds to the customerand incur significant charges.our ability to deliver products and services that satisfy customer requirements is heavily dependent on the performance of our subcontractors and suppliers, as well as on the availability of raw materials and other components.we rely on other companies including subcontractors and suppliers to provide and produce raw materials, integrated components and sub-assemblies, and production commodities and to perform some of the services that we provide to our customers. if one or more of our suppliers or subcontractors experiences delivery delays or other performance problems, we may be unable to meet commitments to our customers or incur additional costs. in addition, if one or more of the raw materials on which we depend (such as aluminum, titanium or composites) becomes unavailable or is available only at very high prices, we may be unable to deliver one or more of our products in a timely fashion or at budgeted costs. in some instances, we depend upon a single source of supply. any service disruption from one of these suppliers, either due to circumstances beyond the suppliers control, such as geo-political developments, or as a result of performance problems or financial difficulties, could have a material adverse effect on our ability to meet commitments to our customers or increase our operating costs. for example, we are monitoring political unrest involving russia and ukraine, where we and some of our suppliers source titanium products and/or have operations. 10table of contentswe use estimates in accounting for many contracts and programs. changes in our estimates could adversely affect our future financial results.contract and program accounting require judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating revenues and costs and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. due to the size and nature of many of our contracts and programs, the estimation of total revenues and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. assumptions have to be made regarding the length of time to complete the contract or program because costs also include expected increases in wages and employee benefits, material prices and allocated fixed costs. incentives or penalties related to performance on contracts are considered in estimating sales and profit rates, and are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. suppliers assertions are also assessed and considered in estimating costs and profit rates. estimates of award fees are also used in sales and profit rates based on actual and anticipated awards.with respect to each of our commercial aircraft programs, inventoriable production costs (including overhead), program tooling and other non-recurring costs and routine warranty costs are accumulated and charged as cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. a program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates. to establish the relationship of sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates of (a)the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b)the period over which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced and (c)the units expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total program. several factors determine accounting quantity, including firm orders, letters of intent from prospective customers and market studies. changes to customer or model mix, production costs and rates, learning curve, changes to price escalation indices, costs of derivative aircraft, supplier performance, customer and supplier negotiations/settlements, supplier claims and/or certification issues can impact these estimates. any such change in estimates relating to program accounting may adversely affect future financial performance.because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes described above, materially different sales and profit amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. changes in underlying assumptions, circumstances or estimates may adversely affect future period financial performance. for additional information on our accounting policies for recognizing sales and profits, see our discussion under managements discussion and analysis  critical accounting policies  contract accounting/program accounting on pages 43  44 and note 1 to our consolidated financial statements on pages 54  64 of this form10-k.competition within our markets may reduce our future contracts and sales.the markets in which we operate are highly competitive and one or more of our competitors may have more extensive or more specialized engineering, manufacturing and marketing capabilities than we do in some areas. in our commercial airplanes business, we anticipate increasing competition among non-u.s. aircraft manufacturers and service providers in one or more of our market segments. in our bds business, we anticipate that the effects of defense industry consolidation and new priorities, including long-term cost competitiveness, of our u.s. dod customer will intensify competition for many of our products and services. furthermore, we are facing increased international competition and cross-border consolidation of competition. there can be no assurance that we will be able to compete successfully against our current or future competitors or that the competitive pressures we face will not result in reduced revenues and market share.11table of contentswe derive a significant portion of our revenues from non-u.s. sales and are subject to the risks of doing business in other countries.in 2014, non-u.s. customers accounted for approximately 58% of our revenues. we expect that non-u.s. sales will continue to account for a significant portion of our revenues for the foreseeable future. as a result, we are subject to risks of doing business internationally, including:changes in regulatory requirements;domestic and international government policies, including requirements to expend a portion of program funds locally and governmental industrial cooperation or participation requirements;fluctuations in international currency exchange rates;volatility in international political and economic environments and changes in non-u.s. national priorities and budgets, which can lead to delays or fluctuations in orders;the complexity and necessity of using non-u.s. representatives and consultants;the uncertainty of the ability of non-u.s. customers to finance purchases, including the availability of financing from the export-import bank of the united states;uncertainties and restrictions concerning the availability of funding credit or guarantees;imposition of domestic and international taxes, export controls, tariffs, embargoes, sanctions and other trade restrictions;the difficulty of management and operation of an enterprise spread over many countries;compliance with a variety of international laws, as well as u.s. laws affecting the activities of u.s. companies abroad; andunforeseen developments and conditions, including terrorism, war, epidemics and international conflicts.while the impact of these factors is difficult to predict, any one or more of these factors could adversely affect our operations in the future.the outcome of litigation and of government inquiries and investigations involving our business is unpredictable and an adverse decision in any such matter could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.we are involved in a number of litigation matters. these matters may divert financial and management resources that would otherwise be used to benefit our operations. no assurances can be given that the results of these matters will be favorable to us. an adverse resolution of any of these lawsuits could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. in addition, we are subject to extensive regulation under the laws of the united states and its various states, as well as other jurisdictions in which we operate. as a result, we are sometimes subject to government inquiries and investigations of our business due, among other things, to our business relationships with the u.s. government, the heavily regulated nature of our industry, and in the case of environmental proceedings, our ownership of certain property. any such inquiry or investigation could potentially result in an adverse ruling against us, which could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations.a significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers based in the united states, and in certain types of boeing aircraft, which exposes us to concentration risks.a significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in distinct geographic regions, particularly in the united states. our portfolio is also concentrated by varying 12table of contentsdegrees across boeing aircraft product types, most notably 717 aircraft. if one or more customers holding a significant portion of our portfolio assets experiences financial difficulties or otherwise defaults on or does not renew its leases with us at their expiration, and we are unable to redeploy the aircraft on reasonable terms, or if the types of aircraft that are concentrated in our portfolio suffer greater than expected declines in value, our earnings, cash flows and/or financial position could be materially adversely affected.we may be unable to obtain debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments at competitive rates, on commercially reasonable terms or in sufficient amounts.we depend, in part, upon the issuance of debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments. as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, our airplane financing commitments totaled $16,723 million and $17,987 million. if we require additional funding in order to fund outstanding financing commitments or meet other business requirements, our market liquidity may not be sufficient. a number of factors could cause us to incur increased borrowing costs and to have greater difficulty accessing public and private markets for debt. these factors include disruptions or declines in the global capital markets and/or a decline in our financial performance, outlook or credit ratings. the occurrence of any or all of these events may adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and contractual or financing commitments.we may not realize the anticipated benefits of mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures/strategic alliances or divestitures.as part of our business strategy, we may merge with or acquire businesses and/or form joint ventures and strategic alliances. whether we realize the anticipated benefits from these acquisitions and related activities depends, in part, upon our ability to integrate the operations of the acquired business, the performance of the underlying product and service portfolio, and the performance of the management team and other personnel of the acquired operations. accordingly, our financial results could be adversely affected from unanticipated performance issues, legacy liabilities, transaction-related charges, amortization of expenses related to intangibles, charges for impairment of long-term assets, credit guarantees, partner performance and indemnifications. consolidations of joint ventures could also impact our reported results of operations or financial position. while we believe that we have established appropriate and adequate procedures and processes to mitigate these risks, there is no assurance that these transactions will be successful. we also may make strategic divestitures from time to time. these transactions may result in continued financial involvement in the divested businesses, such as through guarantees or other financial arrangements, following the transaction. nonperformance by those divested businesses could affect our future financial results through additional payment obligations, higher costs or asset write-downs.our insurance coverage may be inadequate to cover all significant risk exposures.we are exposed to liabilities that are unique to the products and services we provide. we maintain insurance for certain risks and, in some circumstances, we may receive indemnification from the u.s. government. the amount of our insurance coverage may not cover all claims or liabilities and we may be forced to bear substantial costs. for example, liabilities arising from the use of certain of our products, such as aircraft technologies, missile systems, border security systems, anti-terrorism technologies, and/or air traffic management systems may not be insurable on commercially reasonable terms. while some of these products are shielded from liability within the u.s. under the safety act provisions of the 2002 homeland security act, no such protection is available outside the u.s., potentially resulting in significant liabilities. the amount of insurance coverage we maintain may be inadequate to cover these or other claims or liabilities.13table of contentsbusiness disruptions could seriously affect our future sales and financial condition or increase our costs and expenses.our business may be impacted by disruptions including threats to physical security, information technology or cyber-attacks or failures, damaging weather or other acts of nature and pandemics or other public health crises. any of these disruptions could affect our internal operations or our ability to deliver products and services to our customers. any significant production delays, or any destruction, manipulation or improper use of our data, information systems or networks could impact our sales, increase our expenses and/or have an adverse effect on the reputation of boeing and of our products and services.some of our and our suppliers workforces are represented by labor unions, which may lead to work stoppages.approximately 64,000 employees, which constitute 39% of our total workforce, were union represented as of december31, 2014. we experienced a work stoppage in 2008 when a labor strike halted commercial aircraft and certain bma program production. we may experience additional work stoppages in the future, which could adversely affect our business. we cannot predict how stable our relationships, currently with 11 u.s. labor organizations and 6 non-u.s. labor organizations, will be or whether we will be able to meet the unions requirements without impacting our financial condition. the unions may also limit our flexibility in dealing with our workforce. union actions at suppliers can also affect us. work stoppages and instability in our union relationships could delay the production and/or development of our products, which could strain relationships with customers and cause a loss of revenues which would adversely affect our operations.we have substantial pension and other postretirement benefit obligations, which have a material impact on our earnings, shareholders' equity and cash flows from operations and could have significant adverse impacts in future periods.we have qualified defined benefit pension plans that cover the majority of our employees. potential pension contributions include both mandatory amounts required under the employee retirement income security act and discretionary contributions to improve the plans' funded status. the extent of future contributions depends heavily on market factors such as the discount rate and the actual return on plan assets. we estimate future contributions to these plans using assumptions with respect to these and other items. changes to those assumptions could have a significant effect on future contributions as well as on our annual pension costs and/or result in a significant change to shareholders' equity. for u.s. government contracts, we allocate pension costs to individual contracts based on u.s. cost accounting standards which can also affect contract profitability. we also provide other postretirement benefits to certain of our employees, consisting principally of health care coverage for eligible retirees and qualifying dependents. our estimates of future costs associated with these benefits are also subject to assumptions, including estimates of the level of medical cost increases. for a discussion regarding how our financial statements can be affected by pension and other postretirement plan accounting policies, see management's discussion and analysis-critical accounting policies-pension plans on pages 45  46 of this form 10-k. although gaap expense and pension or other postretirement benefit contributions are not directly related, the key economic factors that affect gaap expense would also likely affect the amount of cash or stock we would contribute to our plans.our operations expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities.we are subject to various federal, state, local and non-u.s. laws and regulations related to environmental protection, including the discharge, treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. we could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs, fines and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if we were to violate or become liable 14table of contentsunder environmental laws or regulations. in some cases, we may be subject to such costs due to environmental impacts attributable to our current or past manufacturing operations or the operations of companies we have acquired. in other cases, we may become subject to such costs due to an indemnification agreement between us and a third party relating to such environmental liabilities. in addition, new laws and regulations, more stringent enforcement of existing laws and regulations, the discovery of previously unknown contamination or the imposition of new remediation requirements could result in additional costs. for additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.unauthorized access to our or our customers information and systems could negatively impact our business.we face certain security threats, including threats to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data and systems. we maintain an extensive network of technical security controls, policy enforcement mechanisms, monitoring systems and management oversight in order to address these threats. while these measures are designed to prevent, detect and respond to unauthorized activity in our systems, certain types of attacks, including cyber-attacks, could result insignificant financial or information losses and/or reputational harm. in addition, we manage information technology systems for certain customers. many of these customers face similar security threats. if we cannot prevent the unauthorized access, release and/or corruption of our customers confidential, classified or personally identifiable information, our reputation could be damaged, and/or we could face financial losses.item1b. unresolved staff commentsnot applicable15table of contentsitem2. propertieswe occupied approximately 82 million square feet of floor space on december31, 2014 for manufacturing, warehousing, engineering, administration and other productive uses, of which approximately 96% was located in the united states. the following table provides a summary of the floor space by business as of december31, 2014:(square feet in thousands)ownedleasedgovernment owned(1)totalcommercial airplanes38,8975,28844,185defense, space & security26,5387,85434,392other(2)2,3958763183,589total67,83014,01831882,166(1)  excludes rent-free space furnished by u.s. government landlord of 145 square feet.(2)  other includes bcc; eo&t; ssg; and our corporate headquarters.at december31, 2014, we occupied in excess of 74.6 million square feet of floor space at the following major locations:commercial airplanes  greater seattle, wa; greater charleston, sc; portland, or; greater los angeles, ca; greater salt lake city, ut; australia; and canadadefense, space& security  greater st. louis, mo; greater los angeles, ca; greater seattle, wa; philadelphia, pa; mesa, az; san antonio, tx; huntsville, al; greater washington, dc; oklahoma city, ok; and houston, txother  chicago, il and greater seattle, wamost runways and taxiways that we use are located on airport properties owned by others and are used jointly with others. our rights to use such facilities are provided for under long-term leases with municipal, county or other government authorities. in addition, the u.s. government furnishes us certain office space, installations and equipment at u.s. government bases for use in connection with various contract activities.we believe that our major properties are adequate for our present needs and, as supplemented by planned improvements and construction, expect them to remain adequate for the foreseeable future.item3. legal proceedingscurrently, we are involved in a number of legal proceedings. for a discussion of contingencies related to legal proceedings, see note 20 to our consolidated financial statements, which is hereby incorporated by reference.item4. mine safety disclosuresnot applicable16table of contentspart iiitem5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securitiesthe principal market for our common stock is the new york stock exchange where it trades under the symbol ba. as of february5, 2015, there were 129,832 shareholders of record. additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference from note 22 to our consolidated financial statements.issuer purchases of equity securitiesthe following table provides information about purchases of our common stock we made during the quarter ended december31, 2014:(dollars in millions, except per share data)(a)(b)(c)(d)total number of sharespurchased(1)averageprice paidpersharetotal number ofshares purchasedas part of publicly announced plansor programsapproximate dollar value of shares that may yetbe purchased under theplans or programs(2)10/1/2014 thru 10/31/20141,637,262$123.021,626,078$5,61111/1/2014 thru 11/30/20146,207,902129.246,196,0864,81012/1/2014 thru 12/31/20144,915132.2412,000total7,850,079$127.947,822,164(1)we purchased an aggregate of 7,822,164 shares of our common stock in the open market pursuant to our repurchase plan and 27,915 shares transferred to us from employees in satisfaction of minimum tax withholding obligations associated with the vesting of restricted stock units during the period. we did not purchase shares in swap transactions.(2)on december 15, 2014, we announced a new repurchase plan for up to $12 billion of common stock, replacing the plan previously authorized in 2013. 17table of contentsitem6. selected financial data   five-year summary (unaudited)(dollars in millions, except per share data)20142013201220112010operationsrevenues:commercial airplanes$59,990$52,981$49,127$36,171$31,834defense, space& security:(1)boeing military aircraft13,51115,28515,38814,11513,291network& space systems8,0038,5127,9118,9649,769global services& support9,3679,4009,3088,8978,883total defense, space& security30,88133,19732,60731,97631,943boeing capital416408468547672unallocated items, eliminations, and other(2)(525)37(504)41(143)total revenues$90,762$86,623$81,698$68,735$64,306general and administrative expense3,7673,9563,7173,4083,644research and development expense3,0473,0713,2983,9184,121other income/(loss), net(3)56624752net earnings from continuing operations$5,446$4,586$3,903$4,011$3,311net gain/(loss) on disposal of discontinued operations, net of tax(1)(3)7(4)net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900$4,018$3,307basic earnings per share from continuing operations7.476.035.155.384.50diluted earnings per share from continuing operations7.385.965.115.334.46cash dividends declared$2,210$1,642$1,360$1,263$1,245per share3.102.1851.8051.701.68additions to property, plant and equipment2,2362,0981,7031,7131,125depreciation of property, plant and equipment1,4141,3381,2481,1191,096year-end workforce165,500168,400174,400171,700160,500financial position at december31total assets$99,198$92,663$88,896$79,986$68,565working capital11,06813,58812,3278,5365,177property, plant and equipment, net11,00710,2249,6609,3138,931cash and cash equivalents11,7339,08810,34110,0495,359short-term and other investments1,3596,1703,2171,2235,158total debt9,0709,63510,40912,37112,421customer financing assets3,5613,9714,4204,7724,680shareholders equity(3)8,66514,8755,8673,5152,766common shares outstanding (in millions)(4)706.7747.4755.6744.7735.3contractual backlog:commercial airplanes$440,118$372,980$317,287$293,303$255,591defense, space& security:(1)boeing military aircraft21,14323,60427,89822,10723,350network& space systems8,9359,83210,0789,4299,935global services& support16,89616,24517,09214,81815,079total defense, space& security46,97449,68155,06846,35448,364total contractual backlog$487,092$422,661$372,355$339,657$303,955cash dividends have been paid on common stock every year since 1942.(1)effective in 2014, certain programs were realigned between bds segments. prior years have been recast for segment realignments.(2)beginning in 2014, amounts previously reported separately as other segment and unallocated items and eliminations are now presented on a combined basis to provide a more meaningful presentation. prior years have been adjusted to reflect the change.(3)shareholders equity excludes noncontrolling interests.(4)represents actual number of shares outstanding as of december31 and excludes treasury shares and the outstanding shares held by the sharevalue trust, which was terminated in july 2010.18table of contentsitem7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsconsolidated results of operations and financial conditionoverviewwe are a global market leader in design, development, manufacture, sale, service and support of commercial jetliners, military aircraft, satellites, missile defense, human space flight and launch systems and services. we are one of the two major manufacturers of 100+ seat airplanes for the worldwide commercial airline industry and one of the largest defense contractors in the u.s. while our principal operations are in the u.s., we conduct operations in many countries and rely on an extensive network of international partners, key suppliers and subcontractors.our strategy is centered on successful execution in healthy core businesses  commercial airplanes and defense, space& security (bds)  supplemented and supported by boeing capital (bcc). taken together, these core businesses have historically generated substantial earnings and cash flow that permit us to invest in new products and services. we focus on producing the products and providing the services that the market demands and we price our products and services to provide a fair return for our shareholders while continuing to find new ways to improve efficiency and quality. commercial airplanes is committed to being the leader in commercial aviation by offering airplanes and services that deliver superior design, efficiency and value to customers around the world. bds integrates its resources in defense, intelligence, communications, security, space and services to deliver capability-driven solutions to its customers at reduced costs. our bds strategy is to leverage our core businesses to capture key next-generation programs while expanding our presence in adjacent and international markets, underscored by an intense focus on growth and productivity. our strategy also benefits us as the cyclicality of commercial and defense markets sometimes offset. bcc facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our boeing customers.consolidated results of operationsearnings from operations and core operating earnings (non-gaap) the following table summarizes key indicators of consolidated results of operations:(dollars in millions, except per share data)years ended december 31,201420132012revenues$90,762$86,623$81,698gaapearnings from operations7,4736,5626,290operating margins8.2%7.6%7.7%effective income tax rate23.7%26.4%34.0%net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900diluted earnings per share$7.38$5.96$5.11non-gaap (1)core operating earnings$8,860$7,876$7,189core operating margin9.8%9.1%8.8%core earnings per share$8.60$7.07$5.88(1)these measures exclude certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. see page 42 for important information about these non-gaap measures and reconciliations to the most comparable gaap measures.19table of contentsrevenues the following table summarizes revenues:(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012commercial airplanes$59,990$52,981$49,127defense, space& security30,88133,19732,607boeing capital416408468unallocated items, eliminations and other(525)37(504)total$90,762$86,623$81,698revenues in 2014 increased by $4,139 million or 5% compared with 2013. commercial airplanes revenues increased by $7,009 million primarily due to higher new airplane deliveries. bds revenues decreased by $2,316 million due to lower revenues in all three segments. revenues in 2013 increased by $4,925 million or 6% compared with 2012. commercial airplanes revenues increased by $3,854 million due to higher new airplane deliveries. bds revenues increased by $590 million due to higher revenues in the network& space systems (n&ss) and global services& support (gs&s) segments, partially offset by lower revenues in the boeing military aircraft (bma) segment. the change in unallocated items, eliminations and other in 2014, 2013 and 2012 primarily reflects the timing of eliminations for intercompany aircraft deliveries. earnings from operationsthe following table summarizes earnings from operations:(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012commercial airplanes$6,411$5,795$4,711defense, space& security3,1333,2353,068boeing capital9210788unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense (1,387)(1,314)(899)other unallocated items and eliminations(776)(1,261)(678)earnings from operations (gaap)$7,473$6,562$6,290unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense1,3871,314899core operating earnings (non-gaap)$8,860$7,876$7,189earnings from operations in 2014 increased by $911 million compared with 2013 primarily reflecting higher earnings at commercial airplanes of $616 million and lower unallocated items and eliminations of $485 million. the decrease in unallocated items is due to the a-12 litigation settlement of $406 million which was recorded in 2013 and lower 2014 deferred compensation of $194 million. earnings from operations in 2013 increased by $272 million compared with 2012. commercial airplanes earnings increased by $1,084 million primarily reflecting higher new airplane deliveries and lower research and development expense. bds earnings increased by $167 million due to higher earnings in the n&ss and bma segments partially offset by lower earnings in the gs&s segment. unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense in 2013 reduced earnings by $415 million compared with 2012 due to higher unallocated pension expense offset by lower unallocated other postretirement expense. other unallocated items and eliminations in 2013 reduced earnings by $583 million primarily due to a charge recorded in 2013 related to the settlement of the a-12 aircraft litigation and higher 2013 deferred 20table of contentscompensation expense. the a-12 aircraft litigation settlement resulted in the company recording a $406 million pre-tax charge in 2013, which consisted of writing-off a-12 inventory, recorded as cost of sales, and providing three ea-18g growlers at no cost to the u.s. navy, recorded as a reduction in revenues. core operating earnings in 2014 increased by $984 million compared with 2013 primarily reflecting higher earnings at commercial airplanes and the 2013 a-12 charge. core operating earnings in 2013 increased by $687 million compared with 2012 as higher earnings at commercial airplanes and bds more than offset the a-12 charge and higher 2013 deferred compensation expense.unallocated items, eliminations and other the most significant items included in unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the following table:(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012share-based plans($67)($95)($81)deferred compensation(44)(238)(75)eliminations and other(665)(522)(643)litigation settlements(406)121sub-total (included in core operating earnings*)(776)(1,261)(678)pension(1,469)(1,374)(787)postretirement8260(112)pension and other postretirement benefit expense (excluded from core operating earnings*)(1,387)(1,314)(899)total unallocated items, eliminations and other($2,163)($2,575)($1,577)* core operating earnings is a non-gaap measure that excludes certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. see page 42.deferred compensation expense decreased by $194 million in 2014 and increased by $163 million in 2013, primarily driven by changes in our stock price.eliminations and other unallocated expense increased by $143 million in 2014 decreased by $121 million in 2013 primarily due to insurance recoveries which were recorded in the third quarter of 2013. litigation settlements include the 2013 charge of $406 million related to the settlement of the a-12 litigation and the $121 million benefit recorded in 2012 due to a favorable court judgment on satellite litigation.net periodic benefit cost related to pension and other postretirement benefits totaled $2,483 million, $3,769 million and $3,383 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. the decrease in 2014 net periodic benefit cost related to pension is primarily due to lower amortization of actuarial losses due to higher discount rates which more than offset higher 2014 curtailment charges. the increase in 2013 is primarily due to higher amortization of actuarial losses and higher service costs driven by lower discount rates. unallocated pension expense in 2014 reflects pension charges of $395 million, primarily for pension curtailment costs. see note 14. the unallocated pension expense in 2013 reflects a pension curtailment charge of $73 million related to the decision in september 2013 to end production of the c-17 aircraft in 2015. see note 11. during the third quarter of 2013 we also determined that the pension expense in prior years was overstated and recorded a reduction in pension expense of $63 million. a portion of net periodic benefit cost is recognized in earnings from operations in the period incurred and the remainder is included in inventory at the end of the reporting period and recorded in earnings from operations in subsequent periods. costs are allocated to the business segments as described in note 21.21table of contentsnet periodic benefit costs included in earnings from operations were as follows:(dollars in millions)pensionother postretirementbenefitsyears ended december31,201420132012201420132012allocated to business segments($1,746)($1,662)($1,620)($369)($413)($431)unallocated items, eliminations and other(1,469)(1,374)(787)8260(112)total($3,215)($3,036)($2,407)($287)($353)($543)other earnings items(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012earnings from operations$7,473$6,562$6,290other income, net(3)5662interest and debt expense(333)(386)(442)earnings before income taxes7,1376,2325,910income tax expense(1,691)(1,646)(2,007)net earnings from continuing operations$5,446$4,586$3,903interest and debt expense decreased by $53 million in 2014 and $56 million in 2013 as a result of lower weighted average debt balances.our effective income tax rates were 23.7%, 26.4% and 34.0% for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. our 2014 effective tax rate was lower than 2013 primarily due to tax benefits of $265 million related to tax basis adjustments and $259 million related to audit settlements, both recorded in the second quarter of 2014. our 2013 effective tax rate was lower than 2012 due to research tax credits for the 2013 and 2012 tax years that were both recorded in 2013 and the issuance of research and experimental regulations which resulted in $212 million of previously unrecognized tax benefits being recorded in the fourth quarter of 2013. for additional discussion related to income taxes, see note 4 to our consolidated financial statements.total costs and expenses (cost of sales)cost of sales, for both products and services, consists primarily of raw materials, parts, sub-assemblies, labor, overhead and subcontracting costs. our commercial airplanes segment predominantly uses program accounting to account for cost of sales and bds predominantly uses contract accounting. under program accounting, cost of sales for each commercial airplane program equals the product of (i) revenue recognized in connection with customer deliveries and (ii) the estimated cost of sales percentage applicable to the total remaining program. under contract accounting, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage to the amount of revenue recognized. 22table of contentsthe following table summarizes cost of sales:(dollars in millions)years ended december 31,20142013change20132012changecost of sales$76,752$73,268$3,484$73,268$68,665$4,603cost of sales as a % of revenues84.6%84.6%0.0%84.6%84.0%0.6%cost of sales in 2014 increased by $3,484 million, or 5% compared with the same period in 2013, primarily driven by the increase in revenue. cost of sales at commercial airplanes increased by $6,265 million, or 14%, primarily driven by the 13% increase in revenues. cost of sales at bds decreased by $2,085 million, or 8% primarily due to the 7% reduction in revenues. cost of sales increased in 2013 by $4,603 million, or 7% compared with the prior year primarily driven by the 6% increase in revenues and higher unallocated pension and other postretirement costs. cost of sales at commercial airplanes increased by $2,957 million, or 7%, primarily driven by the 8% increase in revenues and cost of sales at bds increased by $407 million, primarily driven by the 2% increase in revenues. research and development the following table summarizes our research and development expense:(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012commercial airplanes$1,881$1,807$2,049defense, space& security1,1581,2151,189other84960total$3,047$3,071$3,298research and development expense in 2014 decreased by $24 million compared to 2013. commercial airplanes spending increased on 777x, 787-10 and 737 max partially offset by lower spending on the 787-9. research and development expense in 2013 decreased by $227 million compared to 2012 primarily due to lower spending at commercial airplanes on the 787 program partially offset by increased spending on the 737 max and 777x.backlogour backlog at december31 was as follows:(dollars in millions)201420132012contractual backlog:commercial airplanes$440,118$372,980$317,287defense, space & security:boeing military aircraft21,14323,60427,898network & space systems8,9359,83210,078global services & support16,89616,24517,092total defense, space& security46,97449,68155,068total contractual backlog$487,092$422,661$372,355unobligated backlog$15,299$18,267$17,873contractual backlog of unfilled orders excludes purchase options, announced orders for which definitive contracts have not been executed, and unobligated u.s. and non-u.s. government contract funding. the 23table of contentsincrease in contractual backlog at december 31, 2014 compared with december 31, 2013 was primarily due to commercial airplane orders and reclassifications from unobligated backlog related to incremental funding. the increase was partially offset by commercial airplane deliveries and revenues recognized on awarded contracts. the increase in contractual backlog during 2013 was primarily due to commercial aircraft orders in excess of deliveries partially offset by cancellation of orders. unobligated backlog includes u.s. and non-u.s. government definitive contracts for which funding has not been authorized. the unobligated backlog at december 31, 2014 decreased from december 31, 2013 primarily due to reclassifications to contractual backlog related to incremental funding for bds contracts, partially offset by contract awards. the unobligated backlog increased during 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to ch-47 chinook and v-22 osprey multi-year contract awards. the increase was partially offset by reclassifications to contractual backlog related to incremental funding for the u.s. air force kc-46a tanker and f-15 multi-year contracts. additional considerationskc-46a tanker in 2011, we were awarded a contract from the u.s. air force (usaf) to design, develop, manufacture and deliver four next generation aerial refueling tankers. the kc-46a tanker is a derivative of our 767 commercial aircraft. this contract is a fixed-price incentive fee contract valued at $4.9 billion andinvolves highly complex designs and systems integration. during the second quarter of 2014, we recorded a reach-forward loss of $425 million on this contract. $238 million of this loss was recorded at our commercial airplanes segment and the remaining $187 million was recorded in our bma segment. the reach-forward loss was primarily due to initial engineering and design issues discovered during systems installation that are requiring rework and additional engineering and manufacturing labor to complete this contract. to date the program has met all customer contractual milestones. this contract contains production options.if all options under the contract are exercised, we expect to deliver 179 aircraft for a total expected contract value of approximately $30 billion. the usaf is scheduled to authorize low rate initial production in 2015 subject to satisfactory progress being made on the development contract. russia/ukraine we continue to monitor political unrest involving russia and ukraine, where we and some of our suppliers source titanium products and/or have operations. a number of our commercial customers also have operations in russia and ukraine.to date, we have not experienced any significant disruptions to production or deliveries.should suppliers or customers experience disruption, our production and/or deliveries could be materially impacted.segment results of operations and financial conditioncommercial airplanesbusiness environment and trendsairline industry environment global economic activity and global trade, which are the primary drivers of the demand for air travel, grew below the long-term average for the third year in a row in 2014. despite this, passenger traffic grew from 5% to 6% annually between 2012 and 2014 and is forecasted to continue above the long-term trend of 5% in 2015. there continues to be significant variation between regions and airline business models, with airlines operating in emerging economies and low-cost-carriers leading growth. 24table of contentsair cargo traffic grew at close to long-term average rates in 2014, with continued improvement projected in 2015. in addition, capacity metrics such as load factors and freighter aircraft utilization are showing signs of improvement. the relative weakness of the air cargo market in recent years has impacted near-term demand for new freighter aircraft and freighter conversions. we continue to closely monitor the impact of this trend on our business.airline financial performance also plays a role in the demand for new capacity. airlines continue to focus on increasing revenue through alliances, partnerships, new marketing initiatives, and effective leveraging of ancillary services and related revenues. airlines are also relentlessly focusing on reducing costs by renewing fleets to leverage more efficient airplanes. net profits for the global airline industry are estimated to total $20 billion in 2014 compared to $11 billion in 2013. together with strong demand growth, we expect lower oil prices will improve airline profitability in 2015.the long-term outlook for the industry remains positive due to the fundamental drivers of air travel growth: economic growth and the increasing propensity to travel due to increased trade, globalization, and improved airline services driven by liberalization of air traffic rights between countries. our 20-year forecast is for a long-term average growth rate of 5%per year for passenger and cargo traffic, based on a projected average annual worldwide real economic growth rate of 3%. based on long-term global economic growth projections, and factoring in increased utilization of the worldwide airplane fleet and requirements to replace older airplanes, we project a $5.2 trillion market for approximately 37,000 new airplanes over the next 20 years.the industry remains vulnerable to near-term exogenous developments including fuel price spikes, credit market shocks, terrorism, natural disasters, conflicts, epidemics and increased global environmental regulations.industry competitiveness the commercial jet airplane market and the airline industry remain extremely competitive. market liberalization in europe and asia is enabling low-cost airlines to continue gaining market share. these airlines are increasing the pressure on airfares. this results in continued cost pressures for all airlines and price pressure on our products. major productivity gains are essential to ensure a favorable market position at acceptable profit margins.continued access to global markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales potential and long-term investment returns. approximately 11% of commercial airplanes contractual backlog, in dollar terms, is with u.s. airlines, including cargo carriers.we face aggressive international competitors who are intent on increasing their market share. they offer competitive products and have access to most of the same customers and suppliers. with government support, airbus has historically invested heavily to create a family of products to compete with ours. regional jet makers embraer and bombardier, coming from the less than 100-seat commercial jet market, continue to develop larger and more capable airplanes. additionally, other competitors from russia, china and japan are developing commercial jet aircraft in the market above 90 seats. many ofthese competitors have historically enjoyed access to government-provided financial support, including launch aid, which greatly reduces the commercial risks associated withairplane development activities and enablesairplanes to be brought to market more quickly than otherwise possible. this market environment has resulted in intense pressures on pricing and other competitive factors, and we expect these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years.worldwide, airplane sales are generally conducted in u.s. dollars. fluctuating exchange rates affect the profit potential of our major competitors, all of whom have significant costs in other currencies. changes in value of the u.s. dollar relative to their local currencies impact competitors revenues and profits. competitors routinely respond to a relatively weaker u.s. dollar by aggressively reducing costs and increasing productivity, thereby improving their longer-term competitive posture. competitors can use the improved efficiency to fund product development, gain market share through pricing and/or improve earnings.25table of contentswe are focused on improving our processes and continuing cost-reduction efforts. we continue to leverage our extensive customer support services network which includes aviation support, spare parts, training, maintenance documents and technical advice for airlines throughout the world. this enables us to provide a high level of customer satisfaction and productivity. these efforts enhance our ability to pursue pricing strategies that enable us to price competitively. many of our non-u.s. customers finance aircraft purchases through the export-import bank of the united states. in september 2014, the banks charter was extended and is now set to expire on june 30, 2015. if the banks charter is not renewed or if the banks existing or future funding authority is insufficient to meet our customers needs, we may fund additional commitments and/or enter into new financing arrangements with customers. certain of our non-u.s. customers also may seek to delay aircraft purchases if they cannot obtain financing at reasonable costs. we continue to work with our customers to mitigate risks to the timing of future deliveries and are assisting with alternative third party financing sources.results of operations(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012revenues$59,990$52,981$49,127% of total company revenues66%61%60%earnings from operations$6,411$5,795$4,711operating margins10.7%10.9%9.6%research and development$1,881$1,807$2,049contractual backlog$440,118$372,980$317,287unobligated backlog$360$660$1,466revenues  commercial airplanes revenues increased by $7,009 million or 13% in 2014 compared with 2013 and by $3,854 million or 8% in 2013 compared with 2012 primarily due to higher new airplane deliveries.commercial airplanes deliveries as of december31 were as follows:737*747767777787total2014cumulative deliveries5,2181,5011,0671,263228deliveries485(15)19(3)6991147232013cumulative deliveries4,7331,4821,0611,164114deliveries440(8)24219865(1)6482012cumulative deliveries4,2931,4581,0401,06649deliveries415(9)31268346(3)601*intercompany deliveries identified by parenthesesaircraft accounted for as revenues by commercial airplanes and as operating leases in consolidation identified by parentheses26table of contentsearnings from operations  earnings from operations in 2014 increased by $616 million or 11% compared with 2013. the increase in earnings is primarily due to higher earnings of $947 million driven by higher new airplane deliveries and commercial aviation services revenue growth. this earnings increase was partially offset by a reach-forward loss of $238 million recorded in the second quarter of 2014 related to the usaf kc-46a tanker contract and higher research and development expense of $74 million. the increase in research and development reflects higher spending on the 777x, 787-10 and 737 max, which more than offset lower 787-9 spending. operating margins decreased from 10.9% in 2013 to 10.7% in 2014 primarily due to the dilutive impact of 747 and 787 deliveries and the usaf kc-46a tanker reach-forward loss.earnings from operations in 2013 increased by $1,084 million or 23% compared with 2012. the increase in earnings is primarily driven by higher new airplane deliveries of $842 million and lower research and development expense of $242 million due to lower spending on the 787 program partially offset by higher spending on the 737 max and 777x. operating margins increased from 9.6% in 2012 to 10.9% in 2013 primarily due to higher deliveries and lower research and development expense partially offset by the dilutive impact of 787 deliveries.backlog firm backlog represents orders for products and services where no contingencies remain before we and the customer are required to perform. backlog does not include prospective orders where customer controlled contingencies remain, such as the customers receiving approval from their board of directors, shareholders or government and completing financing arrangements. all such contingencies must be satisfied or have expired prior to recording a new firm order even if satisfying such conditions is highly certain. firm orders exclude options. a number of our customers may have contractual remedies that may be implicated by program delays. we continue to address customer claims and requests for other contractual relief as they arise. however, once orders are included in firm backlog, orders remain in backlog until canceled or fulfilled, although the value of orders is adjusted as changes to price and schedule are agreed to with customers.the increase in contractual backlog during 2014 was due to orders in excess of deliveries partially reduced by cancellation of orders. the increase in contractual backlog during 2013 was due to orders in excess of deliveries partially reduced by cancellation of orders and changes in projected revenue escalation. the decrease in unobligated backlog during 2014 and 2013 was due to the reclassification from unobligated to contractual backlog related to incremental funding of the existing multi-year contract for commercial airplanes share of the usaf kc-46a tanker contract.accounting quantity the accounting quantity is our estimate of the quantity of airplanes that will be produced for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. the determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. it is a key determinant of the gross margins we recognize on sales of individual airplanes throughout a programs life. estimation of each programs accounting quantity takes into account several factors that are indicative of the demand for that program, including firm orders, letters of intent from prospective customers and market studies. we review our program accounting quantities quarterly.the accounting quantity for each program may include units that have been delivered, undelivered units under contract, and units anticipated to be under contract in the reasonable future (anticipated orders). in developing total program estimates, all of these items within the accounting quantity must be considered.27table of contentsthe following table provides details of the accounting quantities and firm orders by program as of december31. cumulative firm orders represent the cumulative number of commercial jet aircraft deliveries plus undelivered firm orders.program737747767777777x7872014program accounting quantities7,8001,5741,1131,600*1,300undelivered units under firm orders4,2993647278286843cumulative firm orders9,5171,5371,1141,5412861,0712013program accounting quantities7,0001,5741,1131,550*1,300undelivered units under firm orders3,680554931466916cumulative firm orders8,4131,5371,1101,478661,0302012program accounting quantities6,6001,5741,1031,4501,100undelivered units under firm orders3,0746768365799cumulative firm orders7,3671,5251,1081,431848* the accounting quantity for the 777x will be determined in the year of first airplane delivery, targeted for 2020. program highlights737 program the accounting quantity for the 737 program increased by 800 units during 2014 due to the programs normal progress of obtaining additional orders and delivering airplanes. the accounting quantity includes ng and max units. we increased our production rate from 38 to 42 per month in the second quarter of 2014 and plan an additional increase to 47 per month in 2017. on october 2, 2014 we announced our plan to further increase the rate to 52 per month in 2018. first delivery of the 737 max is expected in 2017.747 program lower-than-expected demand for large commercial passenger and freighter aircraft has resulted in ongoing pricing pressures and fewer orders than anticipated.we are currently producing at a rate of 1.5 per month with plans to reduce the rate to 1.3 per month in september 2015. we have a number of unsold 747 production positions and remain focused on obtaining additional orders and implementing cost-reduction efforts. if market, production and other risks cannot be mitigated, the program could face a reach-forward loss that may be material.767 program the 767 assembly line includes a 767 derivative to support the tanker program. in october 2014 we increased our combined tanker and commercial production rate from 1 to 1.5 per month and plan to increase to 2 per month in 2016.777 program the accounting quantity for the 777 program increased by 50 units during 2014 due to the programs normal progress of obtaining additional orders and delivering airplanes. we are currently producing at a rate of 8.3 per month. in the fourth quarter of 2013, we launched the 777x, which features a new composite wing, new engines and folding wing-tips. the 777x will have a separate program accounting quantity, which will be determined in the year of first airplane delivery, targeted for 2020. 787 program during the second quarter of 2014 we completed initial type certification for the 787-9 and received design and production certifications. we delivered the first 787-9 airplane in june 2014. first delivery of the 787-10 derivative aircraft is targeted for 2018.28table of contentswe are producing at a rate of 10 per month and the first delivery at this rate occurred in march 2014. we remain focused on stabilizing 787 production rates at 10 per month while improving aircraft reliability and satisfying customer mission and performance requirements. we continue to monitor and address challenges associated with aircraft production and assembly, including management of our manufacturing operations and extended global supply chain, completion and integration of traveled work, incorporating changes identified during 787-8 flight testing to already completed aircraft, as well as the incorporation of the 787-9 derivative into the manufacturing process. in addition, we continue to work with our customers and suppliers to assess the specific impacts of schedule changes, including requests for contractual relief related to delivery delays and supplier assertions.during 2009, we concluded that the first three flight-test 787 aircraft could not be sold as previously anticipated due to the inordinate amount of rework and unique and extensive modifications made to those aircraft. as a result, costs associated with these airplanes were included in research and development expense. based on sales activity and market interest we continue to believe that the remaining 787 flight-test aircraft are commercially saleable and we continue to include costs related to these aircraft in program inventory. if we determine that any of the remaining flight-test aircraft cannot be sold, we may incur additional charges related to the reclassification of costs associated with those aircraft to research and development expense.the accounting quantity of 1,300 units remains unchanged and reflects the incorporation of revenue and cost estimates associated with the 787-10 and planned production rate increases to 12 and 14 per month in future years. the combination of production challenges, change incorporation, schedule delays and customer and supplier impacts has created significant pressure on program profitability. if risks related to these challenges, together with risks associated with planned production rate increases or introducing the 787-10 derivative as scheduled cannot be mitigated, the program could face additional customer claims and/or supplier assertions, further pressures on program profitability and/or a reach-forward loss. we continue to implement mitigation plans and cost-reduction efforts to improve program profitability and address program risks.fleet support we provide the operators of our commercial airplanes with assistance and services to facilitate efficient and safe airplane operation. collectively known as fleet support services, these activities and services begin prior to airplane delivery and continue throughout the operational life of the airplane. they include flight and maintenance training, field service support costs, engineering services, information services and systems and technical data and documents. the costs for fleet support are expensed as incurred and have been historically less than 1.5% of total consolidated costs of products and services.program development the following chart summarizes the time horizon between go-ahead and planned initial delivery for major commercial airplanes derivatives and programs.reflects models in development during 2014we launched the 787-10 in june 2013 and the 777x in november 2013.additional considerationsthe development and ongoing production of commercial aircraft is extremely complex, involving extensive coordination and integration with suppliers and highly-skilled labor from thousands of employees and other partners. meeting or exceeding our performance and reliability standards, as well as those of customers 29table of contentsand regulators, can be costly and technologically challenging. in addition, the introduction of new aircraft and derivatives, such as the 787-10, 737 max and 777x, involves increased risks associated with meeting development, production and certification schedules. as a result, our ability to deliver aircraft on time, satisfy performance and reliability standards and achieve or maintain, as applicable, program profitability is subject to significant risks. factors that could result in lower margins (or a material charge if an airplane program has or is determined to have reach-forward losses) include the following: changes to the program accounting quantity, customer and model mix, production costs and rates, changes to price escalation factors due to changes in the inflation rate or other economic indicators, performance or reliability issues involving completed aircraft, capital expenditures and other costs associated with increasing or adding new production capacity, learning curve, additional change incorporation, anticipated cost reductions, flight test and certification schedules, costs, schedule and demand for new airplanes and derivatives and status of customer claims, supplier assertions and other contractual negotiations. while we believe the cost and revenue estimates incorporated in the consolidated financial statements are appropriate, the technical complexity of our airplane programs creates financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be extended, which could trigger termination provisions, order cancellations or other financially significant exposure.defense, space& securitybusiness environment and trends united states government defense environment overview u.s. government appropriation levels remain subject to significant uncertainty. in august 2011, the budget control act (the act) established limits on u.s. government discretionary spending, including a reduction of defense spending by approximately $490 billion between the 2012 and 2021 u.s. government fiscal years. the act also provided that the defense budget would face sequestration cuts of up to an additional $500 billion during that same period to the extent that discretionary spending limits are exceeded. while the impact of sequestration cuts was reduced with respect to fy2014 and fy2015 following the enactment of the bipartisan budget act in december 2013, significant uncertainty remains with respect to overall levels of defense spending. it is likely that u.s. government discretionary spending levels for fy2016 and beyond will continue to be subject to significant pressure, including risk of future sequestration cuts.significant uncertainty also continues with respect to program-level appropriations for the u.s. department of defense (u.s. dod) and other government agencies, including the national aeronautics and space administration, within the overall budgetary framework described above. future budget cuts, including cuts mandated by sequestration, or future procurement decisions associated with the authorization and appropriations process could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. any of these impacts could have a material effect on the results of the companys operations, financial position and/or cash flows. in addition to the risks described above, if congress is unable to pass appropriations bills in a timely manner, a government shutdown could result which could have impacts above and beyond those resulting from budget cuts or sequestration impacts. for example, requirements to furlough employees in the u.s. dod or other government agencies could result in payment delays, impair our ability to perform work on existing contracts, and/or negatively impact future orders. the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act, 2015 enacted december 2014, funds most u.s. government agencies through september 2015, including the u.s. dod, national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) and the federal aviation administration (faa). international environment overview the international market continues to be driven by complex and evolving security challenges and the need to modernize aging equipment and inventories, while faced with constrained budgets. in europe, the continuing financial challenges are forcing governments to institute austerity measures negatively impacting defense spending in the near term.30table of contentsthe strongest opportunities for bds in 2015 will be the middle east and asia pacific regions where the relative financial strength of these economies, coupled with a broad spectrum of evolving threats, are expected to result in procurement of defense and security systems.bds realignmenteffective during the first quarter of 2014, certain programs were realigned between bds segments. the realignments include certain bma aircraft and modernization programs which were moved to gs&s. business segment data for all periods presented have been adjusted to reflect the realignment. see note 21. results of operations  (dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012revenues$30,881$33,197$32,607% of total company revenues34%38%40%earnings from operations$3,133$3,235$3,068operating margins10.1%9.7%9.4%contractual backlog$46,974$49,681$55,068unobligated backlog$14,939$17,607$16,407since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many different types of development and production contracts with varying delivery and milestone schedules, the operating results of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of revenues, earnings and backlog may not be indicative of future operating results. in addition, depending on the customer and their funding sources, our orders might be structured as annual follow-on contracts, or as one large multi-year order or long-term award. as a result, period-to-period comparisons of backlog are not necessarily indicative of future workloads. the following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context.deliveries of units for new-build production aircraft, excluding remanufactures and modifications, were as follows:years ended december31,201420132012f/a-18 models444848f-15 models14148c-17 globemaster iii71010ch-47 chinook544451ah-64 apache453719p-8 models11115aew&c33c-40a1total new-build production aircraft179164144revenues  bds revenues in 2014 decreased by $2,316 million compared with 2013 primarily due to lower revenues of $1,774 million in the bma segment and lower revenues of $509 million in the n&ss segment. bds revenues in 2013 increased by $590 million compared with 2012 due to higher revenues of $601 million 31table of contentsand $92 million in the n&ss and gs&s segments, partially offset by lower revenues of $103 million in the bma segment.earnings from operations  bds earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $102 million compared with 2013 due to lower earnings of $200 million and $21 million in the bma and n&ss segments, partially offset by higher earnings of $119 million in the gs&s segment. included above are net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments, which were $96 million higher in 2014 compared with 2013, primarily reflecting higher favorable adjustments in the gs&s segment.bds earnings from operations in 2013 increased by $167 million compared with 2012 due to higher earnings of $157 million and $17 million in the n&ss and bma segments, partially offset by lower earnings of $7 million in the gs&s segment. included above are net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments, which were $137 million lower in 2013 compared with 2012, primarily reflecting lower favorable adjustments in the gs&s and bma segments.backlogtotal backlog is comprised of contractual backlog, which represents work we are on contract to perform for which we have received funding, and unobligated backlog, which represents work we are on contract to perform for which funding has not yet been authorized and appropriated. bds total backlog was $61,913 million at december 31, 2014, reflecting a decrease of 8% from december31, 2013. bds total backlog was $67,288 million at december31, 2013, reflecting a decrease of 6% from december 31, 2012. for further details on the changes between periods, refer to the discussions of the individual segments below. additional considerationsour bds business includes a variety of development programs which have complex design and technical challenges. many of these programs have cost-type contracting arrangements. in these cases, the associated financial risks are primarily in reduced fees, lower profit rates or program cancellation if cost, schedule or technical performance issues arise. examples of these programs include ground-based midcourse defense (gmd), proprietary and space launch system (sls) programs.some of our development programs are contracted on a fixed-price basis. many of these programs have highly complex designs. as technical or quality issues arise during development, we may experience schedule delays and cost impacts, which could increase our estimated cost to perform the work or reduce our estimated price, either of which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. these programs are ongoing, and while we believe the cost and fee estimates incorporated in the financial statements are appropriate, the technical complexity of these programs creates financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be extended, which could trigger termination provisions, the loss of satellite in-orbit incentive payments, or other financially significant exposure. these programs have risk for reach-forward losses if our estimated costs exceed our estimated contract revenues. examples of significant fixed-price development programs include airborne early warningand control (aew&c), india p-8i, saudi f-15, usaf kc-46a tanker, commercial crew and commercial and military satellites.32table of contentsboeing military aircraft results of operations(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012revenues$13,511$15,285$15,388% of total company revenues15%18%19%earnings from operations$1,304$1,504$1,487operating margins9.7%9.8%9.7%contractual backlog$21,143$23,604$27,898unobligated backlog$8,030$10,058$8,671revenues  bma revenues in 2014 decreased by $1,774 million, or 12%, compared with 2013 primarily due to a reduction of revenue of $1,730 million related to f-15 and kc-46a tanker milestones, fewer c-17 aircraft deliveries and delivery mix on the p-8 program.bma revenues in 2013 decreased by $103 million compared with 2012 primarily due to a reduction of $1,320 million related to fewer deliveries of aew&c aircraft to australia and the republic of korea and customer and delivery mix for the f/a-18 and c-17 programs. this reduction was partially offset by an increase of $1,168 million related to higher 2013 deliveries of p-8 aircraft and apache rotorcraft, as well as non-recurring effort on several chinook programs. earnings from operations  bma earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $200 million, or 13%, compared with 2013 primarily due to 2014 charges of $235 million and lower earnings of $73 million related to fewer deliveries on the c-17 program. the charges recorded in 2014 included $187 million related to the usaf kc-46a tanker contract and $48 million to write off inventory and accrue termination liabilities as a result of our 2014 decision to produce three fewer c-17 aircraft in 2015 than previously planned. see note 11. these decreases were partially offset by higher earnings of $65 million related to improved performance on the f/a-18 program. in addition, in 2013, we recorded a charge of $64 million to write off inventory and accrue termination liabilities as a result of the republic of korea's announcement to restart its f-x fighter aircraft competition. net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $39 million lower in 2014 than in 2013 primarily driven by the reach-forward loss on the usaf kc-46a tanker contract, partially offset by higher favorable adjustments to the f/a-18 and f-15 programs.bma earnings from operations in 2013 increased by $17 million compared with 2012 primarily due to increased deliveries and higher revenues on the p-8, apache and chinook programs of $263 million partially offset by lower earnings of $175 million related to initial revenues in 2012 on the saudi f-15 program and lower c-17 performance. net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $62 million lower in 2013 than in 2012, primarily driven by less favorable adjustments to the f-15 program. in the third quarter of 2013, we decided to end production of c-17 aircraft in 2015. see note 11. also in the third quarter of 2013, we recorded a charge of $64 million to write off inventory and accrue termination liabilities as a result of the republic of korea's announcement that it will restart its f-x fighter aircraft competition.33table of contentsbacklogbma total backlog at december31, 2014 was $29,173 million, a decrease of 13% reflecting revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years, partially offset by contract awards for the f/a-18, p-8 and apache programs. bma total backlog was $33,662 million at december31, 2013, reflecting a decrease of 8% from december 31, 2012 primarily due to revenues recognized on f-15, f/a-18 and c-17 program contracts awarded in prior years, partially offset by ch-47 chinook and v-22 osprey multi-year contract awards. additional considerationsc-17 and f/a-18 see the discussion of the c-17 and f/a-18 programs in note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.kc-46a tanker see the discussion of the kc-46a tanker program on page 24.network& space systems results of operations  (dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012revenues$8,003$8,512$7,911% of total company revenues9%10%10%earnings from operations$698$719$562operating margins8.7%8.4%7.1%contractual backlog$8,935$9,832$10,078unobligated backlog$5,987$6,076$6,937revenues  n&ss revenues in 2014 decreased by $509 million compared with 2013 primarily due to a reduction of $812 million related to lower volume on several government satellite, electronic and information solutions (e&is) and proprietary programs, partially offset by $257 million related to higher volume on the commercial crew and sls programs.n&ss revenues in 2013 increased by $601 million compared with 2012 primarily due to higher revenue of $364 million on the sls program awarded in the fourth quarter of 2012 and higher revenues of $329 million on our commercial satellite programs. this increase was partially offset by lower revenues of $196 million on our e&is programs. new-build satellite deliveries were as follows:years ended december31,201420132012commercial and civil satellites533military satellites4734table of contentsearnings from operations  n&ss earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $21 million compared with 2013 primarily due to lower earnings of $84 million on several commercial satellite programs related to lower milestone volume, partially offset by higher earnings of $68 million due to improved performance on several government satellite programs and our united launch alliance (ula) joint venture as well as higher volume on commercial crew during the initial performance period. net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $12 million higher in 2014 than in 2013.n&ss earnings from operations in 2013 increased by $157 million or 28% compared with 2012 primarily due to higher revenues and mix in our civil and commercial satellite programs and the sls program. these increases were partially offset by lower earnings from our united space alliance (usa) joint venture reflecting a gain of $39 million recorded in the third quarter of 2012 related to the termination and settlement of usa's defined benefit pension plans. the impact of net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments was not significant in 2013.n&ss earnings from operations include equity earnings of $211 million, $171 million and $180 million primarily from the ula joint venture in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. backlogn&ss total backlog was $14,922 million at december31, 2014, reflecting a decrease of 6% from december 31, 2013 primarily due to revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years, partially offset by current year contract awards for the commercial crew, commercial satellite and missile defense system programs. n&ss total backlog was $15,908 at december 31, 2013, reflecting a decrease of 7% from december 31, 2012 primarily due to revenues recognized on contracts awarded in prior years, partially offset by government and commercial satellite contract awards. additional considerationsunited launch alliance see the discussion of indemnifications to ula and financing commitments in notes 6, 11, and 12 to our consolidated financial statements.sea launch see the discussion of the sea launch receivables in note 10 to our consolidated financial statements.lightsquared see the discussion of the lightsquared, lp receivables in note 5 to our consolidated financial statements.global services& support results of operations  (dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012revenues$9,367$9,400$9,308% of total company revenues10%11%11%earnings from operations$1,131$1,012$1,019operating margins12.1%10.8%10.9%contractual backlog$16,896$16,245$17,092unobligated backlog$922$1,473$79935table of contentsrevenues  gs&s revenues in 2014 decreased by $33 million compared with 2013 primarily due to lower volume of $277 million in integrated logistics (il) and training systems & government services (tsgs) programs. these decreases were partially offset by higher maintenance, modification and upgrades (mm&u) revenues of $245 million primarily related to deliveries of three aew&c peace eagle to turkey in 2014.gs&s revenues in 2013 increased by $92 million compared with 2012 primarily due to higher revenues on mm&u and tsgs programs, partially offset by decreases in several il programs. earnings from operations  gs&s earnings from operations in 2014 increased by $119 million, or 12%, compared with 2013 primarily due to an increase of $145 million related to improved performance in several mm&u programs, most notably the aew&c peace eagle contract. net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $123 million higher in 2014 than in 2013 primarily due to unfavorable adjustments on the aew&c peace eagle contract in 2013. gs&s earnings from operations in 2013 decreased by $7 million compared with 2012 primarily due to lower performance of $59 million in mm&u on the aew&c peace eagle contract partially offset by $44 million of higher revenues and improved performance on several tsgs programs. net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2013 were $90 million lower than in 2012 primarily due to higher unfavorable adjustments on the aew&c peace eagle contract. backloggs&s total backlog has remained consistent at $17,818 million, $17,718 million and $17,891 million at december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. boeing capitalbusiness environment and trendsbccs gross customer financing and investment portfolio at december31, 2014 totaled $3,506 million. a substantial portion of bccs portfolio is concentrated among certain u.s. commercial airline customers. bccs portfolio is also concentrated by varying degrees across boeing aircraft product types, most notably out-of-production boeing aircraft such as 717 aircraft.bcc provided customer financing of $489 million and $220 million during 2014 and 2013. while we may be required to fund a number of new aircraft deliveries in 2015, we expect alternative financing will be available at reasonable prices from broad and globally diverse sources.aircraft values and lease rates are impacted by the number and type of aircraft that are currently out of service. approximately 2,300 western-built commercial jet aircraft (9.8% of current world fleet) were parked at the end of 2014, including both in-production and out-of-production aircraft types. of these parked aircraft, approximately 15% are not expected to return to service. at the end of 2013 and 2012, 9.2% and 10.0% of the western-built commercial jet aircraft were parked. aircraft valuations could decline if significant numbers of additional aircraft, particularly types with relatively few operators, are placed out of service.36table of contentsresults of operations(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012revenues$416$408$468earnings from operations$92$107$88operating margins22%26%19%revenuesbcc segment revenues consist principally of lease income from equipment under operating lease, interest income from financing receivables and notes, and other income. bccs revenues in 2014 increased by $8 million compared with 2013 primarily due to higher aircraft return condition payments of $60 million, partially offset by a decrease in finance lease income and lower interest income. bccs revenues in 2013 decreased by $60 million compared with 2012 primarily due to lower other income driven by lower aircraft return condition payments and operating lease income. earnings from operations  bccs earnings from operations are presented net of interest expense, provision for (recovery of) losses, asset impairment expense, depreciation on leased equipment and other operating expenses. earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $15 million compared with 2013 due to $60 million increase in asset impairment expense, partially offset by a reduction in the provision for losses on receivables, driven by a change to a customer credit rating recorded in the first quarter of 2014, in addition to lower depreciation and interest expense. earnings from operations in 2013 increased by $19 million compared with 2012 primarily due to lower depreciation expense and interest expense offset by lower revenues. financial positionthe following table presents selected financial data for bcc as of december31:(dollars in millions)20142013customer financing and investment portfolio, net$3,493$3,883other assets, primarily cash and short-term investments615505total assets$4,108$4,388other liabilities, primarily deferred income taxes$1,212$1,296debt, including intercompany loans2,4122,577equity484515total liabilities and equity$4,108$4,388debt-to-equity ratio5.0-to-15.0-to-1bccs customer financing and investment portfolio at december31, 2014 decreased from december31, 2013 primarily due to portfolio run-off, partially offset by the origination of notes receivable and equipment under operating lease totaling $489 million. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, bcc had $48 million and $83 million of assets that were held for sale or re-lease. additionally, aircraft subject to leases with a carrying value of approximately $183 million are scheduled to be returned off lease during 2015. we are seeking to remarket these aircraft or have the leases extended.37table of contentsbcc enters into certain transactions with boeing, reflected in unallocated items, eliminations and other, in the form of intercompany guarantees and other subsidies that mitigate the effects of certain credit quality or asset impairment issues on the bcc segment.on october 31, 2014, boeing issued $850 million of fixed and floating rate notes and entered into a concurrent intercompany loan on the same terms with bcc for $550 million, comprised of $300 million of fixed rate notes and $250 million of floating rate notes. interest expense associated with these intercompany notes is included in boeing capital interest expense. see note 13.restructurings and restructuring requests from time to time, certain customers have requested a restructuring of their transactions with bcc. during 2014, bcc did not reach agreement on any restructuring requests that would have a material effect on our earnings, cash flows and/or financial position.liquidity and capital resourcescash flow summary(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900non-cash items2,5152,5162,728changes in working capital8971,078880net cash provided by operating activities8,8588,1797,508net cash provided/(used) by investing activities2,467(5,154)(3,757)net cash used by financing activities(8,593)(4,249)(3,477)effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents(87)(29)18net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents2,645(1,253)292cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year9,08810,34110,049cash and cash equivalents at end of period$11,733$9,088$10,341operating activities net cash provided by operating activities was $8.9 billion during 2014, compared with $8.2 billion during 2013 and $7.5 billion in 2012. the increase of $0.7 billion in 2014 was primarily due to higher customer advances which more than offset higher gross inventory. the increase of $0.7 billion in 2013 was primarily due to increased customer receipts reflecting higher delivery and order volumes in 2013. our investment in gross inventories increased by $7.6 billion in 2014, $5.7 billion in 2013 and $6.2 billion in 2012, driven by continued investment in commercial airplane program inventory, primarily 787 inventory. advances and progress billings increased by $6.9 billion in 2014, $3.9 billion in 2013 and $1.9 billion in 2012, primarily due to payments from commercial airplane customers. discretionary contributions to our pension plans totaled $0.8 billion in 2014 compared with $1.5 billion in 2013 and $1.6 billion in 2012. investing activities cash provided by investing activities was $2.5 billion during 2014 compared with $5.2 billion used during 2013 and $3.8 billion used during 2012, largely due to changes in investments in time deposits. net proceeds from investments were $4.8 billion in 2014 compared with net contributions to investments of $2.9 billion in 2013 and $2 billion in 2012. in 2014, capital expenditures totaled $2.2 billion, up from $2.1 billion in 2013 and $1.7 billion in 2012. we expect capital expenditures to be higher in 2015 than 2014 due to continued investment to support growth.38table of contentsfinancing activities cash used by financing activities was $8.6 billion during 2014, an increase of $4.3 billion compared with 2013 primarily due to higher share repurchases of $3.2 billion, higher dividends paid of $0.6 billion and a decrease in proceeds from stock options exercised of $0.8 billion in 2014, partially offset by higher new borrowings of $0.4 billion in 2014. cash used by financing activities was $4.2 billion during 2013, an increase of $0.8 billion compared with 2012 primarily due to share repurchases of $2.8 billion in 2013 partially offset by higher new borrowings of $0.5 billion, lower debt repayments of $0.6 billion and an increase in stock options exercised of $1.0 billion in 2013.during 2014, we issued unsecured debt totaling $0.8 billion, of which $0.5 billion was used to fund the bcc segment, and we repaid $1.4 billion of unsecured debt, including repayments of $0.7 billion of debt held at bcc. at december31, 2014 and 2013 the recorded balance of debt was $9.1 billion and $9.6 billion of which $0.9 billion and $1.6 billion was classified as short-term. this includes $2.4 billion and $2.6 billion of debt attributable to bcc, of which $0.1 billion and $0.7 billion was classified as short-term at december31, 2014 and 2013.during 2014 and 2013 we repurchased 46.6 million and 25.4 million shares totaling $6.0 billion and $2.8 billion through our open market share repurchase program. in 2014 and 2013, we had 0.7 million and 0.8 million shares transferred to us from employees for tax withholdings. at december31, 2014, the amount available under the share repurchase plan, announced on december 15, 2014, totaled $12 billion.capital resources we have substantial borrowing capacity. any future borrowings may affect our credit ratings and are subject to various debt covenants as described below. we have a commercial paper program that continues to serve as a significant potential source of short-term liquidity. throughout 2014 and at december31, 2014, we had no commercial paper borrowings outstanding. currently, we have $5.0 billion of unused borrowing capacity on revolving credit line agreements. we anticipate that these credit lines will primarily serve as backup liquidity to support our general corporate borrowing needs.financing commitments totaled $16.7 billion and $18.0 billion at december 31, 2014 and 2013. we anticipate that we will not be required to fund a significant portion of our financing commitments as we continue to work with third party financiers to provide alternative financing to customers. historically, we have not been required to fund significant amounts of outstanding commitments. however, there can be no assurances that we will not be required to fund greater amounts than historically required.in the event we require additional funding to support strategic business opportunities, our commercial aircraft financing commitments, unfavorable resolution of litigation or other loss contingencies, or other business requirements, we expect to meet increased funding requirements by issuing commercial paper or term debt. we believe our ability to access external capital resources should be sufficient to satisfy existing short-term and long-term commitments and plans, and also to provide adequate financial flexibility to take advantage of potential strategic business opportunities should they arise within the next year. however, there can be no assurance of the cost or availability of future borrowings, if any, under our commercial paper program, in the debt markets or our credit facilities.at december 31, 2014 and 2013, our pension plans were $17.3 billion and $10.5 billion underfunded as measured under gaap. the increase in the liability primarily reflects the decrease in the discount rate used from 4.80% at december 31, 2013 to 3.90% at december31, 2014. see note 14. on an employee retirement income security act (erisa) basis our plans are more than 100% funded at december31, 2014 with minimal required contributions in 2015. we do not expect the contributions to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans to be significant in 2015. we may be required to make higher contributions to our pension plans in future years.at december31, 2014, we were in compliance with the covenants for our debt and credit facilities. the most restrictive covenants include a limitation on mortgage debt and sale and leaseback transactions as a percentage of consolidated net tangible assets (as defined in the credit agreements), and a limitation 39table of contentson consolidated debt as a percentage of total capital (as defined). when considering debt covenants, we continue to have substantial borrowing capacity.contractual obligationsthe following table summarizes our known obligations to make future payments pursuant to certain contracts as of december31, 2014, and the estimated timing thereof.(dollars in millions)totallessthan 1year1-3years3-5yearsafter 5yearslong-term debt (including current portion)$8,950$870$1,356$1,871$4,853interest on debt(1)5,3874318007293,427pension and other postretirement cash requirements10,9654771,0801,9727,436capital lease obligations16967731712operating lease obligations1,503226386271620purchase obligations not recorded on the consolidated statements of financial position131,54947,24937,18720,50526,608purchase obligations recorded on the consolidated statements of financial position16,87215,959891517total contractual obligations$175,395$65,279$41,773$25,370$42,973(1)includes interest on variable rate debt calculated based on interest rates at december31, 2014. variable rate debt was 3% of our total debt at december31, 2014.pension and other postretirement benefits pension cash requirements are based on an estimate of our minimum funding requirements, pursuant to erisa regulations, although we may make additional discretionary contributions. estimates of other postretirement benefits are based on both our estimated future benefit payments and the estimated contributions to plans that are funded through trusts.purchase obligations purchase obligations represent contractual agreements to purchase goods or services that are legally binding; specify a fixed, minimum or range of quantities; specify a fixed, minimum, variable, or indexed price provision; and specify approximate timing of the transaction. purchase obligations include amounts recorded as well as amounts that are not recorded on the consolidated statements of financial position. approximately 4% of the purchase obligations disclosed above are reimbursable to us pursuant to cost-type government contracts.purchase obligations not recorded on the consolidated statements of financial position production related purchase obligations not recorded on the consolidated statements of financial position include agreements for inventory procurement, tooling costs, electricity and natural gas contracts, property, plant and equipment, and other miscellaneous production related obligations. the most significant obligation relates to inventory procurement contracts. we have entered into certain significant inventory procurement contracts that specify determinable prices and quantities, and long-term delivery timeframes. in addition, we purchase raw materials on behalf of our suppliers. these agreements require suppliers and vendors to be prepared to build and deliver items in sufficient time to meet our production schedules. the need for such arrangements with suppliers and vendors arises from the extended production planning horizon for many of our products. a significant portion of these inventory commitments is supported by firm contracts and/or has historically resulted in settlement through reimbursement from customers for penalty payments to the supplier should the customer not take delivery. these amounts are also included in our forecasts of costs for program and contract accounting. some inventory procurement contracts may include escalation adjustments. in these limited cases, we have included our best estimate of the effect of the escalation adjustment in the amounts disclosed in the table above.40table of contentspurchase obligations recorded on the consolidated statements of financial position purchase obligations recorded on the consolidated statements of financial position primarily include accounts payable and certain other current and long-term liabilities including accrued compensation.industrial participation agreements we have entered into various industrial participation agreements with certain customers outside of the u.s. to facilitate economic flow back and/or technology transfer to their businesses or government agencies as the result of their procurement of goods and/or services from us. these commitments may be satisfied by our placement of direct work or vendor orders for supplies, opportunities to bid on supply contracts, transfer of technology or other forms of assistance. however, in certain cases, our commitments may be satisfied through other parties (such as our vendors) who purchase supplies from our non-u.s. customers. we do not commit to industrial participation agreements unless a contract for sale of our products or services is signed. in certain cases, penalties could be imposed if we do not meet our industrial participation commitments. during 2014, we incurred no such penalties. as of december31, 2014, we have outstanding industrial participation agreements totaling $17.8 billion that extend through 2030. purchase order commitments associated with industrial participation agreements are included in purchase obligations in the table above. to be eligible for such a purchase order commitment from us, a foreign supplier must have sufficient capability to meet our requirements and must be competitive in cost, quality and schedule.income tax obligations as of december31, 2014, our net liability for income taxes payable, including uncertain tax positions, was $406 million. we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows related to uncertain tax positions. our income tax matters are excluded from the table above. see note 4 to our consolidated financial statements.commercial commitmentsthe following table summarizes our commercial commitments outstanding as of december31, 2014.(dollars in millions)totalamountscommitted/maximumamount of lossless than1 year1-3years4-5yearsafter 5yearsstandby letters of credit and surety bonds$3,985$2,277$1,658$1$49commercial aircraft financing commitments16,7232,5527,2074,0432,921total commercial commitments$20,708$4,829$8,865$4,044$2,970commercial aircraft financing commitments include commitments to provide financing related to aircraft on order, under option for deliveries or proposed as part of sales campaigns based on estimated earliest potential funding dates. based on historical experience, we anticipate that we will not be required to fund a significant portion of our financing commitments. however, there can be no assurances that we will not be required to fund greater amounts than historically required. see note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.contingent obligationswe have significant contingent obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business, which include the following:legal various legal proceedings, claims and investigations are pending against us. legal contingencies are discussed in note 20 to our consolidated financial statements.41table of contentsenvironmental remediation we are involved with various environmental remediation activities and have recorded a liability of $601 million at december31, 2014. for additional information, see note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.income taxes we have $1,312 million of unrecognized tax benefits at december31, 2014 for uncertain tax positions. for further discussion of income taxes, see note 4 to our consolidated financial statements.off-balance sheet arrangementswe are a party to certain off-balance sheet arrangements including certain guarantees. for discussion of these arrangements, see note 12 to our consolidated financial statements.non-gaap measurescore operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per shareour consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states (gaap) which we supplement with certain non-gaap financial information. these non-gaap measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related gaap measures, and other companies may define such measures differently. we encourage investors to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share exclude the impact of unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expenses which represent costs not attributable to business segments - see note 21 to our consolidated financial statements.management uses core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share for purposes of evaluating and forecasting underlying business performance.management believes these core earnings measures provide investors additional insights into operational performance as unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit cost primarily represent costs driven by market factors and costs not allocable to u.s. government contracts.reconciliation of gaap measures to non-gaap measuresthe table below reconciles the non-gaap financial measures of core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share with the most directly comparable gaap financial measures of earnings from operations, operating margins and diluted earnings per share. (dollars in millions, except per share data)years ended december31, 201420132012revenues$90,762$86,623$81,698earnings from operations, as reported$7,473$6,562$6,290operating margins8.2%7.6%7.7%unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense$1,387$1,314$899core operating earnings (non-gaap)$8,860$7,876$7,189core operating margins (non-gaap)9.8%9.1%8.8%diluted earnings per share, as reported$7.38$5.96$5.11unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense(1)$1.22$1.11$0.77core earnings per share (non-gaap)$8.60$7.07$5.88weighted average diluted shares (in millions)738.0769.5763.8(1)earnings per share impact is presented net of the federal statutory rate of 35.0%.42table of contentsothersection 219 of the iran threat reduction and syria human rights act of 2012 and section 13(r) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (the act), require disclosure of certain activities, transactions or dealings relating to iran that occurred during the period covered by this report. disclosure is required even if the activities, transactions or dealings were conducted in compliance with applicable law. we have disclosed such activities in our form 10-q reports for the second and third quarter of 2014 and those disclosures are incorporated herein by reference. during the fourth quarter of 2014, we sold aeronautical navigation charts and data services to iran air. these sales were authorized by a license from the u.s. office of foreign assets control (ofac). boeing applied for the ofac license consistent with guidance from the u.s. government in connection with ongoing negotiations between the p5+1 nations and iran related to, among other things, the safety of irans civil aviation industry. we generated approximately $190 thousand in gross revenues and $15 thousand net profits during the fourth quarter of 2014 from these sales. we may engage in additional sales pursuant to this license, which sales may require additional disclosure pursuant to section 13(r) of the act.critical accounting policiescontract accountingcontract accounting is used to determine revenue, cost of sales, and profit predominantly by our bds business. contract accounting involves a judgmental process of estimating the total sales and costs for each contract, which results in the development of estimated cost of sales percentages. for each contract, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage to the amount of revenue recognized. due to the size, duration and nature of many of our contracts, the estimation of total sales and costs through completion is complicated and subject to many variables. total contract sales estimates are based on negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions regarding contract options, change orders, incentive and award provisions associated with technical performance, and price adjustment clauses (such as inflation or index-based clauses). the majority of these contracts are with the u.s. government where the price is generally based on estimated cost to produce the product or service plus profit. federal acquisition regulations provide guidance on the types of cost that will be reimbursed in establishing contract price. total contract cost estimates are largely based on negotiated or estimated purchase contract terms, historical performance trends, business base and other economic projections. factors that influence these estimates include inflationary trends, technical and schedule risk, internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, asset utilization, and anticipated labor agreements.revenue and cost estimates for all significant contracts are reviewed and reassessed quarterly. changes in these estimates could result in recognition of cumulative catch-up adjustments to the contracts inception to date revenues, cost of sales and profit, in the period in which such changes are made. changes in revenue and cost estimates could also result in a reach-forward loss or an adjustment to a reach-forward loss, which would be recorded immediately in earnings. for the years ending december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-forward losses, across all contracts increased earnings from operations by $100 million, $242 million and $379 million, respectively.due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is likely that materially different cost of sales amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. changes in underlying assumptions/estimates, supplier performance, or circumstances may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods. if the combined gross margin for all contracts in bds for all of 2014 had been estimated to be higher or lower by 1%, it would have increased or decreased pre-tax income for the year by approximately $309 million. in addition, 43table of contentsa number of our fixed price development contracts are in a reach-forward loss position. changes to estimated losses are recorded immediately in earnings.program accountingprogram accounting requires the demonstrated ability to reliably estimate the relationship of sales to costs for the defined program accounting quantity. a program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. the determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. for each program, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage for the total remaining program to the amount of sales recognized for airplanes delivered and accepted by the customer.factors that must be estimated include program accounting quantity, sales price, labor and employee benefit costs, material costs, procured part costs, major component costs, overhead costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and warranty costs. estimation of the accounting quantity for each program takes into account several factors that are indicative of the demand for the particular program, such as firm orders, letters of intent from prospective customers, and market studies. total estimated program sales are determined by estimating the model mix and sales price for all unsold units within the accounting quantity, added together with the sales prices for all undelivered units under contract. the sales prices for all undelivered units within the accounting quantity include an escalation adjustment for inflation that is updated quarterly. cost estimates are based largely on negotiated and anticipated contracts with suppliers, historical performance trends, and business base and other economic projections. factors that influence these estimates include production rates, internal and subcontractor performance trends, customer and/or supplier claims or assertions, asset utilization, anticipated labor agreements, and inflationary or deflationary trends.to ensure reliability in our estimates, we employ a rigorous estimating process that is reviewed and updated on a quarterly basis. changes in estimates are normally recognized on a prospective basis; when estimated costs to complete a program exceed estimated revenues from undelivered units in the accounting quantity, a loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the accounting quantity.the program method of accounting allocates tooling and other non-recurring and production costs over the accounting quantity for each program. because of the higher unit production costs experienced at the beginning of a new program and substantial investment required for initial tooling and other non-recurring costs, new commercial aircraft programs, such as the 787 program, typically have lower initial margins than established programs.due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is likely that materially different cost of sales amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions, or if the underlying circumstances were to change. changes in underlying assumptions/estimates, supplier performance, or other circumstances may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods. if combined cost of sales percentages for commercial airplane programs for all of 2014 had been estimated to be lower by 1%, it would have increased pre-tax income for the year by approximately $520 million. if the combined cost of sales percentages for commercial airplane programs for all of 2014 (excluding the 747 and 787 programs which had gross margins that were breakeven or near breakeven during 2014) had been estimated to be higher by 1%, it would have decreased pre-tax income for the year by approximately $360 million. if we are unable to mitigate risks associated with the 747 and 787 programs, or if we are required to change one or more of our pricing, cost or other assumptions related to these programs, we could be required to record reach-forward losses which could have a material effect on our reported results.44table of contentsgoodwill and indefinite-lived intangible impairmentswe test goodwill for impairment by performing a qualitative assessment or using a two-step impairment process. if we choose to perform a qualitative assessment, we evaluate economic, industry and company-specific factors as an initial step in assessing the fair value of operations. if we determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related operations, the two-step impairment process is then performed; otherwise, no further testing is required. for operations where the two-step impairment process is used, we first compare the book value of net assets to the fair value of the related operations. if the fair value is determined to be less than book value, a second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. in this process, a fair value for goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. the shortfall of the fair value below carrying value represents the amount of goodwill impairment.we estimate the fair values of the related operations using discounted cash flows. forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements and general market conditions. changes in these forecasts could significantly change the amount of impairment recorded, if any.the cash flow forecasts are adjusted by an appropriate discount rate derived from our market capitalization plus a suitable control premium at the date of evaluation. therefore, changes in the stock price may also affect the amount of impairment recorded, if any.we completed our assessment of goodwill as of april1, 2014 and determined that there is no impairment of goodwill. as of december 31, 2014, we estimated that the fair value of each reporting unit significantly exceeded its corresponding carrying value. changes in our forecasts, or decreases in the value of our common stock could cause book values of certain operations to exceed their fair values which may result in goodwill impairment charges in future periods. as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, we had $490 million and $497 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets related to the jeppesen and aviall brand and trade names acquired in business combinations. we test these intangibles for impairment by comparing their carrying value to current projections of discounted cash flows attributable to the brand and trade names. any excess carrying value over the amount of discounted cash flows represents the amount of the impairment. a 10% decrease in the discounted cash flows would not impact the carrying value of these indefinite-lived intangible assets.pension plansthe majority of our employees are earning benefits under defined benefit pension plans through 2016. in 2014, we announced changes to our retirement plans whereby nonunion and the majority of union employees currently participating in defined benefit pension plans will transition in 2016 to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan. accounting rules require an annual measurement of our projected obligation and plan assets. these measurements are based upon several assumptions, including the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of asset return. future changes in assumptions or differences between actual and expected outcomes can significantly affect our future annual expense, projected benefit obligation and shareholders equity.45table of contentsthe following table shows the sensitivity of our pension plan liability and net periodic cost to a 25 basis point change in the discount rate as of december31, 2014.(dollars in millions)changeindiscountrateincrease25bpschangeindiscountratedecrease25bpspension plansprojected benefit obligation($2,449)$3,068net periodic pension cost(266)329pension expense is also sensitive to changes in the expected long-term rate of asset return. a decrease or increase of 25 basis points in the expected long-term rate of asset return would have increased or decreased 2014 net periodic pension expense by $141 million. we expect 2015 net periodic pension cost to increase by approximately $367 million and the portion recognized in earnings to decrease by approximately $1,084 million primarily due to amortization of actuarial losses.item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market riskinterest rate riskwe have financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk, principally fixed-rate debt obligations, and customer financing assets and liabilities. additionally, bcc uses interest rate swaps with certain debt obligations to manage exposure to interest rate changes. historically, we have not experienced material gains or losses on our customer financing assets and liabilities due to interest rate changes. as of december31, 2014, the impact over the next 12 months of a 100 basis point rise in interest rates to our pre-tax earnings would not be significant. the investors in our fixed-rate debt obligations do not generally have the right to demand we pay off these obligations prior to maturity. therefore, exposure to interest rate risk is not believed to be material for our fixed-rate debt.foreign currency exchange rate riskwe are subject to foreign currency exchange rate risk relating to receipts from customers and payments to suppliers in foreign currencies. we use foreign currency forward contracts to hedge the price risk associated with firmly committed and forecasted foreign denominated payments and receipts related to our ongoing business. foreign currency forward contracts are sensitive to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. at december31, 2014, a 10% increase or decrease in the exchange rate in our portfolio of foreign currency contracts would have increased or decreased our unrealized losses by $237 million. consistent with the use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of exchange rate fluctuations, such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions being hedged. when taken together, these forward currency contracts and the offsetting underlying commitments do not create material market risk.46table of contentsitem8. financial statements and supplementary dataindex to the consolidated financial statementspageconsolidated statements of operations48consolidated statements of comprehensive income49consolidated statements of financial position50consolidated statements of cash flows51consolidated statements of equity52summary of business segment data53note 1  summary of significant accounting policies54note 2 - goodwill and acquired intangibles65note 3 - earnings per share66note 4 - income taxes67note 5 - accounts receivable70note 6 - inventories71note 7 - customer financing72note 8 - property, plant and equipment74note 9 - investments75note 10 - other assets76note 11 - liabilities, commitments and contingencies76note 12 - arrangements with off-balance sheet risk81note 13 - debt83note 14 - postretirement plans85note 15 - share-based compensation and other compensation arrangements94note 16 - shareholders equity97note 17 - derivative financial instruments99note 18 - significant group concentrations of risk100note 19 - fair value measurements101note 20 - legal proceedings103note 21 - segment information104note 22 - quarterly financial data108reports of independent registered public accounting firm10947table of contentsthe boeing company and subsidiariesconsolidated statements of operations(dollars in millions, except per share data)years ended december 31,201420132012sales of products$80,688$76,792$71,234sales of services10,0749,83110,464total revenues90,76286,62381,698cost of products(68,551)(65,640)(60,309)cost of services(8,132)(7,553)(8,247)boeing capital interest expense(69)(75)(109)total costs and expenses(76,752)(73,268)(68,665)14,01013,35513,033income from operating investments, net287214268general and administrative expense(3,767)(3,956)(3,717)research and development expense, net(3,047)(3,071)(3,298)(loss)/gain on dispositions, net(10)204earnings from operations7,4736,5626,290other (loss)/income, net(3)5662interest and debt expense(333)(386)(442)earnings before income taxes7,1376,2325,910income tax expense(1,691)(1,646)(2,007)net earnings from continuing operations5,4464,5863,903net loss on disposal of discontinued operations, net of taxes of $0, $0, and $2(1)(3)net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900basic earnings per share from continuing operations$7.47$6.03$5.15net loss on disposal of discontinued operations, net of taxesbasic earnings per share$7.47$6.03$5.15diluted earnings per share from continuing operations$7.38$5.96$5.11net loss on disposal of discontinued operations, net of taxesdiluted earnings per share$7.38$5.96$5.11see notes to the consolidated financial statements on pages 53  108.48table of contentsthe boeing company and subsidiariesconsolidated statements of comprehensive income(dollars in millions)years ended december 31,201420132012net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax:currency translation adjustments(97)(64)17unrealized (loss)/gain on derivative instruments:unrealized (loss)/gain arising during period, net of tax of $77, $42, and ($13)(137)(75)25reclassification adjustment for loss/(gain) included in net earnings, net of tax of ($4), $9, and $37(17)(5)total unrealized (loss)/gain on derivative instruments, net of tax(130)(92)20defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits:net actuarial (loss)/gain arising during the period, net of tax of $2,588, ($3,437), and $1,382(4,612)6,143(2,401)amortization of actuarial losses included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of ($367), ($849), and ($752)6611,5161,304settlements and curtailments included in net income, net of tax of ($101), ($33), and ($9)1805915pension and postretirement (cost)/benefit related to our equity method investments, net of tax $15, ($13), and ($74)(27)24127amortization of prior service cost included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of ($12), ($6), and ($10)211018prior service cost arising during the period, net of tax of $3, $41, and $9(5)(74)(16)total defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits, net of tax(3,782)7,678(953)other comprehensive (loss)/income, net of tax(4,009)7,522(916)comprehensive income related to noncontrolling interests1093comprehensive income, net of tax$1,447$12,116$2,987see notes to the consolidated financial statements on pages 53  108.49table of contentsthe boeing company and subsidiariesconsolidated statements of financial position(dollars in millions, except per share data)december31,20142013assetscash and cash equivalents$11,733$9,088short-term and other investments1,3596,170accounts receivable, net7,7296,546current portion of customer financing, net190344deferred income taxes1814inventories, net of advances and progress billings46,75642,912total current assets67,78565,074customer financing, net3,3713,627property, plant and equipment, net11,00710,224goodwill5,1195,043acquired intangible assets, net2,8693,052deferred income taxes6,5762,939investments1,1541,204other assets, net of accumulated amortization of $479 and $4481,3171,500total assets$99,198$92,663liabilities and equityaccounts payable$10,667$9,498accrued liabilities13,34314,131advances and billings in excess of related costs23,17520,027deferred income taxes and income taxes payable8,6036,267short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt9291,563total current liabilities56,71751,486accrued retiree health care6,8026,528accrued pension plan liability, net17,18210,474non-current income taxes payable358156other long-term liabilities1,208950long-term debt8,1418,072shareholders equity:common stock, par value $5.00  1,200,000,000 shares authorized; 1,012,261,159 shares issued5,0615,061additional paid-in capital4,6254,415treasury stock, at cost(23,298)(17,671)retained earnings36,18032,964accumulated other comprehensive loss(13,903)(9,894)total shareholders equity8,66514,875noncontrolling interests125122total equity8,79014,997total liabilities and equity$99,198$92,663see notes to the consolidated financial statements on pages 53  108.50table of contentsthe boeing company and subsidiariesconsolidated statements of cash flows(dollars in millions)years ended december 31,201420132012cash flows  operating activities:net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:non-cash items share-based plans expense195206193depreciation and amortization1,9061,8441,811investment/asset impairment charges, net2299684customer financing valuation benefit(28)(11)(10)loss on disposal of discontinued operations15loss/(gain) on dispositions, net10(20)(4)other charges and credits, net317528694excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements(114)(128)(45)changes in assets and liabilities accounts receivable(1,328)(879)(27)inventories, net of advances and progress billings(4,330)(5,562)(5,681)accounts payable1,339(298)1,199accrued liabilities(1,088)883801advances and billings in excess of related costs3,1453,3531,177income taxes receivable, payable and deferred1,3251,4451,605other long-term liabilities362157pension and other postretirement plans1,1861,7201,288customer financing, net578391407other3423(46)net cash provided by operating activities8,8588,1797,508cash flows  investing activities:property, plant and equipment additions(2,236)(2,098)(1,703)property, plant and equipment reductions345197acquisitions, net of cash acquired(163)(26)(124)contributions to investments(8,617)(15,394)(12,921)proceeds from investments13,41612,45310,901purchase of distribution rights(140)(7)other33net cash provided/(used) by investing activities2,467(5,154)(3,757)cash flows  financing activities:new borrowings96257160debt repayments(1,601)(1,434)(2,076)payments to noncontrolling interest(12)repayments of distribution rights and other asset financing(185)(280)(228)stock options exercised3431,097120excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements11412845employee taxes on certain share-based payment arrangements(98)(63)(76)common shares repurchased(6,001)(2,801)dividends paid(2,115)(1,467)(1,322)net cash used by financing activities(8,593)(4,249)(3,477)effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents(87)(29)18net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents2,645(1,253)292cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year9,08810,34110,049cash and cash equivalents at end of year$11,733$9,088$10,341see notes to the consolidated financial statements on pages 53 108.51the boeing company and subsidiariesconsolidated statements of equityboeing shareholders(dollars in millions, except per share data)commonstockadditionalpaid-incapitaltreasury stockretainedearningsaccumulatedother comprehensive lossnon-controllinginteresttotalbalance at january 1, 2012$5,061$4,033($16,603)$27,524($16,500)$93$3,608net earnings3,90033,903other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $536(916)(916)share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents215(27)188excess tax pools4545treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net(54)174120treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net(183)116(67)treasury shares issued for 401(k) contribution66376442cash dividends declared ($1.805 per share)(1,360)(1,360)changes in noncontrolling interests44balance at december 31, 2012$5,061$4,122($15,937)$30,037($17,416)$100$5,967net earnings4,58594,594other comprehensive income, net of tax of ($4,246)7,5227,522share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents216(16)200excess tax pools101101treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net1099881,097treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net(133)79(54)common shares repurchased(2,801)(2,801)cash dividends declared ($2.185 per share)(1,642)(1,642)changes in noncontrolling interests1313balance at december 31, 2013$5,061$4,415($17,671)$32,964($9,894)$122$14,997net earnings5,446105,456other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $2,199(4,009)(4,009)share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents208(20)188excess tax pools114114treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net17326343treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net(129)48(81)common shares repurchased(6,001)(6,001)cash dividends declared ($3.10 per share)(2,210)(2,210)changes in noncontrolling interests(7)(7)balance at december 31, 2014$5,061$4,625($23,298)$36,180($13,903)$125$8,790see notes to the consolidated financial statements on pages 53  108.52table of contentsthe boeing company and subsidiariesnotes to the consolidated financial statementssummary of business segment data(dollars in millions)years ended december31,201420132012revenues:commercial airplanes$59,990$52,981$49,127defense, space& security:boeing military aircraft13,51115,28515,388network& space systems8,0038,5127,911global services& support9,3679,4009,308total defense, space& security30,88133,19732,607boeing capital416408468unallocated items, eliminations and other(525)37(504)total revenues$90,762$86,623$81,698earnings from operations:commercial airplanes$6,411$5,795$4,711defense, space& security:boeing military aircraft1,3041,5041,487network& space systems698719562global services& support1,1311,0121,019total defense, space& security3,1333,2353,068boeing capital9210788unallocated items, eliminations and other(2,163)(2,575)(1,577)earnings from operations$7,473$6,562$6,290other (loss)/income, net(3)5662interest and debt expense(333)(386)(442)earnings before income taxes7,1376,2325,910income tax expense(1,691)(1,646)(2,007)net earnings from continuing operations5,4464,5863,903net loss on disposal of discontinued operations, net of taxes of $0, $0, $2(1)(3)net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900this information is an integral part of the notes to the consolidated financial statements. see note 21 for further segment results.53table of contentsthe boeing company and subsidiariesnotes to the consolidated financial statementsyears ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions, except per share data)note 1  summary of significant accounting policiesprinciples of consolidation and basis of presentationthe consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared by management of the boeing company (herein referred to as boeing, the company, we, us, or our). these statements include the accounts of all majority-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities that are required to be consolidated. all significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated. segment data for all years have been adjusted to reflect a realignment ofcertain programs from the boeing military aircraft (bma) segment to the global services& support (gs&s) segment and the combination of other segment with unallocated items and eliminations. see note 21.standards issued and not yet implementedin may 2014, the financial accounting standards board issued accounting standards update no. 2014-09, revenue from contracts with customers. the new standard is effective for reporting periods beginning after december 15, 2016 and early adoption is not permitted. the comprehensive new standard will supersede existing revenue recognition guidance and require revenue to be recognized when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. adoption of the new rules could affect the timing of revenue recognition for certain transactions. the guidance permits two implementation approaches, one requiring retrospective application of the new standard with restatement of prior years and one requiring prospective application of the new standard with disclosure of results under old standards. for boeing the new standard will be effective january 1, 2017 and the company is currently evaluating the impacts of adoption and the implementation approach to be used. use of estimatesmanagement makes assumptions and estimates to prepare financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. those assumptions and estimates directly affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. significant estimates for which changes in the near term are considered reasonably possible and that may have a material impact on the financial statements are disclosed in these notes to the consolidated financial statements.operating cyclefor classification of certain current assets and liabilities, we use the duration of the related contract or program as our operating cycle, which is generally longer than one year.revenue and related cost recognitioncontract accounting contract accounting is used for development and production activities predominantly by defense, space& security (bds). the majority of business conducted by bds is performed under contracts with the u.s. government and other customers that extend over several years. contract accounting involves a judgmental process of estimating total sales and costs for each contract resulting in the development of estimated cost of sales percentages. for each contract, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage to the amount of revenue 54table of contentsrecognized. when the current estimates of total sales and costs for a contract indicate a loss, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recognized.changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effect on operating income are recognized using a cumulative catch-up adjustment which recognizes in the current period the cumulative effect of the changes on current and prior periods based on a contracts percent complete. in 2014, 2013 and 2012 net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-forward losses, across all contracts increased earnings from operations by $100, $242 and $379, respectively and diluted eps by $0.10, $0.23 and $0.33, respectively. significant adjustments during the three years ended december 31, 2014 included a reach-forward loss of $425 on the usaf kc-46a tanker contract recorded during 2014.we combine contracts for accounting purposes when they are negotiated as a package with an overall profit margin objective. these essentially represent an agreement to do a single project for a single customer, involve interrelated construction activities with substantial common costs, and are performed concurrently or sequentially. when a group of contracts is combined, revenue and profit are earned uniformly over the performance of the combined contracts. similarly, we may segment a single contract or group of contracts when a clear economic decision has been made during contract negotiations that would produce different rates of profitability for each element or phase of the contract.sales related to fixed-price contracts are recognized as deliveries are made, except for certain fixed-price contracts that require substantial performance over an extended period before deliveries begin, for which sales are recorded based on the attainment of performance milestones. sales related to contracts in which we are reimbursed for costs incurred plus an agreed upon profit are recorded as costs are incurred. the federal acquisition regulations provide guidance on the types of cost that will be reimbursed in establishing contract price. contracts may contain provisions to earn incentive and award fees if specified targets are achieved. incentive and award fees that can be reasonably estimated and are probable are recorded over the performance period of the contract. incentive and award fees that cannot be reasonably estimated are recorded when awarded.program accounting our commercial airplanes segment predominantly uses program accounting to account for cost of sales related to its programs. program accounting is applicable to products manufactured for delivery under production-type contracts where profitability is realized over multiple contracts and years. under program accounting, inventoriable production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and warranty costs are accumulated and charged to cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. a program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. the determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. to establish the relationship of sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates of (a)the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b)the period over which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced, and (c)the units expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total program.we recognize sales for commercial airplane deliveries as each unit is completed and accepted by the customer. sales recognized represent the price negotiated with the customer, adjusted by an escalation formula as specified in the customer agreement. the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage for the total remaining program to the amount of sales recognized for airplanes delivered and accepted by the customer. changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effects on program margins are recognized prospectively except in cases where the program is determined to have a reach-forward loss in which case the loss is recognized in the current period. see note 11.55table of contentsconcession sharing arrangements we account for sales concessions to our customers in consideration of their purchase of products and services as a reduction to revenue when the related products and services are delivered. the sales concessions incurred may be partially reimbursed by certain suppliers in accordance with concession sharing arrangements. we record these reimbursements, which are presumed to represent reductions in the price of the vendors products or services, as a reduction in cost of products.spare parts revenue we recognize sales of spare parts upon delivery and the amount reported as cost of sales is recorded at average cost.service revenue service revenue is recognized when the service is performed with the exception of u.s. government service agreements, which are accounted for using contract accounting. service activities primarily include: support agreements associated with military aircraft and helicopter contracts, ongoing maintenance of international space station, and technical and flight operation services for commercial aircraft. service revenue and associated cost of sales from pay-in-advance subscription fees are deferred and recognized as services are rendered.financial services revenue we record financial services revenue associated with sales-type/finance leases, operating leases, and notes receivable.lease and financing revenue arrangements are included in sales of services on the consolidated statements of operations. for sales-type/finance leases, we record an asset at lease inception. this asset is recorded at the aggregate future minimum lease payments, estimated residual value of the leased equipment, and deferred incremental direct costs less unearned income. income is recognized over the life of the lease to approximate a level rate of return on the net investment. residual values, which are reviewed periodically, represent the estimated amount we expect to receive at lease termination from the disposition of the leased equipment. actual residual values realized could differ from these estimates. declines in estimated residual value that are deemed other-than-temporary are recognized in the period in which the declines occur.for operating leases, revenue on leased aircraft and equipment is recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. operating lease assets, included in customer financing, are recorded at cost and depreciated over the period that we project we will hold the asset to an estimated residual value, using the straight-line method. we periodically review our estimates of residual value and recognize forecasted changes by prospectively adjusting depreciation expense.for notes receivable, notes are recorded net of any unamortized discounts and deferred incremental direct costs. interest income and amortization of any discounts are recorded ratably over the related term of the note.reinsurance revenue our wholly-owned insurance subsidiary, astro ltd., participates in a reinsurance pool for workers compensation. the member agreements and practices of the reinsurance pool minimize any participating members individual risk. reinsurance revenues were $135, $160 and $129 during 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. reinsurance costs related to premiums and claims paid to the reinsurance pool were $144, $147 and $128 during 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. revenues and costs are presented net in cost of sales in the consolidated statements of operations.fleet supportwe provide assistance and services to facilitate efficient and safe aircraft operation to the operators of all our commercial airplane models. collectively known as fleet support services, these activities and services include flight and maintenance training, field service support, engineering services, and technical data and documents. fleet support activity begins prior to aircraft delivery as the customer receives training, manuals, and technical consulting support. this activity continues throughout the aircrafts operational life. services provided after delivery include field service support, consulting on maintenance, repair, and 56table of contentsoperational issues brought forth by the customer or regulators, updating manuals and engineering data, and the issuance of service bulletins that impact the entire models fleet. field service support involves our personnel located at customer facilities providing and coordinating fleet support activities and requests. the costs for fleet support are expensed as incurred as cost of services.research and developmentresearch and development includes costs incurred for experimentation, design, and testing, as well as bid and proposal efforts related to government products and services which are expensed as incurred unless the costs are related to certain contractual arrangements with customers. costs that are incurred pursuant to such contractual arrangements are recorded over the period that revenue is recognized, consistent with our contract accounting policy. we have certain research and development arrangements that meet the requirement for best efforts research and development accounting. accordingly, the amounts funded by the customer are recognized as an offset to our research and development expense rather than as contract revenues. research and development expense included bid and proposal costs of $289, $285 and $326 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.we have established cost sharing arrangements with some suppliers for the 787 program. our cost sharing arrangements state that the supplier contributions are for reimbursements of costs we incur for experimentation, basic design, and testing activities during the 787 development. in each arrangement, we retain substantial rights to the 787 part or component covered by the arrangement. the amounts received from these cost sharing arrangements are recorded as a reduction to research and development expenses since we have no obligation to refund any amounts received per the arrangements regardless of the outcome of the development efforts. specifically, under the terms of each agreement, payments received from suppliers for their share of the costs are typically based on milestones and are recognized as earned when we achieve the milestone events and no ongoing obligation on our part exists. in the event we receive a milestone payment prior to the completion of the milestone, the amount is classified in accrued liabilities until earned.share-based compensationwe provide various forms of share-based compensation to our employees. for awards settled in shares, we measure compensation expense based on the grant-date fair value net of estimated forfeitures. for awards settled in cash, or that may be settled in cash, we measure compensation expense based on the fair value at each reporting date net of estimated forfeitures. the expense is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award.income taxesprovisions for federal, state, and non-u.s. income taxes are calculated on reported earnings before income taxes based on current tax law and also include, in the current period, the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in determining deferred tax assets and liabilities. such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable because certain items of income and expense are recognized in different time periods for financial reporting purposes than for income tax purposes. significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions.the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. we record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured for financial statement purposes and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. to the extent that our assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the 57table of contentsdetermination is made. tax-related interest and penalties are classified as a component of income tax expense.postretirement plansthe majority of our employees are earning benefits under defined benefit pension plans. in 2014, we announced changes to our retirement plans whereby nonunion and the majority of union employees currently participating in defined benefit pension plans will transition in 2016 to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan. we also provide postretirement benefit plans other than pensions, consisting principally of health care coverage to eligible retirees and qualifying dependents. benefits under the pension and other postretirement benefit plans are generally based on age at retirement and years of service and, for some pension plans, benefits are also based on the employees annual earnings. the net periodic cost of our pension and other postretirement plans is determined using the projected unit credit method and several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, the long-term rate of asset return, and medical trend (rate of growth for medical costs). a portion of net periodic pension and other postretirement income or expense is not recognized in net earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to production as product costs, and reflected in inventory at the end of a reporting period. actuarial gains and losses, which occur when actual experience differs from actuarial assumptions, are reflected in shareholders equity (net of taxes). if actuarial gains and losses exceed ten percent of the greater of plan assets or plan liabilities we amortize them over the average future service period of employees. the funded status of our pension and postretirement plans is reflected on the consolidated statements of financial position.postemployment planswe record a liability for postemployment benefits, such as severance or job training, when payment is probable, the amount is reasonably estimable, and the obligation relates to rights that have vested or accumulated.environmental remediationwe are subject to federal and state requirements for protection of the environment, including those for discharge of hazardous materials and remediation of contaminated sites. we routinely assess, based on in-depth studies, expert analyses and legal reviews, our contingencies, obligations, and commitments for remediation of contaminated sites, including assessments of ranges and probabilities of recoveries from other responsible parties and/or insurance carriers. our policy is to accrue and charge to current expense identified exposures related to environmental remediation sites when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. the amount of the liability is based on our best estimate or the low end of a range of reasonably possible exposure for investigation, cleanup, and monitoring costs to be incurred. estimated remediation costs are not discounted to present value as the timing of payments cannot be reasonably estimated. we may be able to recover a portion of the remediation costs from insurers or other third parties. such recoveries are recorded when realization of the claim for recovery is deemed probable.cash and cash equivalentscash and cash equivalents consist of highly liquid instruments, such as commercial paper, time deposits, and other money market instruments, which have original maturities of three months or less. we aggregate our cash balances by bank where conditions for right of set-off are met, and reclassify any negative balances, consisting mainly of uncleared checks, to accounts payable. negative balances reclassified to accounts payable were $241 and $108 at december 31, 2014 and 2013.58table of contentsinventoriesinventoried costs on commercial aircraft programs and long-term contracts include direct engineering, production and tooling and other non-recurring costs, and applicable overhead, which includes fringe benefits, production related indirect and plant management salaries and plant services, not in excess of estimated net realizable value. to the extent a material amount of such costs are related to an abnormal event or are fixed costs not appropriately attributable to our programs or contracts, they are expensed in the current period rather than inventoried. inventoried costs include amounts relating to programs and contracts with long-term production cycles, a portion of which is not expected to be realized within one year. included in inventory for federal government contracts is an allocation of allowable costs related to manufacturing process reengineering.commercial aircraft programs inventory includes deferred production costs and supplier advances. deferred production costs represent actual costs incurred for production of early units that exceed the estimated average cost of all units in the program accounting quantity. higher production costs are experienced at the beginning of a new or derivative airplane program. units produced early in a program require substantially more effort (labor and other resources) than units produced later in a program because of volume efficiencies and the effects of learning. we expect that these deferred costs will be fully recovered when all units included in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries is below the estimated average cost of all units in the program. supplier advances represent payments for parts we have contracted to receive from suppliers in the future. as parts are received, supplier advances are amortized to work in process.the determination of net realizable value of long-term contract costs is based upon quarterly reviews that estimate costs to be incurred to complete all contract requirements. when actual contract costs and the estimate to complete exceed total estimated contract revenues, a loss provision is recorded. the determination of net realizable value of commercial aircraft program costs is based upon quarterly program reviews that estimate revenue and cost to be incurred to complete the program accounting quantity. when estimated costs to complete exceed estimated program revenues to go, a program loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the accounting quantity.used aircraft purchased by the commercial airplanes segment and general stock materials are stated at cost not in excess of net realizable value. see aircraft valuation within this note for a discussion of our valuation of used aircraft. spare parts inventory is stated at lower of average unit cost or market. we review our commercial spare parts and general stock materials quarterly to identify impaired inventory, including excess or obsolete inventory, based on historical sales trends, expected production usage, and the size and age of the aircraft fleet using the part. impaired inventories are charged to cost of products in the period the impairment occurs.included in inventory for commercial aircraft programs are amounts paid or credited in cash, or other consideration to certain airline customers, that are referred to as early issue sales consideration. early issue sales consideration is recognized as a reduction to revenue when the delivery of the aircraft under contract occurs. if an airline customer does not perform and take delivery of the contracted aircraft, we believe that we would have the ability to recover amounts paid. however, to the extent early issue sales consideration exceeds advances and is not considered to be otherwise recoverable, it would be written off in the current period.we net advances and progress billings on long-term contracts against inventory in the consolidated statements of financial position. advances and progress billings in excess of related inventory are reported in advances and billings in excess of related costs.59table of contentsprecontract costswe may, from time to time, incur costs in excess of the amounts required for existing contracts. if we determine the costs are probable of recovery from future orders, then we capitalize the precontract costs we incur, excluding start-up costs which are expensed as incurred. capitalized precontract costs are included in inventories, net of advances and progress billings, in the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position. should future orders not materialize or we determine the costs are no longer probable of recovery, the capitalized costs would be written off.property, plant and equipmentproperty, plant and equipment are recorded at cost, including applicable construction-period interest, less accumulated depreciation and are depreciated principally over the following estimated useful lives: new buildings and land improvements, from 10 to 40 years; and new machinery and equipment, from 3to 20 years. the principal methods of depreciation are as follows: buildings and land improvements, 150% declining balance; and machinery and equipment, sum-of-the-years digits. capitalized internal use software is included in other assets and amortized using the straight line method over 5 years. we periodically evaluate the appropriateness of remaining depreciable lives assigned to long-lived assets, including assets that may be subject to a management plan for disposition.long-lived assets held for sale are stated at the lower of cost or fair value less cost to sell. long-lived assets held for use are subject to an impairment assessment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. if the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.asset retirement obligationswe record all known asset retirement obligations for which the liabilitys fair value can be reasonably estimated, including certain asbestos removal, asset decommissioning and contractual lease restoration obligations. recorded amounts are not material.we also have known conditional asset retirement obligations, such as certain asbestos remediation and asset decommissioning activities to be performed in the future, that are not reasonably estimable due to insufficient information about the timing and method of settlement of the obligation. accordingly, these obligations have not been recorded in the consolidated financial statements. a liability for these obligations will be recorded in the period when sufficient information regarding timing and method of settlement becomes available to make a reasonable estimate of the liabilitys fair value. in addition, there may be conditional asset retirement obligations that we have not yet discovered (e.g. asbestos may exist in certain buildings but we have not become aware of it through the normal course of business), and therefore, these obligations also have not been included in the consolidated financial statements.goodwill and other acquired intangiblesgoodwill and other acquired intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually and when an event occurs or circumstances change such that it is more likely than not that an impairment may exist. our annual testing date is april1.we test goodwill for impairment by performing a qualitative assessment or using a two-step impairment process. if we choose to perform a qualitative assessment and determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related operations, the two-step impairment process is then performed; otherwise, no further testing is required. for operations where the two-step impairment process is used, we first compare the carrying value of net assets to the fair value of the related 60table of contentsoperations. if the fair value is determined to be less than carrying value, a second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. in this process, a fair value for goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. the shortfall of the fair value below carrying value represents the amount of goodwill impairment.indefinite-lived intangibles consist of brand and trade names acquired in business combinations. we test these intangibles for impairment by comparing their carrying value to current projections of discounted cash flows attributable to the brand and trade names. any excess carrying value over the amount of discounted cash flows represents the amount of the impairment.our finite-lived acquired intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows: developed technology, from 5 to 14 years; product know-how, from 5 to 30 years; customer base, from 3 to 19 years; distribution rights, from 5 to 27 years; and other, from 3 to 32 years. we evaluate the potential impairment of finite-lived acquired intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. if the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.investmentstime deposits are held-to-maturity investments that are carried at cost.the equity method of accounting is used to account for investments for which we have the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control, over an investee. significant influence is generally deemed to exist if we have an ownership interest in the voting stock of an investee of between 20% and 50%.we classify investment income and loss on our consolidated statements of operations based on whether the investment is operating or non-operating in nature. operating investments align strategically and are integrated with our operations. earnings from operating investments, including our share of income or loss from equity method investments, dividend income from certain cost method investments, and any impairments or gain/loss on the disposition of these investments, are recorded in income from operating investments, net. non-operating investments are those we hold for non-strategic purposes. earnings from non-operating investments, including interest and dividends on marketable securities, and any impairments or gain/loss on the disposition of these investments are recorded in other income/(expense), net.derivativesall derivative instruments are recognized in the financial statements and measured at fair value regardless of the purpose or intent of holding them. we use derivative instruments to principally manage a variety of market risks. for derivatives designated as hedges of the exposure to changes in fair value of the recognized asset or liability or a firm commitment (referred to as fair value hedges), the gain or loss is recognized in earnings in the period of change together with the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged. the effect of that accounting is to include in earnings the extent to which the hedge is not effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair value. for our cash flow hedges, the effective portion of the derivatives gain or loss is initially reported in comprehensive income and is subsequently reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods during which the hedged forecasted transaction affects earnings. the ineffective portion of the gain or loss of a cash flow hedge is reported in earnings immediately. we also hold certain instruments for economic purposes that are not designated for hedge accounting treatment. for these derivative instruments, the changes in their fair value are also recorded in earnings immediately.61table of contentsaircraft valuationused aircraft under trade-in commitments and aircraft under repurchase commitments in conjunction with signing a definitive agreement for the sale of new aircraft (sale aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain customers that give them the right to trade in used aircraft at a specified price upon the purchase of sale aircraft. additionally, we have entered into contingent repurchase commitments with certain customers wherein we agree to repurchase the sale aircraft at a specified price, generally 10 to 15 years after delivery of the sale aircraft. our repurchase of the sale aircraft is contingent upon a future, mutually acceptable agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft. if we execute an agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft, and if the customer exercises its right to sell the sale aircraft to us, a contingent repurchase commitment would become a trade-in commitment. our historical experience is that contingent repurchase commitments infrequently become trade-in commitments.exposure related to trade-in commitments may take the form of:(1)adjustments to revenue for the difference between the contractual trade-in price in the definitive agreement and our best estimate of the fair value of the trade-in aircraft as of the date of such agreement, which would be recognized upon delivery of the sale aircraft, and/or(2)charges to cost of products for adverse changes in the fair value of trade-in aircraft that occur subsequent to signing of a definitive agreement for sale aircraft but prior to the purchase of the used trade-in aircraft. estimates based on current aircraft values would be included in accrued liabilities.the fair value of trade-in aircraft is determined using aircraft-specific data such as model, age and condition, market conditions for specific aircraft and similar models, and multiple valuation sources. this process uses our assessment of the market for each trade-in aircraft, which in most instances begins years before the return of the aircraft. there are several possible markets in which we continually pursue opportunities to place used aircraft. these markets include, but are not limited to, the resale market, which could potentially include the cost of long-term storage; the leasing market, with the potential for refurbishment costs to meet the leasing customers requirements; or the scrap market. trade-in aircraft valuation varies significantly depending on which market we determine is most likely for each aircraft. on a quarterly basis, we update our valuation analysis based on the actual activities associated with placing each aircraft into a market. this quarterly valuation process yields results that are typically lower than residual value estimates by independent sources and tends to more accurately reflect results upon the actual placement of the aircraft.used aircraft acquired by the commercial airplanes segment are included in inventories at the lower of cost or market as it is our intent to sell these assets. to mitigate costs and enhance marketability, aircraft may be placed on operating lease. while on operating lease, the assets are included in customer financing.customer financing customer financing includes operating lease equipment, notes receivable, and sales-type/finance leases. sales-type/finance leases are treated as receivables, and allowances for losses are established as necessary.we assess the fair value of the assets we own, including equipment under operating leases, assets held for sale or re-lease, and collateral underlying receivables, to determine if their fair values are less than the related assets carrying values. differences between carrying values and fair values of sales-type/finance leases and notes and other receivables, as determined by collateral value, are considered in determining the allowance for losses on receivables.we use a median calculated from published collateral values from multiple third-party aircraft value publications based on the type and age of the aircraft to determine the fair value of aircraft. under certain circumstances, we apply judgment based on the attributes of the specific aircraft or equipment, usually 62table of contentswhen the features or use of the aircraft vary significantly from the more generic aircraft attributes covered by outside publications.impairment review for assets under operating leases and held for sale or re-lease we evaluate for impairment assets under operating lease or assets held for sale or re-lease when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the expected undiscounted cash flow from the asset may be less than the carrying value. we use various assumptions when determining the expected undiscounted cash flow, including our intentions for how long we will hold an asset subject to operating lease before it is sold, the expected future lease rates, lease terms, residual value of the asset, periods in which the asset may be held in preparation for a follow-on lease, maintenance costs, remarketing costs and the remaining economic life of the asset. we record assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value less costs to sell.when we determine that impairment is indicated for an asset, the amount of impairment expense recorded is the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the asset.allowance for losses on customer financing receivables we record the potential impairment of customer financing receivables in a valuation account, the balance of which is an accounting estimate of probable but unconfirmed losses. the allowance for losses on receivables relates to two components of receivables: (a)receivables that are evaluated individually for impairment and (b)all other receivables.we determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due according to the original contractual terms of the receivable agreement, without regard to any subsequent restructurings. factors considered in assessing collectability include, but are not limited to, a customers extended delinquency, requests for restructuring and filings for bankruptcy. we determine a specific impairment allowance based on the difference between the carrying value of the receivable and the estimated fair value of the related collateral we would expect to realize.we review the adequacy of the allowance attributable to the remaining receivables (after excluding receivables subject to a specific impairment allowance) by assessing both the collateral exposure and the applicable cumulative default rate. collateral exposure for a particular receivable is the excess of the carrying value of the receivable over the fair value of the related collateral. a receivable with an estimated fair value in excess of the carrying value is considered to have no collateral exposure. the applicable cumulative default rate is determined using two components: customer credit ratings and weighted average remaining contract term. internally assigned credit ratings, our credit quality indicator, are determined for each customer in the portfolio. those ratings are updated based upon public information and information obtained directly from our customers.we have entered into agreements with certain customers that would entitle us to look beyond the specific collateral underlying the receivable for purposes of determining the collateral exposure as described above. should the proceeds from the sale of the underlying collateral asset resulting from a default condition be insufficient to cover the carrying value of our receivable (creating a shortfall condition), these agreements would, for example, permit us to take the actions necessary to sell or retain certain other assets in which the customer has an equity interest and use the proceeds to cover the shortfall.each quarter we review customer credit ratings, published historical credit default rates for different rating categories, and multiple third-party aircraft value publications as a basis to validate the reasonableness of the allowance for losses on receivables. there can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from estimates or that the consideration of these factors in the future will not result in an increase or decrease to the allowance for losses on receivables.63table of contentswarrantiesin conjunction with certain product sales, we provide warranties that cover factors such as non-conformance to specifications and defects in material and design. the majority of our warranties are issued by our commercial airplanes segment. generally, aircraft sales are accompanied by a three to four-year standard warranty for systems, accessories, equipment, parts, and software manufactured by us or manufactured to certain standards under our authorization. these warranties are included in the programs estimate at completion. on occasion we have made commitments beyond the standard warranty obligation to correct fleet-wide major issues of a particular model, resulting in additional accrued warranty expense. warranties issued by our bds segments principally relate to sales of military aircraft and weapons hardware and are included in the contract cost estimates. these sales are generally accompanied by a six to twelve-month warranty period and cover systems, accessories, equipment, parts, and software manufactured by us to certain contractual specifications. estimated costs related to standard warranties are recorded in the period in which the related product sales occur. the warranty liability recorded at each balance sheet date reflects the estimated number of months of warranty coverage outstanding for products delivered times the average of historical monthly warranty payments, as well as additional amounts for certain major warranty issues that exceed a normal claims level. estimated costs of these additional warranty issues are considered changes to the initial liability estimate.we provide guarantees to certain commercial airplane customers which include compensation provisions for failure to meet specified aircraft performance targets. we account for these performance guarantees as warranties. the estimated liability for these warranties is based on known and anticipated operational characteristics and forecasted customer operation of the aircraft relative to contractually specified performance targets, and anticipated settlements when contractual remedies are not specified. estimated payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue at delivery of the related aircraft. we have agreements that require certain suppliers to compensate us for amounts paid to customers for failure of supplied equipment to meet specified performance targets. claims against suppliers under these agreements are included in inventories and recorded as a reduction in cost of products at delivery of the related aircraft. these performance warranties and claims against suppliers are included in the programs estimate at completion.supplier penaltieswe record an accrual for supplier penalties when an event occurs that makes it probable that a supplier penalty will be incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. until an event occurs, we fully anticipate accepting all products procured under production-related contracts.guaranteeswe record a liability in accrued liabilities for the fair value of guarantees that are issued or modified after december31, 2002. for a residual value guarantee where we received a cash premium, the liability is equal to the cash premium received at the guarantees inception. for credit guarantees, the liability is equal to the present value of the expected loss. we determine the expected loss by multiplying the creditors default rate by the guarantee amount reduced by the expected recovery, if applicable, for each future period the credit guarantee will be outstanding. if at inception of a guarantee, we determine there is a probable related contingent loss, we will recognize a liability for the greater of (a)the fair value of the guarantee as described above or (b)the probable contingent loss amount.64table of contentsnote 2  goodwill and acquired intangibleschanges in the carrying amount of goodwill by reportable segment for the years ended december 31, 2014 and 2013 were as follows:commercialairplanesboeingmilitaryaircraftnetwork& spacesystemsglobalservices&supporttotalbalance at january 1, 2013$2,125$946$1,513$451$5,035acquisitions18725goodwill adjustments(17)(17)balance at december 31, 2013$2,108$964$1,513$458$5,043acquisitions4557102goodwill adjustments(22)(4)(26)balance at december 31, 2014$2,131$964$1,566$458$5,119as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, we had indefinite-lived intangible assets with carrying amounts of $490 and $497 relating to trade names.the gross carrying amounts and accumulated amortization of our acquired finite-lived intangible assets were as follows at december31:20142013grosscarryingamountaccumulatedamortizationgrosscarryingamountaccumulatedamortizationdistribution rights$2,245$550$2,275$483product know-how494216507199customer base619381615347developed technology500386853742other202148233157total$4,060$1,681$4,483$1,928amortization expense for acquired finite-lived intangible assets for the years ended december 31, 2014 and 2013 was $227 and $205. estimated amortization expense for the five succeeding years is as follows: 20152016201720182019estimated amortization expense$215$210$201$190$182during 2014 and 2013 we acquired $87 and $144 of finite-lived intangible assets, of which $24 and $0 related to non-cash investing and financing transactions. total acquired finite-lived intangibles of $24 and $182 remain unpaid as of december 31, 2014 and 2013.65table of contentsnote 3  earnings per share basic and diluted earnings per share are computed using the two-class method, which is an earnings allocation method that determines earnings per share for common shares and participating securities. the undistributed earnings are allocated between common shares and participating securities as if all earnings had been distributed during the period. participating securities and common shares have equal rights to undistributed earnings.basic earnings per share is calculated by taking net earnings, less earnings available to participating securities, divided by the basic weighted average common shares outstanding.diluted earnings per share is calculated by taking net earnings, less earnings available to participating securities, divided by the diluted weighted average common shares outstanding.the elements used in the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share were as follows:(in millions - except per share amounts)years ended december31,201420132012net earnings$5,446$4,585$3,900less: earnings available to participating securities678net earnings available to common shareholders$5,440$4,578$3,892basicbasic weighted average shares outstanding728.9760.8758.0less: participating securities1.31.92.3basic weighted average common shares outstanding727.6758.9755.7dilutedbasic weighted average shares outstanding728.9760.8758.0dilutive potential common shares(1)9.18.75.8diluted weighted average shares outstanding738.0769.5763.8less: participating securities1.31.92.3diluted weighted average common shares outstanding736.7767.6761.5net earnings per share:basic$7.47$6.03$5.15diluted7.385.965.11(1)diluted earnings per share includes any dilutive impact of stock options, restricted stock units, performance-based restricted stock units and performance awards.66table of contentsthe following table includes the number of shares that may be dilutive potential common shares in the future. these shares were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the effect was either antidilutive or the performance condition was not met. (shares in millions)years ended december31,201420132012stock options4.823.6performance awards5.14.24.9performance-based restricted stock units1.3note 4  income taxesthe components of earnings before income taxes were:years ended december31,201420132012u.s.$6,829$5,946$5,647non-u.s.308286263total$7,137$6,232$5,910income tax expense/(benefit) consisted of the following:years ended december31,201420132012current tax expenseu.s. federal$676($82)$657non-u.s.917652u.s. state691119total current8365728deferred tax expenseu.s. federal8281,5311,209non-u.s.3441(13)u.s. state(7)6983total deferred8551,6411,279total income tax expense$1,691$1,646$2,007net income tax payments were $355, $209 and $410 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.67table of contentsthe following is a reconciliation of the u.s. federal statutory tax rate of 35% to our effective income tax rates:years ended december31,201420132012u.s. federal statutory tax35.0%35.0%35.0%research and development credits (1)(2.9)(4.9)0.8amendments to the r&e regulations (2)(3.4)tax basis adjustment (3)(3.6)tax on international activities(0.2)(0.1)(1.2)tax deductible dividends(0.7)(0.6)(0.7)state income tax provision, net of effect on u.s. federal tax0.70.40.8federal audit settlements(4)(3.6)other provision adjustments(1.0)(0.7)effective income tax rate23.7%26.4%34.0%(1)in the fourth quarter of 2014, we recorded tax benefits of $188 related to the reinstatement of the research tax credit for 2014. research tax credits for the 2013 and 2012 tax years were both recorded in 2013.(2)in 2013, we recorded $212 for the issuance of favorable regulations related to research and experimental (r&e) expenditures. (3)in the second quarter of 2014 we recorded an incremental tax benefit of $265 related to the application of a 2012 federal court of claims decision which held that the tax basis in certain assets could be increased and realized upon the assets' disposition (tax basis adjustment). (4)in the second quarter of 2014, tax benefits of $116 and $143 were recorded as a result of the 2007-2008 and 2009-2010 federal tax audit settlements.the research tax credit expired on december 31, 2014. if the research tax credit is not extended there would be an unfavorable impact to our 2015 effective income tax rate.federal income tax audits have been settled for all years prior to 2011. the years 2011-2012 are currently being examined by the irs. we are also subject to examination in major state and international jurisdictions for the 2001-2014 tax years. we believe appropriate provisions for all outstanding tax issues have been made for all jurisdictions and all open years.68table of contentssignificant components of our deferred tax (liabilities)/assets at december31 were as follows:20142013inventory and long-term contract methods of income recognition, fixed assets and other (net of valuation allowance of $18 and $20)($11,589)($9,948)pension benefits6,1453,099retiree health care benefits2,5722,458other employee benefits1,4771,773customer and commercial financing(853)(990)net operating loss, credit and capital loss carryovers (net of valuation allowance of $63 and $105)(1)266362other net unrealized losses11026unremitted earnings of non-u.s. subsidiaries(37)(44)in-process research and development related to acquisitions1023partnerships and joint ventures9(62)net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets(2)($1,890)($3,303)(1) of the deferred tax asset for net operating loss and credit carryovers, $252 expires in years ending from december31, 2015 through december31, 2034 and $14 may be carried over indefinitely. (2) included in the net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets as of december 31, 2014 and 2013 are deferred tax assets in the amounts of $8,007 and $5,818 related to accumulated other comprehensive loss. net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets at december31 were as follows:20142013deferred tax assets$14,219$12,486deferred tax liabilities(16,028)(15,664)valuation allowance(81)(125)net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets($1,890)($3,303)the measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by a valuation allowance if, based upon available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.we have provided for u.s. deferred income taxes and foreign withholding tax in the amount of $37 on undistributed earnings not considered indefinitely reinvested in our non-u.s. subsidiaries. we have not provided for u.s. deferred income taxes or foreign withholding tax on the remainder of undistributed earnings from our non-u.s. subsidiaries of approximately $800 because such earnings are considered to be indefinitely reinvested and it is not practicable to estimate the amount of tax that may be payable upon distribution.as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, the amounts accrued for the payment of income tax-related interest and penalties included in the consolidated statements of financial position were as follows: interest of $17 and $12 and penalties of $5 and $8. the amounts of interest benefit included in the consolidated statements of operations were $17, $4, and $43 for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. the interest benefit recorded during 2012 was primarily related to the settlement of non-us audits. 69table of contentsa reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:201420132012unrecognized tax benefits  january1$1,141$1,055$939gross increases  tax positions in prior periods4031055gross decreases  tax positions in prior periods(251)(125)(20)gross increases  current-period tax positions21720283gross decreases  current-period tax positions(1)(1)settlements(197)(1)lapse of statute of limitations(1)unrecognized tax benefits  december31$1,312$1,141$1,055as of december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits was $1,312, $1,141 and $1,055, respectively, of which $1,180, $1,018 and $945 would affect the effective tax rate, if recognized. as of december31, 2014, these amounts are primarily associated with u.s. federal tax issues such as the amount of research tax credits claimed, the domestic production activities deductions claimed, tax basis adjustments and u.s. taxation of foreign earnings. also included in these amounts are accruals for domestic state tax issues such as the allocation of income among various state tax jurisdictions and the amount of state tax credits claimed.note 5  accounts receivable, netaccounts receivable at december 31 consisted of the following:20142013u.s. government contracts$4,281$3,604defense, space & security customers (1)1,0181,073commercial airplanes customers1,7491,072reinsurance receivables512525other296376less valuation allowance(127)(104)total$7,729$6,546(1)excludes u.s. government contractsthe following table summarizes our accounts receivable under long-term contracts that were unbillable or related to outstanding claims as of december 31:unbillableclaims2014201320142013current$2,306$1,550$29$3expected to be collected after one year1,4081,0207361total$3,714$2,570$102$64under contract accounting unbillable receivables on long-term contracts arise when the sales or revenues based on performance attainment, though appropriately recognized, cannot be billed yet under terms of the contract as of the balance sheet date. any adjustment for the credit quality of unbillable receivables, if required, would be recorded as a direct reduction of revenue. factors considered in assessing the collectability of unbillable receivables include, but are not limited to, a customers extended delinquency, 70table of contentsrequests for restructuring and filings for bankruptcy. unbillable receivables related to commercial customers expected to be collected after one year were $172 and $179 at december 31, 2014 and 2013. accounts receivable related to claims are items that we believe are earned, but are subject to uncertainty concerning their determination or ultimate realization.accounts receivable as of december31, 2014, includes $112 of unbillable receivables on a long-term contract with lightsquared, lp (lightsquared) related to the construction of two commercial satellites. one of the satellites has been delivered, and the other is substantially complete but remains in boeings possession. on may 14, 2012, lightsquared filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. we believe that our rights in the second satellite and related ground-segment assets are sufficient to protect the value of our receivables in the event lightsquared fails to make payments as contractually required or rejects its contract with us. given the uncertainties inherent in bankruptcy proceedings, it is reasonably possible that we could incur losses related to these receivables in connection with the lightsquared bankruptcy.accounts receivable, other than those described above, expected to be collected after one year are not material.note 6  inventoriesinventories at december31 consisted of the following:20142013long-term contracts in progress$13,381$12,608commercial aircraft programs55,22048,065commercial spare parts, used aircraft, general stock materials and other7,4217,793inventory before advances and progress billings76,02268,466less advances and progress billings(29,266)(25,554)total$46,756$42,912long-term contracts in progresslong-term contracts in progress includes delta launch program inventory that is being sold at cost to united launch alliance (ula) under an inventory supply agreement that terminates on march31, 2021. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, the inventory balance was $154 (net of advances of $322) and $425 (net of advances of $331). at december31, 2014, $292 of this inventory related to unsold launches. see note 12.capitalized precontract costs of $1,281 and $520 at december 31, 2014 and 2013 are included in inventories. see c-17 in note 11.commercial aircraft programsat december 31, 2014 and 2013, commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 787 program: $33,163 and $27,576 of work in process (including deferred production costs of $26,149 and $21,620), $2,257 and $2,189 of supplier advances, and $3,801 and $3,377 of unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs. at december31, 2014, $20,982 of 787 deferred production costs, unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs are expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that have firm orders and $8,968 is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent expected future orders.at december 31, 2014 and 2013, commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 747 program: $1,741 and $1,554 of deferred production costs, net of previously recorded 71table of contentsreach-forward losses, and $476 and $563 of unamortized tooling costs. at december31, 2014, $1,047 of 747 deferred production and unamortized tooling costs are expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that have firm orders and $1,170 is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent expected future orders.commercial aircraft programs inventory included amounts credited in cash or other consideration (early issue sales consideration) to airline customers totaling $3,341 and $3,465 at december 31, 2014 and 2013.note 7  customer financingcustomer financing primarily relates to the boeing capital (bcc) segment and consisted of the following at december31:20142013financing receivables:investment in sales-type/finance leases$1,535$1,699notes370587total financing receivables1,9052,286operating lease equipment, at cost, less accumulated depreciation of $571 and $5641,6771,734gross customer financing3,5824,020less allowance for losses on receivables(21)(49)total$3,561$3,971the components of investment in sales-type/finance leases at december31 were as follows:20142013minimum lease payments receivable$1,475$1,731estimated residual value of leased assets521543unearned income(461)(575)total$1,535$1,699operating lease equipment primarily includes large commercial jet aircraft and regional jet aircraft. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, operating lease equipment included $48 and $83 of bcc equipment available for sale or re-lease. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, we had firm lease commitments for $0 and $57 of this equipment.financing receivable balances evaluated for impairment at december31 were as follows:20142013individually evaluated for impairment$86$95collectively evaluated for impairment1,8192,191total financing receivables$1,905$2,286we determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due according to the original contractual terms. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, we individually evaluated for impairment customer financing receivables of $86 and $95 and determined that none of these were impaired. as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, we had no material receivables that were greater than 30 days past due and we had no impaired customer financing receivables during 2014.72table of contentsincome recognition is generally suspended for financing receivables at the date full recovery of income and principal becomes not probable. income is recognized when financing receivables become contractually current and performance is demonstrated by the customer. for the years ended december 31, 2013 and 2012, interest income recognized on such receivables was $30 and $6, and the average recorded investment in impaired financing receivables was $376 and $466. the change in the allowance for losses on financing receivables for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, consisted of the following:201420132012beginning balance - january 1($49)($60)($70)customer financing valuation benefit281110ending balance - december 31($21)($49)($60)collectively evaluated for impairment($21)($49)($60)the adequacy of the allowance for losses is assessed quarterly. three primary factors influencing the level of our allowance for losses on customer financing receivables are customer credit ratings, default rates and collateral values. we assign internal credit ratings for all customers and determine the creditworthiness of each customer based upon publicly available information and information obtained directly from our customers. our rating categories are comparable to those used by the major credit rating agencies. our financing receivable balances at december31 by internal credit rating category are shown below:rating categories20142013bbb$1,055$1,091bb58b633585ccc131457other8695total carrying value of financing receivables$1,905$2,286at december31, 2014, our allowance related to receivables with ratings of b and bbb. we applied default rates that averaged 16% and 2% to the exposure associated with those receivables.customer financing exposure customer financing is collateralized by security in the related asset. the value of the collateral is closely tied to commercial airline performance and overall market conditions and may be subject to reduced valuation with market decline. declines in collateral values are also a significant driver of our allowance for losses. generally, out-of-production aircraft have experienced greater collateral value declines than in-production aircraft. 73table of contentsour customer financing portfolio is primarily collateralized by out-of-production 717, 757 and md-80 aircraft. the majority of customer financing carrying values are concentrated in the following aircraft models at december31:20142013717 aircraft ($421 and $444 accounted for as operating leases)$1,562$1,674747 aircraft ($601 and $183 accounted for as operating leases)601286757 aircraft ($349 and $402 accounted for as operating leases)370453md-80 aircraft (accounted for as sales-type finance leases)358411767 aircraft ($47 and $60 accounted for as operating leases)158207737 aircraft ($127 and $138 accounted for as operating leases)156210md-11 aircraft (accounted for as operating leases)114220787 aircraft (accounted for as operating leases)273charges related to customer financing asset impairment for the years ended december31 were as follows:201420132012boeing capital$139$67$73other boeing4514(15)total$184$81$58scheduled receipts on customer financing are as follows:year20152016201720182019beyond 2019principal payments on notes receivable$55$41$42$120$69$43sales-type/finance lease payments receivable228225206195182439operating lease equipment payments receivable505130927054143note 8  property, plant and equipmentproperty, plant and equipment at december31 consisted of the following:20142013land$560$562buildings and land improvements11,76711,068machinery and equipment12,86712,376construction in progress1,5021,288gross property, plant and equipment26,69625,294less accumulated depreciation(15,689)(15,070)total$11,007$10,224depreciation expense was $1,414, $1,338 and $1,248 for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. interest capitalized during the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 totaled $102, $87 and $74, respectively.74table of contentsrental expense for leased properties was $277, $287 and $276, for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. at december31, 2014, minimum rental payments under capital leases aggregated $158. minimum rental payments under operating leases with initial or remaining terms of one year or more aggregated $1,486, net of sublease payments of $17 at december31, 2014. payments due under operating and capital leases net of sublease amounts and non-cancellable future rentals during the next five years are as follows:20152016201720182019minimum operating lease payments, net of sublease amounts$221$203$175$146$123minimum capital lease payments, net of sublease amounts564033143accounts payable related to purchases of property, plant and equipment were $299 and $213 for the years ended december 31, 2014 and 2013.note 9  investmentsour investments, which are recorded in short-term and other investments or investments, consisted of the following at december31:20142013time deposits$1,295$6,090pledged money market funds(1)3846available-for-sale investments78equity method investments (2)1,1141,164restricted cash(3)2633other investments3333total$2,513$7,374(1)reflects amounts pledged in lieu of letters of credit as collateral in support of our workers compensation programs. these funds can become available within 30 days notice upon issuance of letters of credit.(2)dividends received were $293 and $226 during 2014 and 2013. retained earnings at december31, 2014 include undistributed earnings from our equity method investments of $158.(3)restricted to pay certain claims related to workers compensation and life insurance premiums for certain employees. equity method investmentsour equity method investments consisted of the following as of december31:segmentownership percentagesinvestment balance20142013united launch alliancenetwork& space systems (n&ss)50%$916$970othercommercial airplanes, n&ss and  global services& support (gs&s)198194total equity method investments$1,114$1,16475table of contentsnote 10  other assetssea launchat december 31, 2014 and 2013, other assets included $356 of receivables related to our former investment in the sea launch venture which became payable by certain sea launch partners following sea launchs bankruptcy filing in june 2009. the $356 includes $147 related to a payment made by us under a bank guarantee on behalf of sea launch and $209 related to loans (partner loans) we made to sea launch. the net amounts owed to boeing by each of the partners are as follows: s.p. koroley rocket and space corporation energia of russia  $223, po yuzhnoye mashinostroitelny zavod of ukraine  $89 and kb yuzhnoye of ukraine  $44.although each partner is contractually obligated to reimburse us for its share of the bank guarantee, the russian and ukrainian partners have raised defenses to enforcement and contested our claims. on october19, 2009, we filed a notice of arbitration with the stockholm chamber of commerce seeking reimbursement from the other sea launch partners of the $147 bank guarantee payment. on october7, 2010, the arbitrator ruled that the stockholm chamber of commerce lacked jurisdiction to hear the matter but did not resolve the merits of our claim. we filed a notice appealing the arbitrators ruling on january11, 2011. on april 11, 2014, the appellate court entered a ruling that the decision of the arbitrator is not appealable. on may 9, 2014, we filed a brief with the supreme court of sweden appealing the appellate court's april 11, 2014 ruling. on february 1, 2013, we filed an action in the united states district court for the central district of california seeking reimbursement from the other sea launch partners of the $147 bank guarantee payment and the $209 partner loan obligations. a trial in the united states district court for the central district of california is scheduled to commence july 14, 2015. we believe the partners have the financial wherewithal to pay and intend to pursue vigorously all of our rights and remedies. in the event we are unable to secure reimbursement of $147 related to our payment under the bank guarantee and $209 related to partner loans made to sea launch, we could incur additional charges. our current assessment as to the collectability of these receivables takes into account the current economic conditions in russia and ukraine, although we will continue to monitor the situation.note 11  liabilities, commitments and contingenciesaccrued liabilitiesaccrued liabilities at december31 consisted of the following:20142013accrued compensation and employee benefit costs$5,868$6,158environmental601649product warranties1,5041,570forward loss recognition414360dividends payable637542other4,3194,852total$13,343$14,13176table of contentsenvironmentalthe following table summarizes environmental remediation activity during the years ended december 31, 2014 and 2013.20142013beginning balance  january1$649$710reductions for payments made(89)(120)changes in estimates4159ending balance  december31$601$649the liabilities recorded represent our best estimate or the low end of a range of reasonably possible costs expected to be incurred to remediate sites, including operation and maintenance over periods of up to 30 years. it is reasonably possible that we may incur charges that exceed these recorded amounts because of regulatory agency orders and directives, changes in laws and/or regulations, higher than expected costs and/or the discovery of new or additional contamination. as part of our estimating process, we develop a range of reasonably possible alternate scenarios that includes the high end of a range of reasonably possible cost estimates for all remediation sites for which we have sufficient information based on our experience and existing laws and regulations. there are some potential remediation obligations where the costs of remediation cannot be reasonably estimated. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, the high end of the estimated range of reasonably possible remediation costs exceeded our recorded liabilities by $874 and $928.product warrantiesthe following table summarizes product warranty activity recorded during the years ended december 31, 2014 and 2013.20142013beginning balance  january1$1,570$1,572additions for current year deliveries566595reductions for payments made(432)(419)changes in estimates(200)(178)ending balance - december 31$1,504$1,570commercial aircraft commitmentsin conjunction with signing definitive agreements for the sale of new aircraft (sale aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain customers that give them the right to trade in used aircraft at a specified price upon the purchase of sale aircraft. the probability that trade-in commitments will be exercised is determined by using both quantitative information from valuation sources and qualitative information from other sources. the probability of exercise is assessed quarterly, or as events trigger a change, and takes into consideration the current economic and airline industry environments. trade-in commitments, which can be terminated by mutual consent with the customer, may be exercised only during the period specified in the agreement, and require advance notice by the customer.trade-in commitment agreements at december31, 2014 have expiration dates from 2015 through 2026. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, total contractual trade-in commitments were $2,392 and $1,605. as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, we estimated that it was probable we would be obligated to perform on certain of these commitments with net amounts payable to customers totaling $446 and $325 and the fair value of the related trade-in aircraft was $446 and $325. 77table of contentsfinancing commitmentsfinancing commitments related to aircraft on order, including options and those proposed in sales campaigns, totaled $16,723 and $17,987 as of december 31, 2014 and 2013. the estimated earliest potential funding dates for these commitments as of december31, 2014 are as follows:total2015$2,55220163,71020173,49720182,30520191,738thereafter2,921$16,723as of december31, 2014 all of these financing commitments related to customers we believe have less than investment-grade credit. we have concluded that no reserve for future potential losses is required for these financing commitments based upon the terms, such as collateralization and interest rates, under which funding would be provided.standby letters of credit and surety bondswe have entered into standby letters of credit and surety bonds with financial institutions primarily relating to the guarantee of our future performance on certain contracts. contingent liabilities on outstanding letters of credit agreements and surety bonds aggregated approximately $3,985 and $4,376 as of december 31, 2014 and 2013.commitments to ulawe and lockheed martin corporation have each committed to provide ula with up to $527 of additional capital contributions in the event ula does not have sufficient funds to make a required payment to us under an inventory supply agreement. see note 6.c-17in september 2013, we decided to end production of c-17 aircraft in late 2015. in april 2014, we announced that we anticipate ending production approximately three months earlier based on our decision to produce three fewer aircraft in 2015 than previously planned. as a result, during the first quarter of 2014, bds recorded $48 to write off inventory and accrue termination liabilities to suppliers. at december 31, 2014, our backlog included international orders for three c-17 aircraft that are scheduled for delivery in 2015 and we have active sales campaigns for the remaining seven unsold aircraft. we are currently incurring costs and have made commitments to suppliers related to these aircraft. we believe it is probable that we will recover costs related to the unsold aircraft from international customer orders. should orders for the seven unsold aircraft not materialize or should we decide to discontinue production of unsold aircraft, we could incur further charges to write-down inventory and/or record termination liabilities. at december31, 2014, we had approximately $1,091 of capitalized precontract costs and $385 of potential termination liabilities to suppliers associated with unsold aircraft.78table of contentsf/a-18at december 31, 2014, our backlog included 68 f/a-18 aircraft under contract with the u.s. navy.the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act, 2015, funds 15 additional f/a-18 aircraft. the orders in backlog, combined with anticipated orders for the 15 aircraft currently funded, would complete production in 2017. the presidents fiscal year 2016 budget request submitted in february 2015 did not include funding for additional f/a-18 aircraft. we are continuing to work with our u.s. customer as well as international customers to secure additional orders.should additional orders not materialize, it is reasonably possible that we will decide in the next twelve months to end production of the f/a-18 at a future date. we are still evaluating the full financial impact of a potential production shutdown, including any recovery that may be available from the u.s. government.company owned life insurancemcdonnell douglas corporation insured its executives with company owned life insurance (coli), which are life insurance policies with a cash surrender value. although we do not use coli currently, these obligations from the merger with mcdonnell douglas are still a commitment at this time. we have loans in place to cover costs paid or incurred to carry the underlying life insurance policies. as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, the cash surrender value was $466 and $451 and the total loans were $439 and $425. as we have the right to offset the loans against the cash surrender value of the policies, we present the net asset in other assets on the consolidated statements of financial position as of december 31, 2014 and 2013.united states government defense environment overviewu.s. government appropriation levels remain subject to significant uncertainty. in august 2011, the budget control act (the act) established limits on u.s. government discretionary spending, including a reduction of defense spending by approximately $490 billion between the 2012 and 2021 u.s. government fiscal years. the act also provided that the defense budget would face sequestration cuts of up to an additional $500 billion during that same period to the extent that discretionary spending limits are exceeded. while the impact of sequestration cuts was reduced with respect to fy2014 and fy2015 following the enactment of the bipartisan budget act in december 2013, significant uncertainty remains with respect to overall levels of defense spending. it is likely that u.s. government discretionary spending levels for fy2016 and beyond will continue to be subject to significant pressure, including risk of future sequestration cuts.significant uncertainty also continues with respect to program-level appropriations for the u.s. department of defense (u.s. dod) and other government agencies, including the national aeronautics and space administration, within the overall budgetary framework described above. future budget cuts, including cuts mandated by sequestration, or future procurement decisions associated with the authorization and appropriations process could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. any of these impacts could have a material effect on the results of the companys operations, financial position and/or cash flows. in addition to the risks described above, if congress is unable to pass appropriations bills in a timely manner, a government shutdown could result which could have impacts above and beyond those resulting from budget cuts or sequestration impacts. for example, requirements to furlough employees in the u.s. dod or other government agencies could result in payment delays, impair our ability to perform work on existing contracts, and/or negatively impact future orders.kc-46a tanker and bds fixed-price development contractsfixed-price development work is inherently uncertain and subject to significant variability in estimates of the cost and time required to complete the work. bds fixed-price contracts with significant development 79table of contentswork include airborne early warning and control, commercial crew, india p-8i, saudi f-15, usaf kc-46a tanker and commercial and military satellites. the operational and technical complexities of these contracts create financial risk, which could trigger termination provisions, order cancellations or other financially significant exposure. changes to cost and revenue estimates could result in lower margins or material charges for reach-forward losses. for example, during the second quarter of 2014, higher estimated costs to complete the kc-46a tanker contract for the u.s. air force resulted in a reach-forward loss of $425 of which the commercial airplanes segment recorded $238 and the bma segment recorded $187. recoverable costs on government contracts our final incurred costs for each year are subject to audit and review for allowability by the u.s. government, which can result in payment demands related to costs they believe should be disallowed. we work with the u.s. government to assess the merits of claims and where appropriate reserve for amounts disputed. if we are unable to satisfactorily resolve disputed costs, we could be required to record an earnings charge and/or provide refunds to the u.s. government.russia/ukrainewe continue to monitor political unrest involving russia and ukraine, where we and some of our suppliers source titanium products and/or have operations. a number of our commercial customers also have operations in russia and ukraine.to date, we have not experienced any significant disruptions to production or deliveries.should suppliers or customers experience disruption, our production and/or deliveries could be materially impacted.747 and 787 commercial airplane programsthe development and initial production of new commercial airplanes and new commercial airplane derivatives, which include the 747 and 787, entail significant commitments to customers and suppliers as well as substantial investments in working capital, infrastructure and research and development. the 747 and 787 programs had gross margins that were breakeven or near breakeven during 2014.lower-than-expected demand for large commercial passenger and freighter aircraft have resulted in ongoing pricing pressures and fewer 747 orders than anticipated.we continue to have a number of unsold 747 production positions. if market, production and other risks cannot be mitigated, the program could face a reach-forward loss that may be material.the combination of production challenges, change incorporation, schedule delays and customer and supplier impacts has created significant pressure on 787 program profitability. if risks related to this program, including risks associated with planned production rate increases or introducing and manufacturing the 787-10 derivative as scheduled cannot be mitigated, the program could face additional customer claims and/or supplier assertions, as well as a reach-forward loss that may be material. 80table of contentsnote 12  arrangements with off-balance sheet riskwe enter into arrangements with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business, primarily in the form of guarantees.the following table provides quantitative data regarding our third party guarantees. the maximum potential payments represent a worst-case scenario, and do not necessarily reflect amounts that we expect to pay. estimated proceeds from collateral and recourse represent the anticipated values of assets we could liquidate or receive from other parties to offset our payments under guarantees. the carrying amount of liabilities represents the amount included in accrued liabilities.maximumpotentialpaymentsestimatedproceeds fromcollateral/recoursecarryingamount ofliabilitiesdecember31,201420132014201320142013contingent repurchase commitments$1,375$1,872$1,364$1,871$5$5indemnifications to ula:contributed delta program launch inventory114127contract pricing26126177other delta contracts1502278other indemnifications631062028credit guarantees3035272722contingent repurchase commitments the repurchase price specified in contingent repurchase commitments is generally lower than the expected fair value at the specified repurchase date. estimated proceeds from collateral/recourse in the table above represent the lower of the contracted repurchase price or the expected fair value of each aircraft at the specified repurchase date.indemnifications to ula in 2006, we agreed to indemnify ula through december31, 2020 against potential non-recoverability and non-allowability of $1,360 of boeing delta launch program inventory included in contributed assets plus $1,860 of inventory subject to an inventory supply agreement which ends on march31, 2021. since inception, ula has consumed $1,246 of the $1,360 of inventory that was contributed by us and has yet to consume $114. ula has made advance payments of $1,609 to us and we have recorded revenues and cost of sales of $1,287 under the inventory supply agreement through december31, 2014. we agreed to indemnify ula against potential losses that ula may incur in the event ula is unable to obtain certain additional contract pricing from the u.s. air force (usaf) for four satellite missions. we believe ula is entitled to additional contract pricing. in december 2008, ula submitted a claim to the usaf to re-price the contract value for two satellite missions. in march 2009, the usaf issued a denial of that claim. in june 2009, ula filed a notice of appeal, and in october 2009, ula filed a complaint before the armed services board of contract appeals (asbca) for a contract adjustment for the price of the two satellite missions. in september 2009, the usaf exercised its option for a third satellite mission. during the third quarter of 2010, ula submitted a claim to the usaf to re-price the contract value of the third mission. the usaf did not exercise an option for a fourth mission prior to the expiration of the contract. in march 2011, ula filed a notice of appeal before the asbca, seeking to re-price the third mission. on november 20, 2013, the asbca denied usaf motions for summary judgment against ula in large part, leaving ulas claims against the usaf substantially intact. the hearing before the asbca concluded on december 20, 2013. the parties filed their final post-hearing briefs in may 2014. the asbca may now issue a decision at any time. if ula is ultimately unsuccessful in obtaining additional pricing, we may be 81table of contentsresponsible for an indemnification payment up to $261 and may record up to $278 in pre-tax losses associated with the three missions.potential payments for other delta contracts include $85 related to deferred support costs. in june 2011, the defense contract management agency (dcma) notified ula that it had determined that $271 of deferred support costs are not recoverable under government contracts. in december 2011, the dcma notified ula of the potential non-recoverability of an additional $114 of deferred production costs. ula and boeing believe that all costs are recoverable and in november 2011, ula filed a certified claim with the usaf for collection of deferred support and production costs. the usaf issued a final decision denying ulas certified claim in may 2012. on june 14, 2012, boeing and ula filed a suit in the court of federal claims seeking recovery of the deferred support and production costs from the u.s. government. on november 9, 2012, the u.s. government filed an answer to our claim and asserted a counterclaim for credits that it alleges were offset by deferred support cost invoices. we believe that the u.s. governments counterclaim is without merit, and have filed an answer challenging it on multiple grounds. the litigation is in the discovery phase and the court has not yet set a trial date. if, contrary to our belief, it is determined that some or all of the deferred support or production costs are not recoverable, we could be required to record pre-tax losses and make indemnification payments to ula for up to $317 of the costs questioned by the dcma.other indemnifications as part of the 2004 sale agreement with general electric capital corporation related to the sale of bccs commercial financial services business, bcc is involved in a loss sharing arrangement for losses on transferred portfolio assets, such as asset sales, provisions for loss or asset impairment charges offset by gains from asset sales. at december 31, 2014 and 2013, our maximum future cash exposure to losses associated with the loss sharing arrangement was $63 and $106 and our accrued liability under the loss sharing arrangement was $20 and $28.in conjunction with our sales of electron dynamic devices, inc. and rocketdyne propulsion and power businesses and our commercial airplanes facilities in wichita, kansas and tulsa and mcalester, oklahoma, we agreed to indemnify, for an indefinite period, the buyers for costs relating to pre-closing environmental conditions and certain other items. it is impossible to assess the potential number of future claims that may be asserted under these indemnifications, nor the amounts thereof (if any). as a result, we cannot estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments under these indemnities and therefore, no liability has been recorded. to the extent that claims have been made under these indemnities and/or are probable and reasonably estimable, liabilities associated with these indemnities are included in the environmental liability disclosure in note 11.credit guarantees we have issued credit guarantees, principally to facilitate the sale and/or financing of commercial aircraft. under these arrangements, we are obligated to make payments to a guaranteed party in the event that lease or loan payments are not made by the original lessee or debtor or certain specified services are not performed. a substantial portion of these guarantees has been extended on behalf of original lessees or debtors with less than investment-grade credit. our commercial aircraft credit guarantees are collateralized by the underlying commercial aircraft and certain other assets. current outstanding credit guarantees expire within the next six years.industrial revenue bondsindustrial revenue bonds (irb) issued by the city of wichita were used to finance the purchase and/or construction of real and personal property at our wichita site. tax benefits associated with irbs include a ten-year property tax abatement and a sales tax exemption from the kansas department of revenue. we record the property on our consolidated statements of financial position, along with a capital lease obligation to repay the proceeds of the irb. we have also purchased the irbs and therefore are the bondholders as well as the borrower/lessee of the property purchased with the irb proceeds.82table of contentsthe capital lease obligation and irb asset are recorded net in the consolidated statements of financial position. as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, the assets and liabilities associated with the city of wichita irbs were $638 and $690.note 13  debton october31, 2014, we issued $300 of fixed rate senior notes due october30, 2021 with an annual interest rate of 2.35%,  $300 of fixed rate senior notes due october 30, 2024 with an annual interest rate of 2.85%, and $250 of floating rate senior notes due october30, 2017. each series of fixed rate senior notes may be redeemed at our option at any time for a redemption price equal to the full principal amount plus any accrued and unpaid interest and a make-whole premium. the floating rate senior notes bear interest at an annual rate equal to three-month libor plus 12.5 basis points, and are not redeemable prior to maturity. the notes are unsecured senior obligations and rank equally in right of payment with our existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. the net proceeds of the issuance, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses, totaled $838, of which $544 were used to fund bcc.interest incurred, including amounts capitalized, was $504, $548 and $625 for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. interest expense recorded by bcc is reflected as boeing capital interest expense on our consolidated statements of operations. total company interest payments were $511, $551 and $614 for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.we have $5,005 currently available under credit line agreements, of which $2,473 is a 364-day revolving credit facility expiring in november 2015 and $2,472 expires in november 2019 and $60 in november 2017. the 364-day credit facility has a one-year term out option which allows us to extend the maturity of any borrowings one year beyond the aforementioned expiration date. we continue to be in full compliance with all covenants contained in our debt or credit facility agreements.short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt at december31 consisted of the following:20142013unsecured debt securities$755$1,370non-recourse debt and notes3832capital lease obligations6468other notes7293total$929$1,56383table of contentsdebt at december31 consisted of the following:20142013unsecured debt securitiesvariable rate: 3-month usd libor plus 1 basis point due 2014$150variable rate: 3-month usd libor plus 12.5 basis points due 2017$2500.95%- 5.00% due through 20244,2234,8325.88% - 6.88% due through 2043 2,3942,3927.25% - 8.75% due through 20431,6571,672non-recourse debt and notes6.98% - 7.38% notes due through 2021201233capital lease obligations due through 2024161151other notes184205total debt$9,070$9,635total debt is attributable to:20142013bcc$2,412$2,577other boeing6,6587,058total debt$9,070$9,635at december 31, 2014, $213 of debt (non-recourse debt, notes and capital lease obligations) was collateralized by customer financing assets totaling $362.scheduled principal payments for debt and minimum capital lease obligations for the next five years are as follows:20152016201720182019scheduled principal payments$937$1,098$331$653$1,23584table of contentsnote 14  postretirement plansthe majority of our employees are earning benefits under defined benefit pension plans. in 2014, we announced changes to our retirement plans whereby nonunion and the majority of union employees currently participating in defined benefit pension plans will transition in 2016 to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan. we fund our major pension plans through trusts. pension assets are placed in trust solely for the benefit of the plans participants, and are structured to maintain liquidity that is sufficient to pay benefit obligations as well as to keep pace over the long-term with the growth of obligations for future benefit payments.we also have other postretirement benefits (opb) other than pensions which consist principally of health care coverage for eligible retirees and qualifying dependents, and to a lesser extent, life insurance to certain groups of retirees. retiree health care is provided principally until age 65 for approximately half those retirees who are eligible for health care coverage. certain employee groups, including employees covered by most united auto workers bargaining agreements, are provided lifetime health care coverage.the funded status of the plans is measured as the difference between the plan assets at fair value and the projected benefit obligation (pbo). we have recognized the aggregate of all overfunded plans in other assets, and the aggregate of all underfunded plans in either accrued retiree health care or accrued pension plan liability, net. the portion of the amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits included in the pbo exceeds the fair value of plan assets, payable in the next 12 months, is reflected in accrued liabilities. the components of net periodic benefit cost were as follows:pensionother postretirement benefitsyears ended december31,201420132012201420132012service cost$1,661$1,886$1,649$129$148$146interest cost3,0582,9063,005289263313expected return on plan assets(4,169)(3,874)(3,831)(8)(6)(7)amortization of prior service costs177196225(144)(180)(197)recognized net actuarial loss1,0202,2311,937895119settlement/curtailment/other losses461104251(1)net periodic benefit cost$2,208$3,449$3,010$275$320$373net periodic benefit cost included in earnings from operations$3,215$3,036$2,407$287$353$54385table of contentsthe following tables show changes in the benefit obligation, plan assets and funded status of both pensions and opb for the years ended december 31, 2014 and 2013. benefit obligation balances presented below reflect the pbo for our pension plans, and accumulated postretirement benefit obligations (apbo) for our opb plans.pensionother postretirement benefits2014201320142013change in benefit obligationbeginning balance$68,625$75,895$7,008$7,981service cost1,6611,886129148interest cost3,0582,906289263plan participants contributions68amendments51111(43)4actuarial (gain)/loss10,655(9,205)334(905)settlement/curtailment/other(2,518)(81)7(57)gross benefits paid(3,126)(2,874)(449)(451)subsidies3932exchange rate adjustment(21)(21)(8)(7)ending balance$78,391$68,625$7,306$7,008change in plan assetsbeginning balance at fair value$58,131$56,178$140$110actual return on plan assets5,8933,3161023company contribution7841,542814plan participants contributions6823settlement/curtailment/other(640)(103)11benefits paid(3,039)(2,792)(19)(21)exchange rate adjustment(16)(18)ending balance at fair value$61,119$58,131$141$140amounts recognized in statement of financial position at december31 consist of:other assets$3$60other accrued liabilities(93)(80)($363)($340)accrued retiree health care(6,802)(6,528)accrued pension plan liability, net(17,182)(10,474)net amount recognized($17,272)($10,494)($7,165)($6,868)amounts recognized in accumulated other comprehensive loss at december31 were as follows:pensionother postretirement benefits2014201320142013net actuarial loss$21,321$15,460$877$561prior service costs/(credits)385788(512)(614)total recognized in accumulated other comprehensive loss$21,706$16,248$365($53)86table of contentsthe estimated amount that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit cost during the year ended december31, 2015 is as follows:pensionother postretirement benefitsrecognized net actuarial loss$1,581$27amortization of prior service costs/(credits)193(134)total$1,774($107)the abo for all pension plans was $75,655 and $63,491 at december 31, 2014 and 2013. key information for our plans with abo in excess of plan assets as of december31 was as follows:20142013projected benefit obligation$78,358$63,445accumulated benefit obligation75,62258,334fair value of plan assets61,08252,905assumptionsthe following assumptions, which are the weighted average for all plans, are used to calculate the benefit obligation at december31 of each year and the net periodic benefit cost for the subsequent year.december31,201420132012discount rate:pension3.90%4.80%3.80%other postretirement benefits3.50%4.20%3.30%expected return on plan assets7.00%7.50%7.50%rate of compensation increase3.80%4.00%4.00%the discount rate for each plan is determined based on the plans expected future benefit payments using a yield curve developed from high quality bonds that are rated as aa or better by at least half of the four rating agencies utilized as of the measurement date. the yield curve is fitted to yields developed from bonds at various maturity points. bonds with the ten percent highest and the ten percent lowest yields are omitted. a portfolio of about 400 bonds is used to construct the yield curve. since corporate bond yields are generally not available at maturities beyond 30 years, it is assumed that spot rates will remain level beyond that 30-year point. the present value of each plans benefits is calculated by applying the spot/discount rates to projected benefit cash flows. all bonds are u.s. issues, with a minimum outstanding of $50.the pension funds expected return on plan assets assumption is derived from a review of actual historical returns achieved by the pension trust and anticipated future long-term performance of individual asset classes. while consideration is given to recent trust performance and historical returns, the assumption represents a long-term, prospective return. the expected return on plan assets component of the net periodic benefit cost for the upcoming plan year is determined based on the expected return on plan assets assumption and the market-related value of plan assets (mrva). since our adoption of the accounting standard for pensions in 1987, we have determined the mrva based on a five-year moving average of plan assets. as of december31, 2014, the mrva was approximately $1,813 less than the fair market value of assets.87table of contentsassumed health care cost trend rates were as follows:december31,201420132012health care cost trend rate assumed next year7.00%7.00%7.50%ultimate trend rate5.00%5.00%5.00%year that trend reached ultimate rate201820182018assumed health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for the health care plans. to determine the health care cost trend rates we look at a combination of information including ongoing claims cost monitoring, annual statistical analyses of claims data, reconciliation of forecast claims against actual claims, review of trend assumptions of other plan sponsors and national health trends, and adjustments for plan design changes, workforce changes, and changes in plan participant behavior. a one-percentage-point change in assumed health care cost trend rates would have the following effect:increasedecreaseeffect on total of service and interest cost$54($45)effect on postretirement benefit obligation736(613)during 2014 the company conducted a mortality experience study and adopted new company specific tables for purposes of determining the companys mortality assumption used in the defined benefit plan liability calculation. the new tables resulted in an increase of $2,500 and $200 to the projected benefit obligation for pension and other postretirement benefits, respectively as of december 31, 2014.plan assetsinvestment strategy the overall objective of our pension assets is to earn a rate of return over time to satisfy the benefit obligations of the pension plans and to maintain sufficient liquidity to pay benefits and address other cash requirements of the pension fund. specific investment objectives for our long-term investment strategy include reducing the volatility of pension assets relative to pension liabilities, achieving a competitive, total investment return, achieving diversification between and within asset classes and managing other risks. investment objectives for each asset class are determined based on specific risks and investment opportunities identified.we periodically update our long-term, strategic asset allocations. we use various analytics to determine the optimal asset mix and consider plan liability characteristics, liquidity characteristics, funding requirements, expected rates of return and the distribution of returns. we identify investment benchmarks for the asset classes in the strategic asset allocation that are market-based and investable where possible.actual allocations to each asset class vary from target allocations due to periodic investment strategy changes, market value fluctuations, the length of time it takes to fully implement investment allocation positions (such as private equity and real estate), and the timing of benefit payments and contributions. short-term investments and exchange-traded derivatives are used to rebalance the actual asset allocation to the target asset allocation. the asset allocation is monitored and rebalanced on a monthly basis.88table of contentsthe actual and target allocations by asset class for the pension assets at december31 were as follows:actual allocationstarget allocationsasset class2014201320142013fixed income48%49%47%47%global equity29292626private equity5566real estate and real assets981111global strategies4444hedge funds5566total100%100%100%100%fixed income securities are invested broadly and primarily in long duration instruments. global equity securities are invested broadly in u.s. and non-u.s. companies, across various industries and market capitalizations.real estate and real assets include global private investments that may be held through an investment in a limited partnership (lp) or other fund structures and publicly traded investments (such as real estate investment trusts (reit) in the case of real estate). real estate includes, but is not limited to, investments in office, retail, apartment and industrial properties. real assets include, but are not limited to, investments in natural resources (such as energy, farmland and timber), commodities and infrastructure. private equity investment vehicles are primarily limited partnerships (lps) and fund-of-funds that mainly invest in u.s. and non-u.s. leveraged buyout, venture capital and special situation strategies.global strategies investments seek to capitalize on inefficiencies identified across different asset classes or markets, primarily using long-short positions in derivatives and physical securities. hedge fund strategy types include, but are not limited to, event driven, relative value, long-short and multi-strategy.investment managers are retained for explicit investment roles specified by contractual investment guidelines. certain investment managers are authorized to invest in derivatives, such as equity or bond futures, swaps, options and currency futures or forwards. derivatives are used to achieve the desired market exposure of a security or an index, transfer value-added performance between asset classes, achieve the desired currency exposure, adjust portfolio duration or rebalance the total portfolio to the target asset allocation.as a percentage of total pension plan assets, derivative net notional amounts were 3.5% and 18.3% for fixed income, including to-be-announced mortgage-backed securities and treasury forwards, and 2.0% and (2.2)% for global equity and commodities at december 31, 2014 and 2013.risk management in managing the plan assets, we review and manage risk associated with funded status risk, interest rate risk, market risk, counterparty risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. liability matching and asset class diversification are central to our risk management approach and are integral to the overall investment strategy. further, asset classes are constructed to achieve diversification by investment strategy, by investment manager, by industry or sector and by holding. investment manager guidelines for publicly traded assets are specified and are monitored regularly through the custodian. credit parameters for counterparties have been established for managers permitted to trade over-the-counter derivatives. valuation is governed through several types of procedures, including reviews of manager valuation policies, custodian valuation processes, pricing vendor practices, pricing reconciliation, and periodic, security-specific valuation testing.89table of contentsfair value measurements the following table presents our plan assets using the fair value hierarchy as of december 31, 2014 and 2013. the fair value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. level 1 refers to fair values determined based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs, and level 3 includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs.december31, 2014december31, 2013totallevel 1level 2level3totallevel 1level 2level3fixed income securities:corporate$17,488$17,486$2$15,262$15,238$24u.s. government and agencies5,2245,2244,5374,537mortgage backed and asset backed1,2075966111,040491549municipal1,6361,6361,7221,722sovereign1,0731,0731,0181,018common/collective/pooled funds2,127$182,1092,538$162,522other 4989237252484229255derivatives:assets49495555liabilities(66)(66)(10)(10)cash equivalents and other short-term investments792792801801currency overlay derivatives:assets22liabilities(3)(3)equity securities:u.s. common and preferred stock7,5777,5776,9196,919non-u.s. common and preferred stock7,1517,1391117,7227,7211common/collective/pooled funds2,658462,4431693,2395642,675derivatives:assets9944liabilities(5)(5)(6)(6)private equity2,955282,9272,968102,958real estate and real assets:real estate3,199505412,6532,865425162,424real assets1,5673704337641,506336464706derivatives:assets2211liabilities(11)(11)(1)(1)global strategies2,2482,2482,3552,355hedge funds3,3722,4119612,7761,6671,109total$60,750$15,692$36,718$8,340$57,794$15,991$33,777$8,026cash$115$87receivables447458payables(193)(208)total$61,119$58,131fixed income securities are primarily valued upon a market approach, using matrix pricing and considering a securitys relationship to other securities for which quoted prices in an active market may be available, 90table of contentsor an income approach, converting future cash flows to a single present value amount. inputs used in developing fair value estimates include reported trades, broker quotes, benchmark yields, and base spreads.common/collective/pooled funds are typically common or collective trusts valued at their net asset values (navs) that are calculated by the investment manager or sponsor of the fund and have daily or monthly liquidity. derivatives included in the table above are over-the-counter and are primarily valued using an income approach with inputs that include benchmark yields, swap curves, cash flow analysis, rating agency data and interdealer broker rates. exchange-traded derivative positions are reported in accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.cash equivalents and other short-term investments (which are used to pay benefits) are held in a separate account which consists of a commingled fund (with daily liquidity) and separately held short-term securities and cash equivalents. all of the investments in this cash vehicle are valued daily using a market approach with inputs that include quoted market prices for similar instruments. in the event a market price is not available for instruments with an original maturity of one year or less, amortized cost is used as a proxy for fair value. common and preferred stock equity securities are primarily valued using a market approach based on the quoted market prices of identical instruments. private equity and private debt nav valuations are based on the valuation of the underlying investments, which include inputs such as cost, operating results, discounted future cash flows and market based comparable data. for those investments reported on a one-quarter lagged basis (primarily lps) we use navs, adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events.real estate and real asset nav valuations are based on valuation of the underlying investments, which include inputs such as cost, discounted future cash flows, independent appraisals and market based comparable data. for those investments reported on a one-quarter lagged basis (primarily lps) navs are adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events. publicly traded reits and infrastructure stocks are valued using a market approach based on quoted market prices of identical instruments. exchange-traded commodities futures positions are reported in accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.global strategies investments are primarily limited liability company (llc) or mutual fund structures. the navs are based on valuation of the underlying investments, which are primarily valued using a market approach. the funds generally have monthly liquidity.hedge funds consist of fund-of-fund llc structures and direct hedge funds. the navs of the fund-of-funds are based on the navs of the underlying hedge funds as well as any cash and accruals held at the fund-of-fund level. for direct hedge funds the navs are primarily based on valuation of the underlying investments. this is primarily done by applying a market or income valuation methodology depending on the specific type of security or instrument held. redemptions in hedge funds are based on specific terms and conditions of the individual funds.investments in private equity, private debt, real estate, real assets, global strategies, and hedge funds are primarily calculated and reported by the general partner (gp), fund manager or third party administrator. pension assets invested in these structures rely on the nav of these investments as the practical expedient for the valuations.91table of contentsthe following tables present a reconciliation of level 3 assets held during the year ended december 31, 2014 and 2013. transfers into and out of level 3 are reported at the beginning-of-year values.january1 2014 balancenet realized and unrealized gains/(losses)net purchases, issuances and settlementsnet transfers into/(out of) level 3december31 2014 balancefixed income securities:corporate (1)$19($7)($10)$2mortgage backed and assetbacked(1)554141033611other25524(27)252equity securities:non-u.s. common and preferred stock1(1)11common/collective/pooled funds(24)193169private equity2,958415(446)2,927real estate and real assets:real estate2,424336(107)2,653real assets7063226764hedge funds1,109(36)61(173)961total$8,026$761($298)($149)$8,340(1)certain fixed income securities were reclassified from corporate to mortgage backed and asset backed on january 1, 2014.for the year ended december31, 2014, the change in unrealized gain for level 3 assets still held at december31, 2014 were $8 for mortgage and asset backed fixed income, $7 for other fixed income, ($24) for common/collective/pooled funds, ($3) for private equity, $198 for real estate, ($38) for real assets and ($48) for hedge funds.92table of contentsjanuary1 2013 balancenet realized and unrealized gainsnet purchases, issuances and settlementsnet transfers into/(out of) level 3december31 2013 balancefixed income securities:corporate$3$16$5$24mortgage backed and asset backed561(11)(1)549other (2)24537(27)255equity securities:non-u.s. common and preferred stock11private equity (2)2,671536(249)2,958real estate and real assets:real estate2,128232642,424real assets66478(36)706hedge funds1,473183(627)801,109total$7,745$1,066($870)$85$8,026(2)certain private funds with a fixed income strategy were reclassified from private equity to other fixed income on january 1, 2013.for the year ended december31, 2013, the change in unrealized gain for level 3 assets still held at december31, 2013 were $21 for other fixed income, $422 for private equity, $243 for real estate, $71 for real assets and $283 for hedge funds.opb plan assets the majority of opb plan assets are invested in a balanced index fund which is comprised of approximately 60% equities and 40% debt securities. the index fund is valued using a market approach based on the quoted market price of an identical instrument (level 1). the expected rate of return on these assets does not have a material effect on the net periodic benefit cost.cash flowscontributions required pension contributions under the employee retirement income security act (erisa), as well as rules governing funding of our non-u.s. pension plans, are expected to be minimal in 2015. we do not expect contributions to our pension and opb plans to be significant in 2015. estimated future benefit payments the table below reflects the total pension benefits expected to be paid from the plans or from our assets, including both our share of the benefit cost and the participants share of the cost, which is funded by participant contributions. opb payments reflect our portion only.year(s)201520162017201820192020-2024pensions$3,448$3,657$3,828$3,960$3,977$21,515other postretirement benefits:gross benefits paid4654955185585782,974subsidies(38)(38)(40)(41)(42)(211)net other postretirement benefits$427$457$478$517$536$2,76393table of contentstermination provisionscertain of the pension plans provide that, in the event there is a change in control of the company which is not approved by the board of directors and the plans are terminated within five years thereafter, the assets in the plan first will be used to provide the level of retirement benefits required by erisa, and then any surplus will be used to fund a trust to continue present and future payments under the postretirement medical and life insurance benefits in our group insurance benefit programs.we have an agreement with the u.s. government with respect to certain pension plans. under the agreement, should we terminate any of the plans under conditions in which the plans assets exceed that plans obligations, the u.s. government will be entitled to a fair allocation of any of the plans assets based on plan contributions that were reimbursed under u.s. government contracts.defined contribution planswe provide certain defined contribution plans to all eligible employees. the principal plans are the company-sponsored 401(k) plans. the expense for these defined contribution plans was $764, $742 and $708 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.note 15  share-based compensation and other compensation arrangementsshare-based compensationour 2003 incentive stock plan, as amended and restated, permits awards of incentive and non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock or units, performance shares, performance restricted stock or units, performance units and other stock and cash-based awards to our employees, officers, directors, consultants, and independent contractors. the aggregate number of shares of our stock authorized for issuance under the plan is 87,000,000.shares issued as a result of stock option exercises or conversion of stock unit awards will be funded out of treasury shares, except to the extent there are insufficient treasury shares, in which case new shares will be issued. we believe we currently have adequate treasury shares to satisfy these issuances during 2015.share-based plans expense is primarily included in general and administrative expense since it is incentive compensation issued primarily to our executives. the share-based plans expense and related income tax benefit were as follows:years ended december31,201420132012stock options$62$93$85restricted stock units and other awards133113108share-based plans expense$195$206$193income tax benefit$70$76$75stock optionsin february2013 and 2012, we granted to our executives 6,591,968 and 6,114,922 options, respectively. the options have been granted with an exercise price equal to the fair market value of our stock on the date of grant and expire ten years after the date of grant. the stock options vest over a period of three years, with 34% vesting after the first year, 33% vesting after the second year and the remaining 33% vesting after the third year. if an executive terminates employment for any reason, the non-vested portion 94table of contentsof the stock option will not vest and all rights to the non-vested portion will terminate. we discontinued granting options in 2014, replacing them with performance-based restricted stock units.stock option activity for the year ended december31, 2014 is as follows:sharesweighted average exercise price per shareweighted average remaining contractual life (years)aggregate intrinsic valuenumber of shares under option:outstanding at beginning of year23,767,743$73.97granted20,008124.98exercised(4,584,615)74.82forfeited(697,891)75.70expired(600)50.57outstanding at end of year18,504,645$73.755.93$1,041exercisable at end of year13,215,966$72.745.10$757the total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $250, $546 and $89, respectively. cash received from options exercised during the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $343, $1,097 and $120 with a related tax benefit of $87, $190 and $29, respectively, derived from the compensation deductions resulting from these option exercises. at december31, 2014, there was $34 of total unrecognized compensation cost related to our stock option plan which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of one year. the grant date fair value of stock options vested during the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $87, $89 and $83, respectively.the fair values of options were estimated using the black-scholes option-pricing model with the following assumptions:grant yeargrant dateexpected lifeexpected volatilityexpected dividend yieldrisk free interest rateweighted-average grant date fair value per share20132/25/20136 years29.0%2.6%1.0%$15.8520122/27/20126 years29.9%2.4%1.1%$16.89the expected volatility of the stock options is based on a combination of our historical stock volatility and the volatility levels implied on the grant date by actively traded option contracts on our common stock. we determined the expected term of the stock option grants to be six years, calculated using the simplified method in accordance with the sec staff accounting bulletin 110. we use the simplified method since we changed the vesting terms, tax treatment and the recipients of our stock options beginning in 2006 such that we believe our historical data prior to 2006 does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term and we do not have enough option exercise data from our grants issued subsequent to 2006 to support our own estimate as a result of vesting terms and changes in the stock price.95table of contentsrestricted stock unitsin february2014, 2013 and 2012, we granted to our executives 695,651, 1,375,414 and 1,369,810 restricted stock units (rsus) as part of our long-term incentive program with grant date fair values of $129.58, $75.97 and $75.40 per unit, respectively. the rsus granted under this program will vest and settle in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. if an executive terminates employment because of retirement, involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) will receive a proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service period. in all other cases, the rsus will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate. in addition to rsus awarded under our long-term incentive program, we grant rsus to certain executives and employees to encourage retention or to reward various achievements.these rsus are labeled other rsus in the table below. the fair values of all rsus are estimated using the average of the high and low stock prices on the date of grant. rsu activity for the year ended december31, 2014 was as follows:long-term incentive program othernumber of units:outstanding at beginning of year3,722,3171,132,930granted729,603288,600dividends72,38725,833forfeited(177,986)(13,962)distributed(1,313,782)(286,303)outstanding at end of year3,032,5391,147,098unrecognized compensation cost$94$41weighted average remaining contractual life (years)1.72.3the number of vested but undistributed rsus at december31, 2014 was not significant.performance-based restricted stock unitsperformance-based restricted stock units (pbrsus) are stock units that pay out based on the companys total shareholder return as compared to a group of peer companies over a three-year period. the award payout can range from 0% to 200% of the initial pbrsu grant, but will not exceed 400% of the initial value (excluding dividend equivalent credits). the pbrsus granted under this program will vest at the payout amount and settle in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. if an executive terminates employment because of retirement, involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) remains eligible under the award and, if the award is earned, will receive a proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service period. in all other cases, the pbrsus will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate.in february2014, we granted to our executives 662,215 initial pbrsus as part of our long-term incentive program with a grant date fair value of $136.12 per unit. compensation expense for the award is recognized over the three-year performance period based upon the grant date fair value estimated using a monte-carlo simulation model. the model used the following assumptions: expected volatility of 24.2% based upon our historical stock volatility, a risk-free interest rate of 0.72%, and no expected dividend yield because the units earn dividend equivalents.96table of contentspbrsu activity for the year ended december31, 2014 was as follows:long-term incentive program number of units:outstanding at beginning of yeargranted662,215dividends10,497forfeited(49,610)distributed0outstanding at end of year623,102unrecognized compensation cost$53weighted average remaining contractual life (years)2.1other compensation arrangementsperformance awardsperformance awards are cash units that pay out based on the achievement of long-term financial goals at the end of a three-year period. each unit has an initial value of $100 dollars. the amount payable at the end of the three-year performance period may be anywhere from $0 to $200 dollars per unit, depending on the companys performance against plan for a three-year period. the compensation committee has the discretion to pay these awards in cash, stock, or a combination of both after the three-year performance period. compensation expense, based on the estimated performance payout, is recognized ratably over the performance period.during 2014, 2013 and 2012, we granted performance awards to our executives with the payout based on the achievement of financial goals for each three-year period following the grant date. the minimum payout amount is $0 and the maximum amount we could be required to pay out for the 2014, 2013 and 2012 performance awards is $343, $261 and $251, respectively. the 2012 grant is expected to be paid out in cash in march 2015.deferred compensationthe company has a deferred compensation plan which permits executives to defer receipt of a portion of their salary, bonus, and certain other incentive awards. participants can diversify deferred compensation among 23 investment funds including a boeing stock unit account.total expense related to deferred compensation was $44, $238 and $75 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, the deferred compensation liability which is being marked to market was $1,234 and $1,258.note 16  shareholders equityon december 15, 2014, the board approved a new repurchase plan for up to $12,000 of common stock, replacing the previously authorized program. the program will expire when we have used all authorized funds or is otherwise terminated. as of december31, 2014 and 2013, there were 1,200,000,000 shares of common stock and 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized. no preferred stock has been issued.97changes in share balancesthe following table shows changes in each class of shares:commonstocktreasurystockbalance at january 1, 20121,012,261,159267,556,388issued(11,935,423)acquired1,009,663balance at december 31, 20121,012,261,159256,630,628issued(17,903,704)acquired26,155,537balance at december 31, 20131,012,261,159264,882,461issued(6,719,270)acquired47,370,415balance at december 31, 20141,012,261,159305,533,606accumulated other comprehensive losschanges in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (aoci) by component for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 were as follows:currency translation adjustmentsunrealized gains and losses on certain investmentsunrealized gains and losses on derivative instrumentsdefined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefitstotal (1)balance at january 1, 2012$197($8)$66($16,755)($16,500)other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications1725(2,290)(2,248)amounts reclassified from aoci(5)1,337(2)1,332net current period other comprehensive loss1720(953)(916)balance at december 31, 2012$214($8)$86($17,708)($17,416)other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications(64)(75)6,0935,954amounts reclassified from aoci(17)1,585(2)1,568net current period other comprehensive income/(loss)(64)(92)7,6787,522balance at december 31, 2013$150($8)($6)($10,030)($9,894)other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications(97)(137)(4,644)(4,878)amounts reclassified from aoci7862(2)869net current period other comprehensive income/(loss)(97)(130)(3,782)(4,009)balance at december 31, 2014$53($8)($136)($13,812)($13,903)(1)net of tax.(2)primarily relates to amortization of actuarial losses for the years ended december 31, 2014, 2013, and 2012 totaling $661, $1,516, and $1,304 (net of tax of ($367), ($849), and ($752)), respectively. these are included in the net periodic pension cost of which a portion is allocated to production as inventoried costs. see note 14.98note 17  derivative financial instrumentscash flow hedgesour cash flow hedges include foreign currency forward contracts, commodity swaps, and commodity purchase contracts. we use foreign currency forward contracts to manage currency risk associated with certain transactions, specifically forecasted sales and purchases made in foreign currencies. our foreign currency contracts hedge forecasted transactions through 2019. we use commodity derivatives, such as swaps and fixed-price purchase commitments to hedge against potentially unfavorable price changes for items used in production. our commodity contracts hedge forecasted transactions through 2017.fair value hedgesinterest rate swaps under which we agree to pay variable rates of interest are designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate debt. the net change in fair value of the derivatives and the hedged items is reported in boeing capital interest expense.derivative instruments not receiving hedge accounting treatmentwe also hold certain derivative instruments, primarily foreign currency forward contracts, for risk management purposes that are not receiving hedge accounting treatment.notional amounts and fair valuesthe notional amounts and fair values of derivative instruments in the consolidated statements of financial position as of december31 were as follows:notionalamounts(1)otherassetsaccruedliabilities201420132014201320142013derivatives designated as hedging instruments:foreign exchange contracts$2,586$2,524$9$122($204)($64)interest rate contracts1253131013commodity contracts317212(24)(39)derivatives not receiving hedge accounting treatment:foreign exchange contracts3192592112(5)(35)commodity contracts39(4)total derivatives$3,064$3,17741149(233)(142)netting arrangements(16)(63)1663net recorded balance$25$86($217)($79)(1)notional amounts represent the gross contract/notional amount of the derivatives outstanding.99gains/(losses) associated with our cash flow and undesignated hedging transactions and their effect on other comprehensive income/(loss) and net earnings were as follows:years ended december31,20142013effective portion recognized in other comprehensive income/(loss), net of taxes:foreign exchange contracts($135)($76)commodity contracts(2)1effective portion reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings, net of taxes:foreign exchange contracts637commodity contracts(13)(20)forward points recognized in other income, net:foreign exchange contracts2834undesignated derivatives recognized in other income, net:foreign exchange contracts(7)17based on our portfolio of cash flow hedges, we expect to reclassify losses of $98 (pre-tax) out of accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings during the next 12 months. ineffectiveness related to our hedges recognized in other income was insignificant for the years ended december 31, 2014 and 2013.we have derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features. for foreign exchange contracts with original maturities of at least five years, our derivative counterparties could require settlement if we default on our five-year credit facility. for commodity contracts, our counterparties could require collateral posted in an amount determined by our credit ratings. the fair value of foreign exchange and commodity contracts that have credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position at december31, 2014 was $20. at december31, 2014, there was no collateral posted related to our derivatives.note 18  significant group concentrations of riskcredit riskfinancial instruments involving potential credit risk are predominantly with commercial aircraft customers and the u.s. government. of the $11,438 in gross accounts receivable and gross customer financing included in the consolidated statements of financial position as of december31, 2014, $5,246 related predominantly to commercial aircraft customers ($1,664 of accounts receivable and $3,582 of customer financing) and $4,281 related to the u.s. government.of the $3,582 in gross customer financing, $2,429 related to customers we believe have less than investment-grade credit including american airlines, hawaiian airlines, and united/continental airlines who were associated with 11%, 9% and 8%, respectively, of our financing portfolio. financing for aircraft is collateralized by security in the related asset and in some instances security in other assets as well.other riskas of december31, 2014, approximately 39% of our total workforce was represented by collective bargaining agreements, the majority of which expire after 2015. 100table of contentsnote 19  fair value measurementsthe following table presents our assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis and are categorized using the fair value hierarchy. the fair value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. level 1 refers to fair values determined based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs and level 3 includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs.december31, 2014december31, 2013totallevel1level2level3totallevel1level2level3assetsmoney market funds$3,826$3,826$3,783$3,783available-for-sale investments7786$2derivatives25$2586$86total assets$3,858$3,833$25$3,877$3,789$86$2liabilitiesderivatives($217)($217)($79)($79)total liabilities($217)($217)($79)($79)money market funds and available-for-sale equity securities are valued using a market approach based on the quoted market prices of identical instruments. available-for-sale debt investments are primarily valued using an income approach based on benchmark yields, reported trades and broker/dealer quotes.derivatives include foreign currency, commodity and interest rate contracts. our foreign currency forward contracts are valued using an income approach based on the present value of the forward rate less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. commodity derivatives are valued using an income approach based on the present value of the commodity index prices less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. the fair value of our interest rate swaps is derived from a discounted cash flow analysis based on the terms of the contract and the interest rate curve.certain assets have been measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis using significant unobservable inputs (level 3). the following table presents the nonrecurring losses recognized for the years ended december31 due to long-lived asset impairment, and the fair value and asset classification of the related assets as of the impairment date:20142013fair valuetotal lossesfair valuetotal lossesoperating lease equipment$187($170)$216($81)property, plant and equipment19(15)40(15)other assets and acquired intangible assets(17)total$206($202)$256($96)the fair value of the impaired operating lease equipment is derived by calculating a median collateral value from a consistent group of third party aircraft value publications. the values provided by the third party aircraft publications are derived from their knowledge of market trades and other market factors. management reviews the publications quarterly to assess the continued appropriateness and consistency with market trends. under certain circumstances, we adjust values based on the attributes and condition of the specific aircraft or equipment, usually when the features or use of the aircraft vary significantly from 101table of contentsthe more generic aircraft attributes covered by third party publications, or on the expected net sales price for the aircraft.property, plant and equipment, other assets and acquired intangible assets were primarily valued using an income approach based on the discounted cash flows associated with the underlying assets. for level 3 assets that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis during the year ended december 31, 2014, the following table presents the fair value of those assets as of the measurement date, valuation techniques and related unobservable inputs of those assets.fairvaluevaluationtechnique(s)unobservable inputrangemedianoraverageoperating lease equipment$187market approachaircraft value publications$158 - $268(1)median $238aircraft condition adjustments($58) - $7(2)net ($51)(1)the range represents the sum of the highest and lowest values for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, according to the third party aircraft valuation publications that we use in our valuation process.(2)the negative amount represents the sum, for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, of all downward adjustments based on consideration of individual aircraft attributes and condition. the positive amount represents the sum of all such upward adjustments.fair value disclosuresthe fair values and related carrying values of financial instruments that are not required to be remeasured at fair value on the consolidated statements of financial position at december 31 were as follows:december 31, 2014carrying amounttotal fair valuelevel 1level 2level 3assetsaccounts receivable, net$7,729$7,845$7,845notes receivable, net366395395liabilitiesdebt, excluding capital lease obligations(8,909)(10,686)(10,480)($206)december31, 2013carrying amounttotal fair valuelevel 1level 2level 3assetsaccounts receivable, net$6,546$6,525$6,525notes receivable, net572622622liabilitiesdebt, excluding capital lease obligations(9,483)(10,897)(10,897)the fair value of accounts receivable is based on current market rates for loans of the same risk and maturities. the fair values of our variable rate notes receivable that reprice frequently approximate their 102table of contentscarrying amounts. the fair values of fixed rate notes receivable are estimated with discounted cash flow analysis using interest rates currently offered on loans with similar terms to borrowers of similar credit quality. the fair value of our debt that is traded in the secondary market is classified as level 2 and is based on current market yields. for our debt that is not traded in the secondary market, the fair value is classified as level 2 and is based on our indicative borrowing cost derived from dealer quotes or discounted cash flows. the fair values of our debt classified as level 3 are based on discounted cash flow models using the implied yield from similar securities. with regard to other financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, it is not practicable to estimate the fair value of our indemnifications and financing commitments because the amount and timing of those arrangements are uncertain. items not included in the above disclosures include cash, restricted cash, time deposits and other deposits, commercial paper, money market funds, accounts payable and long-term payables. the carrying values of those items, as reflected in the consolidated statements of financial position, approximate their fair value at december 31, 2014 and 2013. the fair value of assets and liabilities whose carrying value approximates fair value is determined using level 2 inputs, with the exception of cash (level 1).note 20  legal proceedingsvarious legal proceedings, claims and investigations related to products, contracts, employment and other matters are pending against us. potentially material contingencies are discussed below. we are subject to various u.s. government investigations, from which civil, criminal or administrative proceedings could result or have resulted in the past. such proceedings involve or could involve claims by the government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble damages, restitution and/or forfeitures. under government regulations, a company, or one or more of its operating divisions or subdivisions, can also be suspended or debarred from government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of investigations. we believe, based upon current information, that the outcome of any such government disputes and investigations will not have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows, except as set forth below. where it is reasonably possible that we will incur losses in excess of recorded amounts in connection with any of the matters set forth below, we will disclose either the amount or range of reasonably possible losses in excess of such amounts or, where no such amount or range can be reasonably estimated, the reasons why no such estimate can be made.employment, labor and benefits litigationin connection with the 2005 sale of the former wichita facility to spirit aerosystems, inc. (spirit), on february 16, 2007, an action entitled harkness et al. v. the boeing company et al. was filed in the u.s. district court for the district of kansas, alleging collective bargaining agreement breaches and erisa violations in connection with alleged failures to provide benefits to certain former employees of the wichita facility. during the second quarter of 2014, the plaintiffs and boeing agreed to settle the matter, subject to a fairness hearing, which has not been scheduled. the settlement would apply to approximately 2,000 employees who were subsequently employed by spirit. spirit is obligated to indemnify boeing for settlement of this matter, and we intend to pursue full indemnification from spirit. during the fourth quarter of 2014, boeing filed a complaint against spirit in delaware superior court seeking to enforce our rights to indemnification and to recover from spirit amounts incurred by boeing for pension and retiree medical obligations. we cannot reasonably estimate the range of loss, if any, that may result from this matter pending the outcome of the fairness hearing.on october13, 2006, we were named as a defendant in a lawsuit filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of illinois. plaintiffs, seeking to represent a class of similarly situated participants and beneficiaries in the boeing company voluntary investment plan (the vip), alleged that fees and expenses incurred by the vip were and are unreasonable and excessive, not incurred solely for the benefit of the vip and its participants, and were undisclosed to participants. the plaintiffs further alleged that defendants breached their fiduciary duties in violation of 502(a)(2) of erisa, and sought injunctive and equitable 103table of contentsrelief pursuant to 502(a)(3) of erisa. our motion for summary judgment was denied on december 30, 2014. we expect trial in this matter to begin during the second quarter of 2015. we cannot reasonably estimate the range of loss, if any, that may result from this matter given the current procedural status of the litigation.note 21  segment informationwe operate in five principal segments: commercial airplanes; boeing military aircraft (bma), network& space systems (n&ss), and global services& support (gs&s), collectively defense, space & security; and boeing capital. all other activities fall within unallocated items, eliminations and other. see page 53 for the summary of business segment data, which is an integral part of this note.effective during the first quarter of 2014, certain programs and contracts were realigned among bds segments. the bma airborne warning and control systems program, f-22 modernization program and the airborne early warningand control peace eagle contract were realigned from bma to gs&s. beginning in the third quarter of 2014, amounts previously reported separately as other segment and unallocated items and eliminations are now presented on a combined basis to provide a more meaningful presentation. segment data for 2013 and 2012 have been adjusted to reflect the changes. the commercial airplanes segment develops, produces and markets commercial jet aircraft and provides related support services, principally to the commercial airline industry worldwide.our bma segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of manned and unmanned military aircraft and weapons systems for global strike, including fighter aircraft and missile systems; vertical lift including rotorcraft and tilt-rotor aircraft; mobility, surveillance and engagement, including battle management, airborne, anti-submarine, transport and tanker aircraft.our n&ss segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of the following products and related services: electronics and information solutions, including command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (c4isr), cyber and information solutions, and intelligence systems; strategic missile and defense systems; space and intelligence systems, including satellites and commercial satellite launch vehicles; and space exploration. our gs&s segment provides customers with mission readiness through total support solutions. our global services business sustains aircraft and systems with a full spectrum of products and services through integrated logistics, including supply chain management and engineering support; maintenance, modification and upgrades for aircraft; and training systems and government services, including pilot and maintenance training. in addition, our gs&s segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of airborne surveillance command and control aircraft. gs&s international operations include boeing defence u.k. ltd., boeing defence australia, and alsalam aircraft company, a joint venture.our bcc segment facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our boeing customers. the unallocated activities of engineering, operations& technology (eo&t) and shared services group (ssg), corporate and intercompany guarantees provided to bcc are included in unallocated items, eliminations and other. eo&t provides boeing with technical and functional capabilities, including information technology, research and development, test and evaluation, technology strategy development, environmental remediation management and intellectual property management.104table of contentswhile our principal operations are in the united states, canada and australia, some key suppliers and subcontractors are located in europe and japan. revenues, including foreign military sales, are reported by customer location and consisted of the following:years ended december31,201420132012asia, other than china$11,900$12,200$10,390europe11,89810,62210,269china11,02910,5556,086middle east9,2439,16510,285canada1,9011,486586africa2,5966211,282oceania1,7571,6572,043latin america, caribbean and other2,5962,7253,555total non-u.s. revenues52,92049,03144,496united states37,84237,59237,202total revenues$90,762$86,623$81,698revenues from the u.s. government (including foreign military sales through the u.s. government), primarily recorded at bds, represented 30%, 34% and 33% of consolidated revenues for 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. approximately 3% of operating assets were located outside the united states as of december 31, 2014 and 2013. the information in the following tables is derived directly from the segments internal financial reporting used for corporate management purposes.depreciation and amortizationyears ended december31,201420132012commercial airplanes$674$632$614defense, space& security:boeing military aircraft164131120network& space systems114120123global services& support756967total defense, space& security353320310boeing capital corporation97110150unallocated items, eliminations and other782782737total$1,906$1,844$1,811105table of contentscapital expendituresyears ended december31,201420132012commercial airplanes$698$694$665defense, space& security:boeing military aircraft175186153network& space systems9396115global services& support684857total defense, space& security336330325unallocated items, eliminations and other1,2021,074713total$2,236$2,098$1,703unallocated capital expenditures relate primarily to assets managed by ssg on behalf of the five principal segments.we recorded earnings from operations associated with our cost and equity method investments of $58, $25 and $77 in our commercial airplanes segment and $229, $203 and $196 in bds, primarily in our n&ss segment, for the years ended december31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.for segment reporting purposes, we record commercial airplanes segment revenues and cost of sales for airplanes transferred to other segments. such transfers may include airplanes accounted for as operating leases and considered transferred to the bcc segment and airplanes transferred to the bds segment for further modification prior to delivery to the customer. the revenues and cost of sales for these transfers are eliminated in the unallocated items and eliminations caption. for segment reporting purposes, we record bds revenues and cost of sales for the modification performed on airplanes received from commercial airplanes when the airplane is delivered to the customer or at the attainment of performance milestones.intersegment revenues, eliminated in unallocated items, eliminations and other, are shown in the following table.years ended december31,201420132012commercial airplanes$1,822$879$1,215boeing capital192949total$1,841$908$1,264106table of contentsunallocated items, eliminations and otherunallocated items, eliminations and other includes costs not attributable to business segments as well as intercompany profit eliminations. we generally allocate costs to business segments based on the u.s. federal cost accounting standards. components of unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the following table.years ended december31,201420132012share-based plans($67)($95)($81)deferred compensation(44)(238)(75)amortization of previously capitalized interest(72)(69)(70)eliminations and other unallocated items(593)(859)(452)sub-total(776)(1,261)(678)pension(1,469)(1,374)(787)postretirement8260(112)pension and postretirement(1,387)(1,314)(899)total($2,163)($2,575)($1,577)unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expenseunallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense represents the portion of pension and other postretirement benefit costs that are not recognized by business segments for segment reporting purposes. through 2012, the business segments have been allocated pension and other postretirement benefit costs using u.s. government cost accounting standards (cas), which employ different actuarial assumptions and accounting conventions than generally accepted accounting principles in the united states of america (gaap). beginning in 2013, pension costs, comprising gaap service and prior service costs, are allocated to commercial airplanes. bds continues to be allocated cas pension costs which are allocable to government contracts. other postretirement benefit costs will continue to be allocated to business segments based on cas, which is generally based on benefits paid. prior year allocations have not been adjusted. assetssegment assets are summarized in the table below.december31,20142013commercial airplanes$55,149$49,520defense, space & security:boeing military aircraft7,2325,872network & space systems5,8956,450global services & support4,5865,040total defense, space & security17,71317,362boeing capital3,5253,914unallocated items, eliminations and other22,81121,867total$99,198$92,663assets included in unallocated items, eliminations and other primarily consist of cash and cash equivalents, short-term and other investments, deferred tax assets, capitalized interest and assets held by ssg as well as intercompany eliminations.107table of contentsnote 22  quarterly financial data (unaudited)201420134th3rd2nd1st4th3rd2nd1sttotal revenues$24,468$23,784$22,045$20,465$23,785$22,130$21,815$18,893total costs and expenses(20,711)(20,075)(18,670)(17,296)(20,388)(18,674)(18,450)(15,756)earnings from operations2,0252,1191,7871,5421,5151,8031,7161,528net earnings from continuing operations1,4661,3621,6539651,2331,1601,0871,106net (loss)/gain from disposal of discontinued operations(2)1net earnings1,4661,3621,6539651,2331,1581,0881,106basic earnings per share from continuing operations2.051.882.261.301.631.531.431.45basic earnings per share2.051.882.261.301.631.531.431.45diluted earnings per share from continuing operations2.021.862.241.281.611.511.411.44diluted earnings per share2.021.862.241.281.611.511.411.44cash dividends declared per share1.641.461.2150.97common stock sales price per share:high135.78130.58138.39144.57142.00120.38104.1586.84low116.32117.87121.92118.77113.3498.9983.8072.68quarter end129.98127.38127.23125.49136.49117.50102.4485.85gross profit is calculated as total revenues minus total costs and expenses. total costs and expenses includes cost of products, cost of services and boeing capital interest expense.in the fourth quarter of 2014, we recorded income tax benefits of $188 related to the reinstatement of the research tax credit for 2014. in the first quarter of 2013, we recorded tax benefits of $145 related to the retroactive reinstatement of the research tax credit for 2012. during the second quarter of 2014, we recorded an incremental tax benefit of $265 that related to the application of a 2012 federal court of claims decision. we also recorded tax benefits of $116 and $143 as a result of the 2007-2008 and 2009-2010 federal tax audit settlements. see note 4.during the second quarter of 2014, higher estimated costs to complete the kc-46a tanker contract for the u.s. air force resulted in a reach-forward loss of $425.we recorded charges related to defined benefit pension plan changes of $334 in the first quarter of 2014.during the fourth quarter of 2013, we recorded a charge of $406 related to the a-12 aircraft litigation settlement. we increased our quarterly dividend from $0.485 to $0.73 in december 2013 and to $0.91 in december 2014.108table of contentsreport of independent registered public accounting firmto the board of directors and shareholders ofthe boeing companychicago, illinoiswe have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of the boeing company and subsidiaries (the company) as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2014. the financial statements are the responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements based on our audits.we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.in our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the boeing company and subsidiaries as of december 31, 2014 and 2013, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended december 31, 2014, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the companys internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2014, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission and our report dated february12, 2015 expressed an unqualified opinion on the companys internal control over financial reporting./s/ deloitte & touche llp chicago, illinoisfebruary12, 2015 109table of contentsreport of independent registered public accounting firmto the board of directors and shareholders ofthe boeing companychicago, illinoiswe have audited the internal control over financial reporting of the boeing company and subsidiaries (the company) as of december 31, 2014, based on criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. the companys management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying managements report on internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express an opinion on the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.we conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the companys principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the companys board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of december 31, 2014, based on the criteria established in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission.we have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states), the consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended december 31, 2014 of the company and our report dated february12, 2015 expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements. /s/ deloitte & touche llp chicago, illinoisfebruary12, 2015 110table of contentsitem9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosurenone.item9a. controls and procedures(a)evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures.our chief executive officer and chief financial officer have evaluated our disclosure controls and procedures as of december31, 2014 and have concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in the reports that we file or submit under the securities exchange act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the securities and exchange commissions rules and forms and is accumulated and communicated to our management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.(b)managements report on internal control over financial reporting.our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in exchange act rules 13a-15(f). our management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in internal control  integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. based on this evaluation under the framework in internal control  integrated framework, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of december31, 2014.our internal control over financial reporting as of december31, 2014, has been audited by deloitte& touche llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included in item8 of this report and is incorporated by reference herein.(c)changes in internal controls over financial reporting.there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2014 that have materially affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial reporting.item9b. other informationnone.111table of contentspart iiiitem 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governanceour executive officers and their ages as of february12, 2015, are as follows:nameageprincipal occupation or employment/other business affiliationsbertrand-marc allen41effective february 15, 2015, mr. allen will serve as senior vice president, president of boeing international. mr. allen previously served as president of boeing capital corporation from march 2014 to february 2015, corporate vice president, boeing international and chairman and president of boeing (china) co., ltd. from march 2011 to march 2014 and vice president, global law affairs from may 2007 to march 2011.christopher m. chadwick54executive vice president, president and chief executive officer of boeing defense, space & security since december 2013. mr. chadwick joined boeing in 1982, and his previous positions include president of boeing military aircraft from march 2009 to december 2013; president of precise engagement and mobility systems from february 2008 to february 2009; vice president and general manager, global strike systems from january 2006 to january 2008; and vice president of f/a-18 from january 2004 to december 2005.raymond l. conner59vice chairman, president and chief executive officer of commercial airplanes since december 2013. mr. conner joined boeing in 1977, and his previous positions include executive vice president, president and chief executive officer of commercial airplanes from june 2012 to december 2013; senior vice president of sales and customer support of commercial airplanes from august 2011 to june 2012; vice president and general manager, supply chain management and operations of commercial airplanes from december 2008 to august 2011; vice president of sales, commercial airplanes from december 2007 to december 2008; and vice president and general manager of the 777 program. mr. conner serves on the board of johnson controls, inc.thomas j. downey50senior vice president, communications since january 2007. mr. downey joined boeing in 1986, and his prior positions include vice president, corporate communications; vice president, commercial airplanes communications; corporate vice president, internal and executive communications; and general manager of communications and community relations for military aircraft and missile systems unit.shephard w. hill62president, boeing international since november 2007 and senior vice president, business development and strategy since october 2009. mr. hill joined boeing in 1996 when the company acquired rockwells aerospace and defense business where he held the position of vice president, aerospace government affairs and marketing. his prior positions at boeing include senior vice president, business development and strategy and vice president, business development at bds. effective february 15, 2015, mr. hill will cease to serve as president, boeing international. he will remain a senior vice president of the company until april 1, 2015, when he will retire from the company.112table of contentsnameageprincipal occupation or employment/other business affiliationstimothy j. keating53senior vice president, government operations since joining boeing in june 2008. mr. keating served as senior vice president, global government relations at honeywell international inc. from october 2002 to may 2008. prior thereto, mr. keating was chairman of the board and managing partner of timmons and company (a washington, d.c. lobbying firm).j. michael luttig60executive vice president, general counsel since april 2009. mr. luttig joined boeing in may 2006 as senior vice president, general counsel. from october 1991 to may 2006, he served on the united states court of appeals for the fourth circuit. mr. luttig previously served as assistant attorney general of the united states, counselor to the attorney general at the department of justice and principal deputy assistant attorney general at the department of justice and was associated with davis polk & wardwell llp. mr. luttig serves as director, franklin templeton mutual funds.w. james mcnerney, jr.65chairman and chief executive officer since july 2005. mr. mcnerney also served as president of the boeing company from july 2005 to december 2013. mr. mcnerney previously served as chairman and chief executive officer of 3m company from january 2001 to june 2005. beginning in 1982, he served in management positions at general electric company, his most recent being president and chief executive officer of ge aircraft engines from 1997 to 2000. mr. mcnerney also serves on the boards of the procter & gamble company and international business machines corporation. he is chair of president obama's export council.dennis a. muilenburg51vice chairman, president and chief operating officer since december 2013. mr. muilenburg joined boeing in 1985, and his previous positions include executive vice president, president and chief executive officer of bds from september 2009 to december 2013; president of global services & support from february 2008 to august 2009; vice president and general manager of combat systems from may 2006 to february 2008; and vice president and program manager for future combat systems. mr. muilenburg serves on the board of caterpillar inc.anthony m. parasida58senior vice president, human resources and administration since april 2013. mr. parasida joined boeing in 1978, and his previous positions include senior vice president from october 2012 to april 2013, president of global services & support from september 2009 to october 2012; vice president and general manager of surveillance and engagement systems from january 2006 to september 2009; vice president of p-8; and vice president of f/a-18.diana l. sands49senior vice president, office of internal governance since april 2014. ms. sands previously served as vice president of finance and corporate controller from february 2012 to april 2014 and vice president of investor relations, financial planning& analysis from february 2010 to february 2012. prior to that, she held positions in financial planning and analysis and in corporate treasury.113table of contentsnameageprincipal occupation or employment/other business affiliationsgregory d. smith48executive vice president, chief financial officer since february 2012. effective february 15, 2015, mr. smith will serve as chief financial officer, executive vice president, business development and strategy.  mr. smith previously served as vice president of finance and corporate controller from february 2010 to february 2012 and vice president of financial planning& analysis from june 2008 to february 2010. from august 2004 until june 2008, he served as vice president of global investor relations at raytheon company. prior to that, he held a number of positions at boeing including cfo, shared services group; controller, shared services group; senior director, internal audit; and leadership roles in supply chain, factory operations and program management.john j. tracy60chief technology officer and senior vice president, engineering, operations & technology since october 2006. dr. tracy joined boeing in 1981, and his previous positions include vice president of engineering and mission assurance for bds; vice president of structural technologies, prototyping, and quality for phantom works; and general manager of engineering for military aircraft and missiles.information relating to our directors and nominees will be included under the caption election of directors in the 2015 proxy statement for our annual shareholders meeting scheduled to be held on april 27, 2015 and is incorporated by reference herein. the information required by items405, 407(d)(4) and 407(d)(5) of regulation s-k will be included under the captions stock ownership information  section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance and board committees in the 2015 proxy statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.codes of ethics. we have adopted (1)the boeing company code of ethical business conduct for the board of directors; (2)the boeing company code of conduct for finance employees which is applicable to our chief financial officer (cfo), controller and all finance employees; and (3)the boeing code of conduct that applies to all employees, including our chief executive officer (ceo), (collectively, the codes of conduct). the codes of conduct are posted on our website, www.boeing.com, and printed copies may be obtained, without charge, by contacting the office of internal governance, the boeing company, 100 n. riverside plaza, chicago, il 60606. we intend to disclose promptly on our website any amendments to, or waivers of, the codes of conduct covering our ceo, cfo and/or controller.no family relationships exist among any of the executive officers, directors or director nominees.item11. executive compensationthe information required by item402 of regulation s-k will be included under the captions compensation discussion and analysis, compensation of executive officers, and compensation of directors in the 2015 proxy statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein. the information required by item407(e)(4) and 407(e)(5) of regulation s-k will be included under the captions compensation committee interlocks and insider participation and compensation committee report in the 2015 proxy statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.114table of contentsitem12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder mattersthe information required by item403 of regulation s-k will be included under the caption stock ownership information in the 2015 proxy statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.equity compensation plan informationwe currently maintain two equity compensation plans that provide for the issuance of common stock to officers and other employees, directors and consultants. each of these compensation plans was approved by our shareholders. the following table sets forth information regarding outstanding options and shares available for future issuance under these plans as of december31, 2014:plan categorynumberofsharesto be issued upon exercise of outstandingoptions, warrantsand rightsweighted-averageexercise price ofoutstandingoptions,warrantsand rightsnumberofsecuritiesremainingavailableforfuture issuance underequitycompensationplans(excludingsharesreflectedincolumn (a))(a)(b)(c)equity compensation plans approved by shareholdersstock options18,504,645$73.75deferred compensation3,335,728other stock units(1)5,425,841equity compensation plans not approved by shareholdersnonenonenonetotal(2)27,266,214$73.7518,091,102(1) includes 1,246,204 shares issuable in respect of pbrsus subject to the satisfaction of performance criteria and assumes payout at maximum levels.(2)excludes the potential performance awards which the compensation committee has the discretion to pay in cash, stock or a combination of both after the three-year performance periods which end in 2014, 2015 and 2016.for further information, see note 15 to our consolidated financial statements.item13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independencethe information required by item404 of regulation s-k will be included under the caption related person transactions in the 2015 proxy statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.the information required by item407(a) of regulation s-k will be included under the caption director independence in the 2015 proxy statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.item14. principal accounting fees and servicesthe information required by this itemwill be included under the caption principal accountant fees and services in the 2015 proxy statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.115table of contentspart ivitem15. exhibits, financial statement schedules(a)list of documents filed as part of this report:1.financial statementsour consolidated financial statements are as set forth under item8 of this report on form10-k.2.financial statement schedulesall schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, not required, or the information is included in the consolidated financial statements.3.exhibits(3)articles of incorporation and by-laws.(i)amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the boeing company dated may5, 2006 (exhibit 3.1to the companys current report on form 8-k dated may1, 2006).(ii)by-laws of the boeing company, as amended and restated december 16, 2013 (exhibit 3.2 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated december 16, 2013).(10) material contracts.bank credit agreements(i)364-day credit agreement, dated as of november10, 2011, among the boeing company, the lenders party thereto, citigroup global markets inc. and j.p. morgan securities llc as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. as syndication agent and citibank, n.a. as administrative agent (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated november10, 2011).(ii)amendment no. 1 dated as of october 9, 2014 to the 364-day credit agreement, dated as of november10, 2011, among the boeing company, the lenders party thereto, citigroup global markets inc. and j.p. morgan securities llc as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. as syndication agent and citibank, n.a. as administrative agent (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 14, 2014).(iii)five-year credit agreement, dated as of november10, 2011, among the boeing company, the lenders party thereto, citigroup global markets inc. and j.p. morgan securities llc as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. as syndication agent and citibank, n.a. as administrative agent (exhibit 10.2to the companys current report on form 8-k dated november10, 2011).(iv)amendment no. 1 dated as of october 9, 2014 to the five-year credit agreement, dated as of november10, 2011, among the boeing company, the lenders party thereto, citigroup global markets inc. and j.p. morgan securities llc as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, jpmorgan chase bank, n.a. as syndication agent and citibank, n.a. as administrative agent (exhibit 10.2 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october 14, 2014).116table of contentsbusiness acquisition agreements(v)joint venture master agreement, dated as of may2, 2005, by and among lockheed martin corporation, the boeing company and united launch alliance, l.l.c. (exhibit(10)(i)to the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended june30, 2005).(vi)delta inventory supply agreement, dated as of december1, 2006, by and between united launch alliance, l.l.c. and the boeing company (exhibit(10)(vi)to the companys form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2006).management contracts and compensatory plans(vii)summary of non-employee director compensation (exhibit 10(i)to the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2014).(viii)deferred compensation plan for directors of the boeing company, as amended and restated effective january1, 2008 (exhibit 10.2 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october28, 2007).(ix)deferred compensation plan for employees of the boeing company, as amended and restated on january1, 2008 (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october28, 2007).(x)incentive compensation plan for employees of the boeing company and subsidiaries, as amended and restated january1, 2008 (exhibit 10.7to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october28, 2007).(xi)the boeing company elected officer annual incentive plan, as amended and restated effective january1, 2008 (exhibit 10.6 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october28, 2007).(xii)the boeing company 1997 incentive stock plan, as amended effective may1, 2000 and further amended effective january1, 2008 (exhibit 10.5 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated october28, 2007).(xiii)amended and restated executive employment agreement with w. james mcnerney, jr. dated march13, 2008 (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated march13, 2008).(xiv)amendment to amended and restated executive employment agreement with w. james mcnerney, jr. dated as of may 6, 2014 (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated may 6, 2014).(xv)supplemental pension agreement between the boeing company and j.michael luttig dated january25, 2007, as amended on november14, 2007 (exhibit (10)(xxx)to the companys form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2007).(xvi)supplemental benefit plan for employees of the boeing company, as amended and restated on august 25, 2014, effective march 1, 2014 (exhibit 10(ii) to the companys form 10-q for the quarter ended september 30, 2014).(xvii)supplemental executive retirement plan for employees of the boeing company, as amended and restated as of march 1, 2014 (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated march 5, 2014).(xviii)the boeing company executive layoff benefits plan, as amended and restated effective january1, 2010 (exhibit (10)(xxix)to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2009).(xix)the boeing company 2003 incentive stock plan.(a)plan, as amended and restated effective april 28, 2014 (exhibit 10.1 to the 117table of contentscompanys registration statement on form s-8 filed on may 7, 2014).(b)form of non-qualified stock option grant notice of terms (exhibit(10)(xvii)(b)to the companys form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2010).(c)form of notice of terms of restricted stock units (exhibit (10)(xvii)(c)to the companys form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2010).(d)form of performance award notice (exhibit (10)(xvii)(d)to the companys form 10-k for the year ended december31, 2010).(e)form of notice of terms of restricted stock units dated february 27, 2012 (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 27, 2012).(f)form of notice of terms of restricted stock units dated december 17, 2012 (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated december 17, 2012).(g)form of notice of terms of restricted stock units dated february 25, 2013 (exhibit (10)(xiv)(g) to the companys form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2013).(h)form of notice of terms of restricted stock units dated february 24, 2014 (exhibit 10.1 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 24, 2014).(i)form of notice of terms of performance-based restricted stock units (exhibit 10.2 to the companys current report on form 8-k dated february 24, 2014).(12)computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges.(14)codes of ethics.(i)the boeing company code of ethical business conduct for members of the board of directors (www.boeing.com/corp_gov/conduct_for_directors.pdf).(ii)the boeing company code of conduct for finance employees (www.boeing.com/corp_gov/conduct_finance.html).(iii)the boeing company code of conduct (www.boeing.com/corp_gov/conduct_employee.html).(21)list of company subsidiaries.(23)consent of independent registered public accounting firm.(31)section302 certifications.(i)certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section302 of sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.(ii)certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section302 of sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.(32)section906 certifications.(i)certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section906 of sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.(ii)certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section906 of sarbanes-oxley act of 2002.118table of contents(99)additional exhibits.(i)commercial program method of accounting (exhibit (99)(i)to the 1997 form10-k).(101)interactive data files.(101.ins)xbrl instance document(101.sch)xbrl taxonomy extension schema document(101.cal)xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document(101.def)xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase document(101.lab)xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document(101.pre)xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase documentin accordance with item601(b)(4)(iii)(a) of regulation s-k, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the company are not filed herewith. pursuant to this regulation, we hereby agree to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the sec upon request.119table of contentssignaturespursuant to the requirements of section13 of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on february12, 2015.the boeing company(registrant)by:/s/ robert e. verbeckrobert e. verbeck  vice president of finance and corporate controller120table of contentspursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on february12, 2015./s/ w. james mcnerney, jr./s/ edmund p. giambastiani, jr.w. james mcnerney, jr.  chairman and chief executive officeredmund p. giambastiani, jr.  director (principal executive officer)/s/ gregory d. smith/s/ lawrence w. kellnergregory d. smith  executive vice president and chief financial officerlawrence w. kellner  director (principal financial officer)/s/ robert e. verbeck/s/ edward m. liddyrobert e. verbeck  vice president of finance and corporate controlleredward m. liddy  director(principal accounting officer)/s/ david l. calhoun/s/ susan c. schwabdavid l. calhoun  directorsusan c. schwab  director/s/ arthur d. collins, jr./s/ ronald a. williamsarthur d. collins, jr.  directorronald a. williams  director/s/ linda z. cook/s/ mike s. zafirovskilinda z. cook  directormike s. zafirovski  director/s/ kenneth m. dubersteinkenneth m. duberstein  director121
