10-k
y83718e10vk.htm
form 10-k: the goldman sachs group, inc.
form 10-k: the goldman sachs group, inc.
united states securities and exchange
commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended november29,
commission file
number:001-14965
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
13-4019460
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
85broad street
new york, n.y.
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(212)902-1000
(registrants telephone number, including
area code)
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
title of each class:
name of each exchange on which registered:
common stock, par value $.01per share,
and attached shareholder protection rights
new
york stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb,
0.25%exchangeable notes due 2007; index-linked notes due
2004; 1%exchangeable notes due 2007;
0.75%exchangeable notes due 2005; 1%exchangeable
basket-linked notes due 2007; 0.25%exchangeable
equity-linked notes due november1, 2005;
0.25%exchangeable equity-linked notes due november7,
2005; and 0.50%exchangeable equity-linked notes due
american
stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb,
2.00%exchangeable notes due 2006; 7.35%notes due
2009; 7.50%notes due 2005; 7.80%notes due 2010; and
floating rate notes due 2005
new
york stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb, callable
index-linked notes due december2, 2003
chicago
board options exchange
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act: none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be
contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by
reference in part iii of this form10-k or any amendment to
this
form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
an accelerated filer (as defined in exchange act
rule12b-2).yesnoo
as of may31, 2002, the aggregate market
value of the common stock of the registrant held by
non-affiliates of the registrant was approximately
$32billion.
as of january31, 2003, there were
471,946,312 shares of the registrants common stock
outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference:
portions of the goldman sachs group,
inc.s 2002 annual report to shareholders are incorporated
by reference in this form10-k in response to partii,
items5, 6, 7, 7a and8, and partiv,
item15. portions of the goldman sachs group, inc.s
proxy statement dated february27, 2003, for its 2003
annual meeting of shareholders to be held on april1, 2003,
are incorporated by reference in this form10-k in response
to partii, item5 and partiii, items10,
11, 12 and13.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november29, 2002
page
form 10-k item number:
no.
part i
item1.
business
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity and
related stockholder matters
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and
results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item14.
controls and procedures
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form8-k
index to financial statements and financial
statement schedule
f-1
signatures
ii-1
certifications
ii-3
part i
item1.business
overview
goldman sachs is a leading global investment
banking, securities and investment management firm that provides
a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base. as of november29, 2002, we
operated offices in over 20 countries and approximately 37% of
our 19,739 employees were based outside the united states.
goldman sachs is the successor to a commercial
paper business founded in 1869 by marcus goldman. on may7,
1999, we converted from a partnership to a corporation and
completed an initial public offering of our common stock.
all references to 2002, 2001 and 2000 refer to
our fiscal year ended, or the date, as the context requires,
november29, 2002, november30, 2001 and
november24, 2000, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman sachs,
we, us and our, we mean the
goldman sachs group, inc., a delaware corporation, and its
consolidated subsidiaries.
financial information concerning our business
segments and geographic regions for each of 2002, 2001 and 2000
is set forth in managements discussion and
analysis, and the consolidated financial statements and
the notes thereto, in our 2002 annual report to shareholders,
which are incorporated by reference in partii, items 5, 6,
7, 7a and 8 of this annual report on form10-k.
our internet address is www.gs.com and the
investor relations section of our web site is located at
www.gs.com/investorrelations. we make
available free of charge, on or through the investor relations
section of our web site, annual reports on form10-k,
quarterly reports on form10-q and current reports on
form8-k and amendments to those reports filed or furnished
pursuant to section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 as soon as reasonably practicable after we
electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the
securities and exchange commission. also posted on our web site
are our charters for our audit committee, compensation committee
and corporate governance and nominating committee, as well as
corporate governance guidelines and a code of business conduct
and ethics governing our directors, officers and employees.
within the time period required by the sec, we will post on our
web site any amendment to such code and any waiver applicable to
our senior financial officers, as defined in the code. in
addition, information concerning purchases and sales of our
equity securities by our executive officers and directors is
posted on our web site.
business segments
our activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking;
trading and principal investments; and
asset management and securities services.
our investment banking and trading and principal
investments activities were previously aggregated into one
reporting segment global capital markets.
the following table sets forth the net revenues,
operating expenses and pre-tax earnings of our segments:
operating results by segment
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking
net revenues
$
2,830
$
3,836
$
5,371
operating expenses
2,454
3,117
3,645
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
1,726
trading and principal investments
net revenues
$
5,249
$
6,349
$
6,627
operating expenses
4,273
5,134
4,199
pre-tax earnings
$
$
1,215
$
2,428
asset management and securities services
net revenues
$
5,907
$
5,626
$
4,592
operating expenses
3,794
3,501
3,008
pre-tax earnings
$
2,113
$
2,125
$
1,584
total
net revenues
$
13,986
$
15,811
$
16,590
operating expenses(1)
10,733
12,115
11,570
pre-tax earnings
$
3,253
$
3,696
$
5,020
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to our segments: (i)amortization of
employee initial public offering awards of $212 million, $363
million and $428 million for the years ended november 2002,
november2001 and november2000, respectively, and
(ii)nonrecurring acquisition awards of $290 million
related to our combination with spear, leeds & kellogg for
the year ended november2000.
these segments consist of various product and
service offerings that are set forth in the following chart:
primary products and activities by business
segment
trading and principal
asset management and
investment banking
investments
securities services
equity and debt
commodities and
commissions received on
underwriting
commodity derivatives
equity securities and
financial restructuring
credit products, including
derivatives
advisory services
investment-grade corporate
increased share of
mergers and acquisitions
securities, high-yield
merchant banking fund
advisory services
securities, bank loans,
income and gains
municipal securities, credit
institutional and high-net-
derivatives and emerging
worth asset management
market debt
margin lending
currencies and currency
matched book
derivatives
merchant banking
interest rate products,
management fees
including interest rate
mutual funds
derivatives and global
prime brokerage
government securities
securities lending
money market instruments
securities, futures and
mortgage-backed securities
options clearing services
and loans
principal investments
proprietary trading
specialist and market
maker in securities and
options
spreads received on, and
proprietary positions in,
equity securities and
derivatives
investment banking
investment banking represented 20% of 2002 net
revenues. we provide a broad range of investment banking
services to a diverse group of corporations, financial
institutions, governments and individuals and seek to develop
and maintain long-term relationships with these clients as their
lead investment bank.
our current structure, which is organized by
regional, industry and product groups, seeks to combine
client-focused investment bankers with execution and industry
expertise. because our businesses are global, we have adapted
our organization to meet the demands of our clients in each
geographic region. through our commitment to teamwork, we
believe that we provide services in an integrated fashion for
the benefit of our clients.
our investment banking activities are divided
into two categories:
financial advisory.
financial advisory includes
advisory assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions,
divestitures, corporate defense activities, restructurings and
spin-offs; and
underwriting.
underwriting includes public
offerings and private placements of equity and debt securities.
financial advisory
goldman sachs is a leading investment bank in
worldwide mergers and acquisitions. our mergers and acquisitions
capabilities are evidenced by our significant share of
assignments in large, complex transactions for which we provide
multiple services, including one-stop acquisition
financing and cross-border structuring expertise as well as
services in other areas of the firm, such as currency hedging.
underwriting
we underwrite a wide range of securities and
other instruments, including common and preferred stock,
convertible and exchangeable securities, investment-grade debt,
high-yield debt, sovereign and emerging market debt, municipal
debt, bank loans, asset-backed securities and real
estate-related securities, such as mortgage-backed securities
and the securities of real estate investment trusts.
equity underwriting.
equity underwriting has been a
long-term core strength of goldman sachs. as with mergers and
acquisitions, we have been particularly successful in winning
mandates for large, complex equity underwritings. we believe our
leadership in worldwide initial public offerings and worldwide
public common stock offerings reflects our expertise in complex
transactions, track record and distribution capabilities.
we believe that a key factor in our equity
underwriting success is the close working relationship among the
investment bankers, sales force and others as coordinated by our
equity capital markets group. with institutional sales
professionals and high-net-worth relationship managers located
in every major market around the world, goldman sachs has
relationships with a large and diverse group of investors.
debt underwriting.
we engage in the underwriting and
origination of various types of debt instruments including:
investment-grade debt;
high-yield debt and bank loans for
non-investment-grade issuers;
emerging market debt, which includes corporate
and sovereign issues; and
structured securities, including asset-backed and
mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations.
we have employed a focused approach in debt
underwriting, emphasizing high value-added areas in servicing
our clients.
trading and principal investments
trading and principal investments represented 38%
of 2002 net revenues. our trading and principal investments
business facilitates customer transactions with a diverse group
of corporations, financial institutions, governments and
individuals and takes proprietary positions through market
making in, and trading of, fixed income and equity products,
currencies, commodities, and swaps and other derivatives. in
addition, we engage in floor-based and electronic market making
as a specialist on u.s.equities and options exchanges. in
order to meet the needs of our clients, our trading and
principal investments business is diversified across a wide
range of products. we believe our willingness and ability to
take risk distinguishes us from many of our competitors and
substantially enhances our client relationships.
trading and principal investments is divided into
three categories:
fixed income, currency and commodities.
we make markets in and trade interest
rate and credit products, currencies and commodities, structure
and enter into a wide variety of derivative transactions, and
engage in proprietary trading;
equities. we make
markets in, act as a specialist for, and trade equities and
equity-related products, structure and enter into equity
derivative transactions, and engage in proprietary trading; and
principal investments.
principal investments primarily
represents net revenues from our merchant banking investments.
fixed
income, currency and commodities
ficc is a large and diversified operation through
which we engage in a variety of customer-driven market making
and proprietary trading activities. ficcs principal
product areas are:
commodities and commodity derivatives;
credit products, including investment-grade
corporate securities, high-yield securities, bank loans,
municipal securities, credit derivatives and emerging market
debt;
currencies and currency derivatives;
interest rate products, including interest rate
derivatives and global government securities;
money market instruments; and
mortgage-backed securities and loans.
we generate trading net revenues from our
customer-driven business in three ways. first, in large, highly
liquid markets, we undertake a high volume of transactions for
modest spreads. second, by capitalizing on our strong market
relationships and capital position, we also undertake
transactions in less liquid markets where spreads are generally
larger. finally, we generate net revenues from structuring and
executing transactions that address complex client needs.
in its customer-driven business, ficc strives to
deliver high-quality service by offering broad market-making,
research and market knowledge to our clients on a global basis
and by creating innovative solutions to complex client problems
by drawing upon our structuring and trading expertise. in
addition, we use our expertise to take positions in markets to
facilitate customer transactions.
in our proprietary activities, we assume a
variety of risks and devote resources to identify, analyze and
benefit from these exposures. we leverage our strong research
capabilities and capitalize on our proprietary analytical models
to analyze information and make informed trading judgments. we
seek to benefit from perceived disparities in the value of
assets in the trading markets and from macroeconomic and
company-specific trends.
a core activity in ficc is market making in a
broad array of securities and products. for example, we are a
primary dealer in many of the largest government bond markets
around the world, including the united states, japan and the
united kingdom. we are a member of the major futures exchanges,
and also have interbank dealer status in the currency markets in
new york, london, tokyo and hong kong. our willingness to make
markets in a broad range of fixed income, currency and commodity
products and their derivatives is crucial both to our client
relationships and to support our underwriting business by
providing secondary market liquidity. our ficc research
capabilities include quantitative and qualitative analyses of
global economic, currency and financial market trends, as well
as credit analyses of corporate and sovereign fixed income
securities.
equities
goldman sachs trades equity securities and
equity-related products (such as convertible securities,
options, futures and over-the-counter (otc) derivative
instruments) on a global basis as an agent, a market maker and
on a proprietary basis. as an agent and market maker we
facilitate customer transactions, often by committing capital,
to provide liquidity to clients with large blocks of stocks or
options. in the u.s., we are one of the leading specialists on
the new york stock exchange and in the listed options market and
we are a designated market maker in over 5,000 stocks traded on
the nasdaq stock market. goldman sachs is a member of most of
the worlds major stock, futures and options exchanges,
including those located in new york, chicago, london, paris,
frankfurt, tokyo and hong kong.
we execute transactions in equity securities and
derivatives as agents for institutional and individual customers
that generate commission revenues. commissions earned on these
transactions are recorded in asset management and securities
services.
in equity trading, as in ficc, we generate net
revenues from our customer-driven business in three ways. first,
by capitalizing on our strong market relationships and capital
position, we undertake large transactions in which we benefit
from spreads that are generally larger than in higher volume
transactions. for example, goldman sachs is active in the
execution of large block trades (trades of 50,000 or more
shares). second, in large, highly liquid principal markets, we
undertake a high volume of transactions for modest spreads.
finally, we also benefit from structuring complex transactions.
in the listed options and futures markets, we
structure, distribute and execute otc derivatives on market
indices, industry groups and individual company stocks to
facilitate customer transactions and our proprietary activities.
we develop quantitative strategies and render advice with
respect to portfolio hedging and restructuring and asset
allocation transactions. we also create specially tailored
instruments to enable sophisticated investors to undertake
hedging strategies and establish or liquidate investment
positions. we are one of the leading participants in the trading
and development of equity derivative instruments. we are an
active participant in the trading of futures and options on most
of the major exchanges in the united states, europe and asia.
our proprietary trading businesses utilize a
variety of strategies to take advantage of market conditions and
events in different regions and markets. these include, among
others, relative value trading (which involves trading
strategies to take advantage of perceived discrepancies in the
relative value of financial instruments, including debt and
equity instruments), risk arbitrage (which focuses on
event-oriented special situations such as corporate
restructurings, recapitalizations, mergers and acquisitions and
legal and regulatory events) and statistical arbitrage (which
involves trading strategies based on analyses of historical
price relationships among sectors of the equities markets).
trading risk management
we believe that our trading and market-making
capabilities are key ingredients to our success. while these
businesses have generally earned attractive returns, we have in
the past incurred significant trading losses in periods of
market turbulence, such as in 1994 and the second half of 1998,
and in connection with specific significant positions.
our trading risk management process seeks to
balance our ability to profit from trading positions with our
exposure to potential losses. as part of this process, we
analyze not only market risk but also credit and other financial
risks. risk management includes input from all levels of goldman
sachs, from the trading desks to the firmwide risk committee.
for a further discussion of our risk management policies and
procedures, see managements discussion and
analysis risk management in the
2002 annual report to shareholders, which is incorporated by
reference in partii, items7 and 7a of this annual
report on form10-k.
in both our customer-driven and proprietary
activities in equities and ficc, we manage our exposure to
credit and other financial risks on a global basis across all
our products.
principal
investments
in connection with our merchant banking
activities, we invest by making principal investments directly
and through funds that we raise and manage. as of november 2002,
we managed private investment funds with total equity capital
commitments from our clients and from goldman sachs of
$37.55billion, including funded amounts; goldman sachs
also had outstanding commitments to invest up to
$1.46billion. the funds investments generate capital
appreciation or depreciation and, upon disposition, realized
gains or losses. see asset management and
securities services asset management
merchant banking for a discussion of our merchant banking
funds. as of november 2002, the aggregate carrying value of our
principal investments held directly or through our merchant
banking funds was approximately $1.78billion, which
consisted of corporate principal investments with an aggregate
carrying value of approximately $1.04billion and real
estate investments with an aggregate carrying value of
approximately $744million.
asset management and securities
services
the components of the asset management and
securities services segment, which represented 42% of 2002 net
revenues, are set forth below:
asset management.
asset management generates
management fees by providing investment advisory services to a
diverse client base of institutions and individuals;
securities services.
securities services includes prime
brokerage, financing services and securities lending, and our
matched book businesses, all of which generate revenues
primarily in the form of interest rate spreads or fees; and
commissions.
commissions includes fees from
executing and clearing client transactions on major stock,
options and futures markets worldwide. commissions also includes
revenues from the increased share of the income and gains
derived from our merchant banking funds when the return on a
funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns
(typically referred to as an override). for a
discussion regarding our increased share of the income and gains
from our merchant banking funds, see asset
management merchant banking below.
in january 2002, we began to implement a new
fee-based pricing structure in our nasdaq trading business.
previously we did not charge explicit fees in this business but
rather earned market-making revenues based generally on the
difference between bid and ask prices. these market-making net
revenues are reported in our equities trading results. as a
result of the change to the fee-based pricing structure, a
substantial portion of our nasdaq net revenues is reported in
commissions.
asset
management
we offer a broad array of investment strategies
and advice across all major asset classes: global equity, fixed
income (including money markets), currency and alternative
investment products (i.e., investment vehicles with
non-traditional investment objectives and/or strategies).
assets under management typically generate fees
based on a percentage of their value and include our mutual
funds, separate accounts managed for institutional and
individual investors, our merchant banking funds and other
alternative investment funds. we also earn trading commissions
on assets in brokerage accounts of high-net-worth individuals,
although the trend in
our private wealth management business has been
away from traditional brokerage accounts that generate
commission revenue to accounts that pay fees based on the assets
under management.
the amount of assets under management is set
forth in the graph below. in the following graph, as well as in
the following tables, substantially all assets under management
are valued as of calendar month-end.
assets under management
($ in billions)
the following table sets forth assets under
management by asset class:
assets under management by asset
class
(in billions)
as of november
asset class
money markets
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity
alternative investments(1)
total
$
$
$
(1)
includes merchant banking, quantitative asset
allocation and other similar funds that we manage, as well as
funds where we recommend one or more subadvisors for our clients.
clients. our
clients are institutions and high-net-worth individuals as well
as retail investors. we access institutional and high-net-worth
clients through both direct and third-party channels and retail
clients through third-party channels. our institutional clients
include pension funds, governmental organizations, corporations,
insurance companies, foundations and endowments. in the
third-party distribution channel, we distribute our mutual funds
on a worldwide basis through banks, brokerage firms, insurance
companies and other financial intermediaries.
the table below sets forth the amount of assets
under management by distribution channel and client category as
of november2002:
assets under management by distribution
channel
(in billions)
assets under
management(1)
primary investment vehicles
directly distributed
institutional
$
separate managed accounts
high-net-worth individuals
commingled vehicles
mutual funds
brokerage accounts
private investment funds
separate managed accounts
third-party distributed
institutional and retail
mutual funds
total
$
(1)
excludes $19.26billion in certain of our
merchant banking funds.
merchant banking.
goldman sachs has established a
successful record in the corporate and real estate merchant
banking business, sponsoring private investment funds with
$37.55billion of committed capital as of
november2002, of which $24.95billion has been
funded. we have provided a portion of those amounts. see
trading and principal investments
principal investments above. our clients, including
pension plans, endowments, charitable institutions and
high-net-worth individuals, have provided the remainder.
our strategy with respect to our merchant banking
funds generally is to invest opportunistically to build a
portfolio of investments that is diversified by industry,
product type, geographic region and transaction structure and
type. some of these investment funds pursue, on a global basis,
long-term investments in equity and debt securities in privately
negotiated transactions, leveraged buyouts and acquisitions. as
of november 2002, our corporate merchant banking funds had total
committed capital of $25.42billion. other funds, with
total committed capital of $12.12billion as of november
2002, invest in real estate operating companies, debt and equity
interests in real estate assets, and other real estate-related
investments.
merchant banking activities generate three
revenue streams. first, we receive a management fee that is
generally a percentage of a funds committed capital,
invested capital, total gross acquisition cost or asset value.
these annual management fees are included in our asset
management revenues. second, goldman sachs, as a substantial
investor in these funds, is allocated its proportionate share of
the funds unrealized appreciation or depreciation arising
from changes in fair value as well as gains and losses upon
realization. these items are included in our trading and
principal investments net revenues. finally, after the fund has
achieved a minimum return for fund investors, we receive an
increased share of the funds income and gains that is a
percentage of the income and gains from the funds
investments. revenues from the increased share of the
funds income and gains are included in commissions.
securities
services
securities services activities include prime
brokerage, financing services and securities lending. we provide
these services to a diversified u.s. and international customer
base,
including mutual funds, pension funds, hedge
funds, foundations, endowments and high-net-worth individuals.
securities services also includes our matched book businesses.
we offer prime brokerage services to our clients,
allowing them the flexibility to trade with most brokers while
maintaining a single source for financing and consolidated
portfolio reports. our prime brokerage activities provide
clearing and custody in 50 markets (with revenues from clearing
and custody included in commissions), consolidated
multi-currency accounting and reporting and offshore fund
administration. additionally, we provide financing to our
clients for their securities trading activities through margin
and securities loans that are collateralized by securities, cash
or other acceptable collateral held in the clients account.
securities lending activities principally involve
the borrowing and lending of equity securities to cover customer
and goldman sachs short sales and otherwise to make
deliveries into the market. in addition, we are an active
participant in the broker-to-broker securities lending business
and the third-party agency lending business.
commissions
goldman sachs generates fees from executing and
clearing client transactions on major stock, options and futures
markets worldwide. as discussed above, commissions also includes
the increased share of the income and gains derived from our
merchant banking funds.
global investment research
our global investment research division provides
fundamental research on industries and companies,
macroeconomics, currencies, commodities and portfolio strategy
on a worldwide basis.
global investment research employs a team
approach that as of november 2002 provided research coverage of
approximately 1,850 companies worldwide, over 50 economies and
25 stock markets. this is accomplished by four groups:
the equity analyst group, which consists of four
regional departments, provides fundamental analysis, forecasts
and investment opinions for companies and industries worldwide.
equity research analysts are organized regionally by industry
team, which allows for extensive collaboration and knowledge
sharing among analysts on important investment themes;
the economic research group, which consists of
four regional departments, formulates macroeconomic forecasts
for economic activity, foreign exchange and interest rates based
on the globally coordinated views of its regional economists;
the portfolio strategy group, which consists of
four regional departments, formulates equity market forecasts
and provides opinions on both asset and industry sector
allocation; and
the commodities research group, which consists of
departments in london and newyork, provides research on
the global commodity markets.
further information regarding research at goldman
sachs is provided under regulation
regulations applicable in and outside the united states,
certain factors that may affect our
business legal and regulatory and legal
proceedings research independence matters in
item3 of this annual report on form10-k.
technology strategy
goldman sachs is committed to the ongoing
development, maintenance and use of technology throughout the
organization. our technology initiatives can be broadly
categorized into four efforts:
enhancing client service through increased
connectivity and the provision of value-added, tailored services;
improving our trading, execution and clearing
capabilities;
risk management; and
overall efficiency, productivity and control.
we have tailored our services to our clients by
providing them with electronic access to our products and
services. in particular, we have extended our global electronic
trading and information distribution capabilities to our clients
via the internet and other forms of electronic connectivity.
these capabilities cover many of our fixed income, currency,
commodity, equity and mutual fund products around the world. we
have also used the internet to improve the ease and quality of
communication with our institutional and high-net-worth clients.
internet technology and electronic commerce have
changed and will continue to change the ways that securities and
other financial products are traded, distributed and settled.
this creates both opportunities and challenges for our
businesses. we remain committed to being at the forefront of
technological innovation in the global capital markets.
we have developed software that enables us to
monitor and analyze our market and credit risks. this risk
management software not only analyzes market risk on firmwide,
divisional and trading desk levels, but also breaks down our
risk into its underlying exposures, permitting management to
evaluate exposures on the basis of specific interest rate,
currency exchange rate, equity price or commodity price changes.
to assist further in the management of our credit exposures,
data from many sources are aggregated daily into credit
management systems that give senior management and professionals
in the credit and controllers departments the ability to receive
timely information with respect to credit exposures worldwide,
including netting information, and the ability to analyze
complex risk situations effectively. our software accesses this
data, allows for quick analysis at the level of individual
trades, and interacts with other goldman sachs systems.
technology has also been a significant factor in
improving the overall efficiency of many areas of goldman sachs.
by automating many trading procedures and operational and
accounting processes, we have substantially increased our
efficiency and accuracy.
employees
management believes that one of the strengths and
principal reasons for the success of goldman sachs is the
quality and dedication of its people and the shared sense of
being part of a team. we strive to maintain a work environment
that fosters professionalism, excellence, diversity and
cooperation among our employees worldwide.
instilling the goldman sachs culture in all
employees is a continuous process, in which training plays an
important part. all employees are offered the opportunity to
participate in education and periodic seminars that we sponsor
at various locations throughout the world. another important
part of instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee
review process. employees are reviewed by supervisors,
co-workers and employees they supervise in a 360-degree review
process that is integral to our team approach.
as of november2002, we had 19,739
employees, which excludes employees of goldman sachs
property management subsidiaries. substantially all of the costs
of these property
management employees are reimbursed to goldman
sachs by the real estate investment funds to which these
subsidiaries provide property management services.
competition
the financial services industry and
all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and
we expect them to remain so. our competitors are other brokers
and dealers, investment banking firms, insurance companies,
investment advisors, mutual funds, hedge funds, commercial banks
and merchant banks. we compete with some of our competitors
globally and with others on a regional, product or niche basis.
our competition is based on a number of factors, including
transaction execution, our products and services, innovation,
reputation and price.
we also face intense competition in attracting
and retaining qualified employees. our ability to continue to
compete effectively in our businesses will depend upon our
ability to attract new employees and retain and motivate our
existing employees.
in recent years, there has been substantial
consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial
services industry, due in part to u.s.federal legislation
that has expanded the activities permissible for firms
affiliated with a u.s.bank. in particular, a number of
large commercial banks, insurance companies and other
broad-based financial services firms have established or
acquired broker-dealers or have merged with other financial
institutions. many of these firms have the ability to offer a
wide range of products, from loans, deposit-taking and insurance
to brokerage, asset management and investment banking services,
which may enhance their competitive position. they also have the
ability to support investment banking and securities products
with commercial banking, insurance and other financial services
revenues in an effort to gain market share, which could result
in pricing pressure in our businesses. moreover, we have faced,
and expect to continue to face, pressure to retain market share
by committing capital to businesses or transactions on terms
that offer returns that may not be commensurate with their
risks. in particular, corporate clients sometimes seek to
require such commitments from financial services firms in
connection with investment banking assignments.
the trend toward consolidation and convergence
has significantly increased the capital base and geographic
reach of some of our competitors. this trend has also hastened
the globalization of the securities and other financial services
markets. as a result, we have had to commit capital to support
our international operations and to execute large global
transactions. in order to take advantage of some of our most
significant challenges and opportunities, we will have to
compete successfully with financial institutions that are larger
and better-capitalized and that may have a stronger local
presence and longer operating history outside the united states.
we have experienced intense price competition in
some of our businesses in recent years. for example, equity and
debt underwriting discounts, as well as trading spreads, have
been under pressure for a number of years and the ability to
execute trades electronically, through the internet and through
other alternative trading systems, may increase the pressure on
trading commissions. it appears that this trend toward
alternative trading systems will continue. moreover, the
introduction of decimalization has led to a reduction in the
revenues of our specialist business and to the implementation of
a new fee-based pricing structure in our nasdaq trading
business, as discussed above under asset
management and securities services. we believe that we may
experience competitive pressures in these and other areas in the
future as some of our competitors seek to obtain market share by
reducing prices.
the trading of futures on single stocks commenced
in november2002. it is too early to tell what the exact
impact of the introduction of single stock futures contracts
will be on the businesses of goldman sachs. while commissions
and clearing fees may increase, other aspects of our business,
in particular, our otc derivative business, may be adversely
affected.
regulation
goldman sachs, as a participant in the securities
and commodity futures and options industries, is subject to
extensive regulation in the united states and elsewhere. as a
matter of public policy, regulatory bodies in the united states
and the rest of the world are charged with safeguarding the
integrity of the securities and other financial markets and with
protecting the interests of customers participating in those
markets. they are not, however, charged with protecting the
interests of goldman sachs shareholders or creditors.
broker-dealers, in particular, are subject to
regulations that cover all aspects of the securities business,
including sales methods, trade practices, use and safekeeping of
customers funds and securities, capital structure,
record-keeping, the financing of customers purchases, and
the conduct of directors, officers and employees. additional
legislation, changes in rules promulgated by self-regulatory
organizations, or changes in the interpretation or enforcement
of existing laws and rules, either in the united states or
elsewhere, may directly affect the operation and profitability
of goldman sachs.
regulation
in the united states
in the united states, the sec is the federal
agency responsible for the administration of the federal
securities laws. our principal broker-dealer in the united
states is goldman, sachs& co., which is registered as
a broker-dealer and as an investment adviser with the sec and as
a broker-dealer in all 50states and the district of
columbia. self-regulatory organizations, such as the nyse and
the nasd, adopt rules that apply to, and examine, broker-dealers
such as goldman, sachs& co. in addition, state
securities and other regulators also have regulatory or
oversight authority over goldman, sachs& co.
similarly, our businesses are also subject to regulation by
various non-u.s.governmental and regulatory bodies and
self-regulatory authorities in virtually all countries where we
have offices. spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p. and certain
of its affiliates are registered u.s.broker-dealers and
are regulated by the sec, the nyse and the nasd. goldman sachs
financial markets, l.p. is registered with the sec as an otc
derivatives dealer and conducts certain otc derivatives
businesses previously conducted by other affiliates.
the commodity futures and commodity options
industry in the united states is subject to regulation under the
commodity exchange act, as amended. the commodity futures
trading commission is the federal agency charged with the
administration of the commodity exchange act and the regulations
thereunder. several of goldman sachs subsidiaries,
including goldman, sachs& co. and spear,
leeds& kellogg, l.p., are registered with the cftc and
act as futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators or
commodity trading advisors and are subject to the commodity
exchange act and the regulations thereunder. the rules and
regulations of various self-regulatory organizations, such as
the chicago board of trade, other futures exchanges and the
national futures association, also govern the commodity futures
and commodity options businesses of these entities.
as a registered broker-dealer and member of
various self-regulatory organizations, goldman, sachs&
co. is subject to the secs uniform net capital rule,
rule15c3-1. this rule specifies the minimum level of net
capital a broker-dealer must maintain and also requires that a
significant part of its assets be kept in relatively liquid
form. goldman, sachs& co. is also subject to the net
capital requirements of the cftc and various securities and
commodity exchanges. see note14 to the consolidated
financial statements incorporated by reference in partii,
item8 of this annual report on form10-k.
the sec and various self-regulatory organizations
impose rules that require notification when net capital falls
below certain predefined criteria, limit the ratio of
subordinated debt to equity in the regulatory capital
composition of a broker-dealer and constrain the ability of a
broker-dealer to expand its business under certain
circumstances. additionally, the secs uniform net capital
rule imposes certain requirements that may have the effect of
prohibiting a
broker-dealer from distributing or withdrawing
capital and requiring prior notice to the sec for certain
withdrawals of capital.
goldman sachs has established the goldman sachs
trust company, n.a., a national bank limited to fiduciary
activities, in order to provide personal trust and estate
administration and related services to its high-net-worth
clients on a nationwide basis. gstc maintains collective
investment funds for eligible pension and profit sharing plan
clients. as a national bank, gstc is subject to regulation by
the office of the comptroller of the currency and is a member
bank of the federal reserve system. gstc will not accept
deposits or make loans and, as a result, it is not considered to
be a bank for purposes of the bank holding company act. it also
does not carry fdic insurance and is not subject to the
requirements of the community reinvestment act.
the usa patriot act of 2001, enacted in response
to the terrorist attacks on september11, 2001, contains
anti-money laundering and financial transparency laws and
mandates the implementation of various new regulations
applicable to broker-dealers and other financial services
companies, including standards for verifying client
identification at account opening, and obligations to monitor
client transactions and report suspicious activities. through
these and other provisions, the act seeks to promote cooperation
among financial institutions, regulators and law enforcement
entities in identifying parties that may be involved in
terrorism or money laundering. anti-money-laundering laws
outside of the u.s. contain some similar provisions. the
increased obligations of financial institutions, including
goldman sachs, to identify their customers, watch for and report
suspicious transactions, respond to requests for information by
regulatory authorities and law enforcement agencies, and share
information with other financial institutions, requires the
implementation and maintenance of internal practices, procedures
and controls which will increase our costs and may subject us to
liability.
regulation
outside of the united states
goldman sachs is an active participant in the
international fixed income and equities markets. many of our
affiliates that participate in these markets are subject to
comprehensive regulations that include some form of capital
adequacy rules and other customer protection rules. goldman
sachs provides investment services in and from the united
kingdom under the regulation of the financial services
authority. various goldman sachs entities operating in europe
are also regulated by, among others, the federal financial
supervisory authority (bafin), the bundesbank and other
regulatory authorities in germany, french and swiss banking
authorities, the london stock exchange and other securities,
derivatives and commodities exchanges of which they are members.
the investment services that are subject to oversight by the fsa
and other european regulators are regulated in accordance with
european union directives requiring, among other things,
compliance with certain capital adequacy standards, customer
protection requirements and conduct of business rules. these
standards, requirements and rules are similarly implemented,
under the same directives, throughout the european union and are
broadly comparable in scope and purpose to the regulatory
capital and customer protection requirements imposed under the
sec and cftc rules. european union directives also permit local
regulation in each jurisdiction, including those in which we
operate, to be more restrictive than the requirements of such
directives and these local requirements can result in certain
competitive disadvantages to goldman sachs.
in addition, the financial services agency, the
tokyo stock exchange, the osaka securities exchange, the tokyo
international financial futures exchange and the japan
securities dealers association in japan, the securities and
futures commission in hong kong, and the monetary authority of
singapore, among others, regulate various of our subsidiaries in
asia and also have capital standards and other requirements
comparable to the rules of the sec.
the european financial conglomerates directive,
adopted by the european union on november20, 2002,
proposes certain changes to the way in which financial
conglomerates and
other financial services organizations are
regulated. these changes may affect the regulation of our
european subsidiaries, and potentially of our business globally,
and goldman sachs entities that are currently unregulated may
become subject to regulation. we continue to work with our
regulators to understand the impact of these changes.
regulations
applicable in and outside the united states
the u.s. and non-u.s.government agencies,
regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations, as well as
state securities commissions in the united states, are empowered
to conduct administrative proceedings that can result in
censure, fine, the issuance of cease-and-desist orders, or the
suspension or expulsion of a broker-dealer or its directors,
officers or employees. occasionally, our subsidiaries have been
subject to investigations and proceedings, and sanctions have
been imposed for infractions of various regulations relating to
our activities, none of which has had a material adverse effect
on us or our businesses.
compliance with the net capital requirements of
u.s. and non-u.s.regulators could limit those operations
of our subsidiaries that require the intensive use of capital,
such as underwriting and trading activities, specialist
activities and the financing of customer account balances, and
also could restrict our ability to withdraw capital from our
regulated subsidiaries, which in turn could limit our ability to
repay debt or pay dividends on our common stock.
our specialist businesses are subject to
extensive regulation by a number of securities exchanges. the
rules of these exchanges generally require our specialists to
maintain orderly markets in the securities in which they are
specialists. these requirements, in turn, may require us to
commit significant amounts of capital to our specialist
businesses.
the research departments of investment banks are
the subject of increased regulatory scrutiny. in 2002, the sec,
the nyse and the nasd adopted numerous rules affecting research
analysts and their interaction with investment banking
departments at member securities firms, as well as other
companies. also, acting in part pursuant to a mandate contained
in the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, the sec, the nyse and the
nasd proposed additional heightened restrictions on the
interaction between research analysts and investment banking
departments at member securities firms. various non-u.s.
jurisdictions have also changed or proposed to change their
requirements with respect to research. in addition, several
major securities firms, including goldman, sachs& co.,
have recently reached agreements in principle with certain
federal and state securities regulators and self-regulatory
organizations to resolve investigations into the practices of
their research departments. as part of this global settlement,
restrictions will be imposed on the interaction between research
and investment banking departments and these securities firms
will be required to fund the provision of independent research
to their customers. in connection with the agreements in
principle, the firm also expects to be joining the other leading
securities firms who are part of the proposed global settlement
in an initiative that generally will prohibit the allocation of
shares in initial public offerings to executives and directors
of public companies. we do not know the practical effect that
such restrictions or measures would have on our business, if
adopted.
certain factors that may affect our
business
market
conditions
as an investment banking, securities and
investment management firm, our businesses are materially
affected by conditions in the financial markets and economic
conditions generally, both in the united states and elsewhere
around the world. in the last year, we have been operating in a
very challenging environment: the number and size of securities
underwritings and mergers and acquisition transactions have
declined significantly; the equities markets in the united
states and elsewhere have been volatile and are at levels
substantially below their record highs; investors have exhibited
concerns over the integrity of the u.s. financial markets as a
result of recent,
highly-publicized financial scandals; and the
attention of management of many clients has been diverted from
capital-raising transactions and acquisitions and dispositions
in part as a result of corporate governance regulations, such as
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, and related uncertainty in
capital markets. it is unclear how long this environment will
last, but so long as it does, our businesses will be adversely
affected.
these types of economic and market conditions
have in the past adversely affected, and may in the future
adversely affect, our business and profitability in many ways,
including the following:
we generally maintain large trading, specialist
and investment positions. market fluctuations and volatility may
adversely affect the value of those positions, including our
interest rate and credit products, currency, commodity and
equity positions and our merchant banking investments, or may
reduce our willingness to enter into some new transactions.
a continuation of the industry-wide declines in
the volume of equity underwritings and mergers and acquisitions
is likely to have a continuing adverse effect on our revenues
and, because we may be unable to reduce expenses
correspondingly, our profit margins. in particular, because a
significant portion of our investment banking revenues are
derived from our participation in large transactions, a decrease
in the number of large transactions due to uncertain or
unfavorable market conditions may adversely affect our
investment banking business.
declines in the volume and number of investment
banking transactions may continue to increase price competition.
reductions in the level of the equities markets
also tend to reduce the value of our clients portfolios,
which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for managing assets.
even in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or
market conditions, investment performance by our asset
management business below the performance of benchmarks or
competitors could result in a decline in assets under management
and therefore in the fees we receive.
concentration of risk in the past has increased
the losses that we have incurred in our proprietary trading,
market-making, block trading, merchant banking, underwriting and
lending businesses and may continue to do so in the future.
the volume of transactions that we execute for
our customers and as a specialist may decline, which would
reduce the revenues we receive from commissions and spreads. in
our specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock exchange
rules to maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing
shares in a declining market. this may result in trading losses
and an increased need for liquidity. finally, further weakness
in global equities markets could adversely impact our trading
businesses and impair the value of our goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets.
risk management, liquidity and
credit
if any of the variety of instruments and
strategies we utilize to hedge or otherwise manage our exposure
to various types of risk are not effective, we may incur losses.
our hedging strategies and other risk management techniques may
not be fully effective in mitigating our risk exposure in all
market environments or against all types of risk.
liquidity (i.e., ready access to funds) is
essential to our businesses. our liquidity could be impaired by
an inability to access the long-term or short-term debt markets,
an inability to access the repurchase and securities lending
markets, or an inability to sell assets. this situation may
arise due to circumstances that we may be unable to control,
such as a general market
disruption, perceptions about our
creditworthiness, or an operational problem that affects third
parties or us. further, our ability to sell assets may be
impaired if other market participants are seeking to sell
similar assets at the same time.
our credit ratings are important to our
liquidity. a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely
affect our liquidity and competitive position, increase our
borrowing costs or trigger our obligations under certain
bilateral provisions in some of our trading and collateralized
financing contracts. under such provisions, counterparties could
be permitted to terminate contracts with goldman sachs or
require us to post additional collateral. termination of our
trading and collateralized financing contracts could cause us to
sustain losses and impair our liquidity by requiring us to find
other sources of financing or to make significant cash payments
or securities movements.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is a holding
company and, therefore, it depends on dividends, distributions
and other payments from its subsidiaries to fund dividend
payments and to fund all payments on its obligations, including
debt obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including goldman,
sachs & co., are subject to laws that authorize regulatory
bodies to block or reduce the flow of funds from those
subsidiaries to the goldman sachs group, inc. regulatory action
of that kind could impede access to funds that the goldman sachs
group, inc. needs to make payments on obligations, including
debt obligations, or dividend payments.
we are exposed to the risk that third parties
that owe us money, securities or other assets will not perform
their obligations. these parties may default on their
obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity,
operational failure or other reasons. the amount and duration of
our credit exposures have been increasing over the past several
years, as has the breadth of the entities to which we have such
exposure. as a clearing member firm, we finance our customer
positions and we could be held responsible for the defaults or
misconduct of our customers. in addition, we have experienced,
due to competitive factors, pressure to extend credit and price
more aggressively the credit risks we take. in particular,
corporate clients sometimes seek to require credit commitments
from us in connection with investment banking assignments.
although we regularly review credit exposures to specific
clients and counterparties and to specific industries, countries
and regions that we believe may present credit concerns, default
risk may arise from events or circumstances that are difficult
to detect or foresee. in addition, concerns about, or a default
by, one institution could lead to significant liquidity
problems, losses or defaults by other institutions, which in
turn could adversely affect goldman sachs.
operations
and infrastructure
our businesses are highly dependent on our
ability to process, on a daily basis, a large number of
transactions across numerous and diverse markets in many
currencies, and the transactions we process have become
increasingly complex. if any of our financial, accounting or
other data processing systems do not operate properly or are
disabled, we could suffer an impairment to our liquidity,
financial loss, a disruption of our businesses, liability to
clients, regulatory intervention or reputational damage. these
systems may fail to operate properly or become disabled as a
result of events that are wholly or partially beyond our
control, including a disruption of electrical or communications
services or our inability to occupy one or more of our
buildings. the inability of our systems to accommodate an
increasing volume of transactions could also constrain our
ability to expand our businesses.
we also face the risk of operational failure or
termination of any of the clearing agents, exchanges, clearing
houses or other financial intermediaries we use to facilitate
our securities transactions. any such failure or termination
could adversely affect our ability to effect transactions and
manage our exposure to risk.
our ability to conduct business may be adversely
impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that supports our
businesses and the communities in which they are located. this
may include a disruption involving electrical,
communications, transportation or other services used by goldman
sachs or third parties with which we conduct business. these
disruptions may occur, for example, as a result of events that
affect only the buildings of goldman sachs or such third
parties, or as a result of events with a broader impact on the
cities where those buildings are located. nearly all of our
employees in our primary locations, including new york, london,
frankfurt, hong kong and tokyo, work in close proximity to each
other, in one or more buildings. if a disruption occurs in one
location and our employees in that location are unable to
communicate with or travel to other locations, our ability to
service and interact with our clients may suffer and we may not
be able to successfully implement contingency plans that depend
on communication or travel.
legal
and regulatory
substantial legal liability or a significant
regulatory action against goldman sachs could have a material
adverse financial effect or cause significant reputational harm
to goldman sachs, which in turn could seriously harm our
business prospects. we face significant legal risks in our
businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of damages
claimed in litigation against financial intermediaries are
increasing. our experience has been that legal claims by
customers and clients increase in a market downturn. in
addition, employment related claims typically increase in
periods when we have reduced the total number of employees.
goldman sachs, as a participant in the financial
services industry, is subject to extensive regulation in
jurisdictions around the world. we face the risk of significant
intervention by regulatory authorities in all jurisdictions in
which we conduct business. among other things, we could be fined
or prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities.
new laws or regulations or changes in enforcement of existing
laws or regulations applicable to our clients may also adversely
affect our businesses.
as discussed under regulation above,
the research departments of investment banks are the subject of
increased regulatory scrutiny which have led to increased
restrictions on the interaction between research analysts and
investment banking departments at securities firms. various
non-u.s. jurisdictions have also changed or proposed changing
their requirements with respect to research matters. in
addition, several major securities firms, including goldman
sachs, have recently reached agreements in principle with
certain federal and state securities regulators and
self-regulatory organizations to resolve investigations into the
practices of their research departments. some of the proposals
and restrictions could adversely impact our businesses, at least
in the short term.
there have been a number of highly publicized
cases involving fraud or other misconduct by employees in the
financial services industry in recent years, and we run the risk
that employee misconduct could occur. it is not always possible
to deter or prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we
take to prevent and detect this activity may not be effective in
all cases.
regulatory
impact on capital markets
recent financial scandals have led to insecurity
and uncertainty in the financial markets and contributed to
declines in capital markets during 2002. in response to these
scandals, the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 and the rules and rule
proposals (if adopted) of the sec, the nyse and nasdaq
necessitate significant changes to corporate governance and
public disclosure. these provisions generally apply to companies
with securities listed on u.s. securities exchanges, and some
provisions apply to non-u.s. issuers with securities traded on
u.s. securities exchanges. to the extent that private companies,
in order to avoid becoming subject to these new requirements,
decide to forgo initial public offerings, our equity
underwriting business may be adversely affected and our ability
to successfully exit some of our merchant banking investments
may be adversely affected. similarly, it is possible that the
imposition of those
provisions on non-u.s. issuers may make these
issuers less likely to list their securities in the united
states or undertake merger or acquisition transactions that
would result in their securities being listed in the united
states. if these measures result in less activity by non-u.s.
issuers in the united states, the u.s. capital markets and our
investment banking business may be adversely affected.
the provisions of sarbanes-oxley and the nyse and
nasdaq corporate governance proposals, coupled with existing
economic uncertainty, have diverted many companies
attention away from capital market transactions, including
securities offerings and acquisition and disposition
transactions. it is unclear how long this uncertainty and
diversion will last, but so long as it does, it will have a
negative impact on our investment banking business. in addition,
proposed accounting and disclosure changes, including those
relating to off-balance-sheet entities, may have an adverse
effect on our financial advisory and other revenues relating to
structured finance transactions.
competition
and conflicts of interest
the financial services industry and
all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and
we expect them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number
of factors, including transaction execution, our products and
services, innovation, reputation and price. we believe that we
may experience pricing pressures in the future as some of our
competitors seek to increase market share by reducing prices. in
recent years, there has been substantial consolidation and
convergence among companies in the financial services industry.
u.s. federal legislation, which significantly expanded the
activities permissible for firms affiliated with a u.s. bank,
may accelerate this consolidation and further increase
competition. this trend toward consolidation and convergence has
significantly increased the capital base and geographic reach of
our competitors. this trend has also hastened the globalization
of the securities and other financial services markets. as a
result, we have had to commit capital to support our
international operations and to execute large global
transactions.
our reputation is one of our most important
assets. as we have expanded the scope of our business and our
client base, we increasingly have to address conflicts of
interest. we have extensive procedures and controls that are
designed to address these issues. however, appropriately dealing
with conflicts of interest is complex and difficult and our
reputation could be damaged if we fail, or appear to fail, to
deal appropriately with conflicts of interest.
technology is fundamental to our overall business
strategy. the growth of the internet and electronic trading, and
the introduction of new technologies, is changing our business
and presenting us with new challenges. securities, futures and
options transactions are now being conducted through the
internet and other alternative, non-traditional trading systems,
and it appears that the trend toward alternative trading systems
will continue and probably accelerate. some of these alternative
trading systems compete with our trading businesses, including
our specialist businesses. a dramatic increase in electronic
trading may adversely affect our commission and trading
revenues, including our market-making revenues, reduce our
participation in the trading markets and associated access to
market information and lead to the creation of new and stronger
competitors. these developments may also require us to make
additional investments in technology or trading systems.
recruiting
and employee retention
our performance is largely dependent on the
talents and efforts of highly skilled individuals. competition
in the financial services industry for qualified employees is
intense. in addition, competition with businesses outside the
financial services industry for the most highly skilled
individuals has become more intense as the economic downturn has
lowered average compensation within the financial services
industry significantly. our continued ability to compete
effectively in our businesses depends on our
ability to attract new employees and to retain and motivate our
existing employees. changes in the business environment may
cause us to move employees from one business to another or to
reduce the number of employees in certain businesses; this may
cause temporary disruptions as our employees adapt to new roles
and may reduce our ability to take advantage of improvements in
the business environment.
acquisitions
we expect the growth of our core businesses to
come principally through internal expansion and also through
acquisitions. to the extent we make acquisitions or enter into
combinations, such as our combination with spear, leeds &
kellogg in october2000, we face numerous risks and
uncertainties combining the businesses and systems, including
the need to combine accounting and data processing systems and
management controls and to integrate relationships with
customers and business partners. we may not be able to meet
these operational and business challenges.
international
operations
in conducting our businesses and maintaining and
supporting our operations around the world, we are subject to
political, economic, legal, operational and other risks that are
inherent in operating in many countries, including risks of
possible nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital
controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental
actions, as well as the outbreak of hostilities. in many
countries, the laws and regulations applicable to the securities
and financial services industries are uncertain and evolving,
and it may be difficult for us to determine the exact
requirements of local laws in every market. our inability to
remain in compliance with local laws in a particular foreign
market could have a significant and negative effect not only on
our businesses in that market but also on our reputation
generally. we are also subject to the risk that transactions we
structure might not be legally enforceable in all cases.
in the last several years, various emerging
market countries have experienced severe economic and financial
disruptions, including significant devaluations of their
currencies, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or
negative growth rates in their economies. the possible effects
of these conditions include an adverse impact on our businesses
and increased volatility in financial markets generally.
shares
available for sale
a significant amount of our outstanding shares of
common stock are held by our former limited partners. while a
significant number of these shares are subject to restrictions
on transfer, our board of directors and/or the
shareholders committee under our shareholders
agreement have in the past waived, and may in the future from
time to time waive, these transfer restrictions. future sales of
substantial amounts of common stock, or the perception that such
sales may occur, could adversely affect the prevailing market
price of our common stock.
cautionary statement pursuant to the private
securities
litigation reform act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by reference in
this annual report on form10-k, and from time to time our
management may make, statements that may constitute
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the
safe harbor provisions of the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are not
historical facts but instead represent only our belief regarding
future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently
uncertain and outside of our control. these statements include
statements other than historical information or statements of
current condition and may relate to our future plans and
objectives and results, among other things, and may also include
our belief regarding the effect of various legal
proceedings, as set forth under legal
proceedings in parti, item3 of this annual
report on form10-k, as well as statements about the
objectives and effectiveness of our liquidity policies, and
statements about our investment banking transaction backlog,
incorporated by reference in partii, item7 of this
annual report on form10-k. it is possible that our actual
results may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated
results indicated in these forward-looking statements. important
factors that could cause actual results to differ from those in
the forward-looking statements include, among others, those
discussed below and under certain factors that
may affect our business.
in the case of statements about our investment
banking transaction backlog, such statements are subject to the
risk that the terms of these transactions may be modified or
that they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net
revenues that we expect to earn from these transactions may
differ, possibly materially, from those currently expected.
important factors that could result in a modification of the
terms of a transaction or a transaction not being completed
include, in the case of underwriting transactions, a decline in
general economic conditions, outbreak of hostilities, volatility
in the securities markets generally or an adverse development
with respect to the issuer of the securities and, in the case of
financial advisory transactions, a decline in the securities
markets, an adverse development with respect to a party to the
transaction or a failure to obtain a required regulatory
approval.
item2.properties
our principal executive offices are located at 85
broad street, new york, new york, and comprise approximately
969,000 square feet of leased space, pursuant to a lease
agreement expiring in june2008 (with options to renew for
up to 20 additional years). we also occupy over 680,000 square
feet at one new york plaza under lease agreements expiring
primarily in september2004 (with options to renew for up
to ten additional years), and we lease space at various other
locations in the new york metropolitan area. in total, we lease
over 5.2million square feet in the new york metropolitan
area. we have additional offices in the united states and
elsewhere in the americas. together, these offices comprise
approximately 1.7million square feet of leased space.
we own approximately four acres of land in jersey
city, new jersey, a portion of which we are using for the
construction of an office building. this project is being
developed to complement our offices in lower manhattan. the
initial phase of development is expected to include
approximately 1.4million square feet of office space, with
occupancy planned in phases beginning in 2004.
we also have offices in europe, asia, africa and
australia. in europe, we have offices that total approximately
1.9million square feet. our european headquarters is
located in london at peterborough court, pursuant to a lease
which expires in 2016. in total, we lease approximately
1.4million square feet in london through various leases,
relating to various properties.
in asia and australia, we have offices that total
approximately 1million square feet. our headquarters in
this region are in tokyo, at the ark mori building, and in hong
kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently lease
approximately 400,000 square feet under renewable leases with
current terms extending, in some cases, to june2005. in
hong kong, we currently lease approximately 300,000 square feet
under lease agreements, the majority of which expire in fiscal
2012.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated
with office space held in excess of our current requirements,
primarily due to the impact of the levels of current business
activity on our previously anticipated growth in headcount. this
excess space is being held for potential future growth. we
continually review our space requirements and may, from time to
time, reduce capacity through the use of sublease contracts or
early termination agreements. we may incur costs in connection
with such reductions in our global office space. where we have
unoccupied
space that we may occupy in the future, we will
continue to charge the underlying operating costs to earnings as
incurred.
item3.legal
proceedings
we are involved in a number of judicial,
regulatory and arbitration proceedings (including those
described below) concerning matters arising in connection with
the conduct of our businesses. we believe, based on currently
available information, that the results of such proceedings, in
the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our
financial condition, but might be material to our operating
results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the
operating results for such period.
ipo
process matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs
& co. are among the numerous financial services companies
that have been named as defendants in a variety of lawsuits
alleging improprieties in the process by which those companies
participated in the underwriting of public offerings in recent
years.
certain purported class actions have been brought
in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york
by purchasers of securities in public offerings, who claim that
the defendants engaged in conspiracies in violation of federal
antitrust laws in connection with these offerings. the
plaintiffs in each instance seek treble damages as well as
injunctive relief. one of the actions, which was commenced on
august21, 1998, alleges that the defendants have conspired
to discourage or restrict the resale of securities for a period
after the offerings, including by imposing penalty
bids. defendants moved to dismiss the complaint in
november1998. the plaintiffs amended their complaint in
february1999, modifying their claims in various ways,
including limiting the proposed class to retail purchasers of
public offerings. the defendants moved to dismiss the amended
complaint on may7, 1999, the motion was granted by a
decision dated december7, 2000, and the plaintiffs
motion for reconsideration of that decision was denied by an
order dated january22, 2001. plaintiffs appealed, and by a
decision dated december20, 2002, the u.s. court of appeals
for the second circuit affirmed the dismissal of their complaint.
several other actions were commenced, beginning
on november3, 1998 by purchasers of securities in public
offerings as well as certain purported issuers of such
offerings, that allege that the defendants, many of whom are
also named in the other action discussed above, have conspired
to fix at 7% the discount that underwriting syndicates receive
from issuers of shares in certain offerings. on march15,
1999, the purchaser plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended
complaint. the defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated
amended complaint on april29, 1999. on february14,
2001, the federal district court granted with prejudice the
defendants motion to dismiss the claims asserted by the
purchasers of securities on the ground that they lacked
antitrust standing. the plaintiffs in those actions appealed,
and by a decision dated december13, 2002, the u.s. court
of appeals for the second circuit vacated the dismissal on the
ground that the lower court had engaged in improper fact-finding
on the motion and remanded for consideration of other potential
bases for dismissal. on september28, 2001, the defendants
moved to dismiss the complaints filed by the issuer plaintiffs
on statute of limitations grounds. on september25, 2002,
the federal district court denied the underwriter
defendants motion to dismiss.
goldman, sachs & co. is one of numerous
financial services firms that have been named as defendants in
purported class actions filed beginning on march9, 2001 in
the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york by
purchasers of securities in public offerings, who claim that the
defendants engaged in a conspiracy to tie
allocations in certain offerings to higher customer brokerage
commission rates as well as purchase orders in the aftermarket,
in violation
of federal antitrust laws. the plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint on january2, 2002. the
defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint
on may24, 2002. goldman, sachs & co. has also,
together with other underwriters in certain offerings as well as
the issuers and certain of their officers and directors, been
named as a defendant in a number of related lawsuits alleging,
among other things, that the prospectuses for the offerings
violated the federal securities laws by failing to disclose the
existence of the alleged tying arrangements. on
july1, 2002, the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss
those complaints. by an opinion and order dated
february19, 2003, the federal district court denied the
motion to dismiss in all material respects relating to the
underwriter defendants.
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in several actions alleging that the firm
intentionally underpriced public offerings for certain issuers.
each of the actions seeks, among other things, consequential
damages resulting from the alleged lower amount of offering
proceeds. two of the lawsuits are purported shareholder
derivative actions commenced on may3, 2002 in california
superior court for santa clara county and san mateo county which
goldman, sachs & co. has removed to the u.s. district court
for the northern district of california. on august5, 2002,
goldman, sachs & co. moved for judgment on the pleadings in
those actions, the motions were granted by decisions dated
october31, 2002 and november6, 2002, and plaintiffs
in both cases have appealed. goldman, sachs & co. has also
been named as a defendant in a similar underpricing action
brought in new york supreme court, new york county on
may15, 2002 by an official committee of unsecured
creditors on behalf of an issuer which is in bankruptcy. on
august1, 2002, goldman, sachs& co. moved to
dismiss that complaint.
the goldman sachs group, inc. has also been named
as a defendant in a purported shareholder derivative action
commenced in delaware court of chancery on october23, 2002
alleging that certain officers and directors of ebay, inc. (who
are also defendants), aided and abetted by the goldman sachs
group, inc., breached their fiduciary duties and usurped
corporate opportunities by receiving allocations of initial
public offerings as customers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
defendants moved to dismiss the complaint on december23,
2002.
the goldman sachs group, inc. has, together with
other underwriters in certain offerings, received subpoenas for
documents and information from various governmental agencies and
the u.s. house of representatives committee on financial
services in connection with investigations relating to the
public offering process. in particular, the securities and
exchange commission has been conducting an investigation of
certain allocation practices employed by goldman, sachs &
co. goldman sachs is cooperating with the investigations.
stock
options antitrust litigation
hull trading co. l.l.c. and spear, leeds &
kellogg, l.p., affiliates of the goldman sachs group, inc., are
among the numerous market makers in listed equity options which
have been named as defendants, together with five national
securities exchanges, in a purported class action brought in the
u.s. district court for the southern district of new york on
behalf of persons who purchased or sold listed equity options.
the consolidated class action complaint, filed on
october4, 1999 (which consolidated certain previously
pending actions and added hull trading co. l.l.c. and other
market makers as defendants), generally alleges that the
defendants engaged in a conspiracy to preclude the multiple
listing of certain equity options on the exchanges and seeks
treble damages under the antitrust laws as well as injunctive
relief. certain of the parties, including hull trading co.
l.l.c. and spear, leeds & kellogg, l.p., have entered into a
stipulation of settlement, subject to court approval, pursuant
to which hull trading co. l.l.c. will be required to pay an
aggregate of $2.48 million and spear, leeds & kellogg, l.p.
an aggregate of $19.59 million. on february14, 2001, the
federal district court granted the motion of certain
non-settling defendants for summary judgment. by a decision
dated april24, 2001, the district court ruled that in
light of that order granting summary judgment, the court
lacked jurisdiction to entertain the proposed
settlement. plaintiffs appealed, and by a decision dated
january9, 2003, the u.s. court of appeals for the second
circuit affirmed the grant of summary judgment, but held that
the decision did not divest the lower court of jurisdiction to
entertain the proposed settlement, and remanded for further
proceedings.
rockefeller center properties, inc.
litigation
several former shareholders of rockefeller center
properties, inc. brought purported class actions in the u.s.
district court for the district of delaware and the delaware
court of chancery arising from the acquisition of rockefeller
center properties, inc. by an investor group in july1996.
the defendants in the actions include, among others, goldman,
sachs & co., whitehall real estate partnership v, a merchant
banking fund advised by goldman, sachs & co., a goldman,
sachs & co. managing director and other members of the
investor group. the federal court actions, which have since been
consolidated, were filed beginning on november15, 1996,
and the state court action was filed on may29, 1998.
the complaints generally allege that the proxy
statement disseminated to former rockefeller center properties,
inc. stockholders in connection with the transaction was
deficient, in violation of the disclosure requirements of the
federal securities laws. the plaintiffs are seeking, among other
things, unspecified damages, rescission of the acquisition,
and/or disgorgement.
in a series of decisions, the federal district
court granted summary judgment dismissing all the claims in the
federal action. the plaintiffs appealed those rulings. on
july19, 1999, the u.s. court of appeals for the third
circuit rendered its decision affirming in part and vacating in
part the lower courts entry of summary judgment dismissing
the action. with respect to the claim as to which summary
judgment was vacated, the appellate court held that the district
court had committed a procedural error in converting the
defendants motion to dismiss into a motion for summary
judgment and remanded for the district court to reconsider that
claim under appropriate standards applicable to motions to
dismiss. plaintiffs subsequently amended their complaint as to
the remanded claim, defendants renewed their motion to dismiss
with respect to the amended complaint, and the motion was
granted by the federal district court on march12, 2001.
plaintiffs appealed, and by a decision dated november8,
2002, the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit affirmed
the dismissal order, and by a decision dated december11,
2002 denied rehearing.
the state action has been stayed pending
disposition of the federal action.
amf securities litigation
the goldman sachs group, l.p., goldman, sachs
& co. and a goldman, sachs &co. managing director
have been named as defendants in several purported class action
lawsuits beginning on april27, 1999 in the u.s. district
court for the southern district of new york brought on behalf of
purchasers of stock of amf bowling, inc. in an underwritten
initial public offering of 15,525,000 shares of common stock in
november1997 at a price of $19.50 per share. defendants
are amf bowling, inc., certain officers and directors of amf
bowling, inc. (including the goldman, sachs & co. managing
director), and the lead underwriters of the offering (including
goldman, sachs & co.). the consolidated amended complaint
alleges violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws and seeks compensatory damages and/or
rescission. the complaint also asserts that the goldman sachs
group, l.p. and the goldman, sachs & co. managing director
are liable as controlling persons of amf bowling, inc. under the
federal securities laws because certain merchant banking funds
managed by goldman sachs owned a majority of the outstanding
common stock of amf bowling, inc. and the managing director
served as its chairman at the time of the offering. on
december22, 1999, the defendants moved to dismiss the
complaint. by a decision dated march22, 2001, the federal
district court denied the motion. by a decision dated
march25, 2002, the federal district court granted
plaintiffs motion for class certification
with respect to a class under section11 of the securities
act of 1933, but denied the motion with respect to a subclass
under section12 of the securities act. by a decision dated
may21, 2002, the federal district court reconsidered its
march25, 2002 decision with respect to plaintiffs
motion for class certification and determined that the class
includes persons who purchased amf stock pursuant to the initial
public offering prior to february26, 1999.
on july30, 2001, amf bowling, inc. filed
for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
iridium securities litigation
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in two purported class action lawsuits commenced,
beginning on may26, 1999, in the u.s. district court for
the district of columbia brought on behalf of purchasers of
classa common stock of iridium world communications, ltd.
in a january1999 underwritten secondary offering of
7,500,000 shares of classa common stock at a price of
$33.40 per share, as well as in the secondary market. the
defendants in the actions include iridium, certain of its
officers and directors, motorola, inc. (an investor in iridium)
and the lead underwriters in the offering, including goldman,
sachs & co. on may13, 2002, plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint alleging substantively identical
claims as the original complaints. on july15, 2002, the
defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint.
the complaints in both actions allege violations
of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws
and seek compensatory and/or rescissory damages. goldman, sachs
& co. underwrote 996,500 shares of common stock and goldman
sachs international underwrote 320,625 shares of common stock
for a total offering price of approximately $44million.
on august13, 1999, iridium world
communications, ltd. filed for protection under the u.s.
bankruptcy laws.
laidlaw bondholders litigation
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in a purported class action filed on
september22, 2000 in the u.s. district court for the
southern district of new york arising from certain offerings of
debentures by laidlaw, inc. from 1997 to 1999. the defendants
include laidlaw, inc., certain of its officers and directors,
the lead underwriters for the offerings (including goldman,
sachs & co., which was lead manager in the offerings), and
laidlaws outside auditors. the offerings included a total
of $1.125 billion principal amount of debentures, of which
goldman, sachs & co. underwrote $286.25 million.
the lawsuit, brought by certain institutional
purchasers of the debentures, alleges that the prospectuses
issued in connection with the offerings were false and
misleading in violation of the disclosure requirements of the
federal securities laws. the plaintiffs are seeking, among other
things, unspecified damages. by an order of the judicial panel
on multi-district litigation filed on april19, 2001, the
lawsuit was transferred to the u.s. district court for the
district of south carolina for purposes of consolidated or
coordinated pretrial proceedings with related actions in that
court pertaining to safety kleen corporation and laidlaw, inc.
on january8, 2002, the parties entered into a preliminary
memorandum of understanding with respect to a settlement of the
lawsuit pursuant to which goldman, sachs & co. would
contribute approximately $2.5million toward a settlement
fund. the settlement has been embodied in a settlement
agreement, and by order dated december19, 2002, the south
carolina court approved the settlement. the settlement is still
subject to, among other things, the confirmation of a
satisfactory plan of reorganization of laidlaw, inc.
on june28, 2001, laidlaw, inc. filed for
bankruptcy protection.
world online litigation
several lawsuits have been commenced in the
netherlands courts based on alleged misstatements and omissions
relating to the initial public offering of world online in
march2000. goldman sachs and abn amro rothschild served as
joint global coordinators of the offering, which raised
approximately
2.9billion.
goldman sachs international underwrote 20,268,846 shares and
goldman, sachs & co. underwrote 6,756,282 shares for a total
offering price of approximately
1.16billion.
on september11, 2000, several dutch world
online shareholders as well as a dutch entity purporting to
represent the interests of certain world online shareholders
commenced a proceeding in amsterdam district court against
abn amro bank n.v., also acting under the name of abn amro
rothschild, alleging misrepresentations and omissions
relating to the initial public offering of world online. the
lawsuit seeks, among other things, the return of the purchase
price of the shares purchased by the plaintiffs or unspecified
damages.
in march2001, a dutch shareholders
association initiated legal proceedings in amsterdam district
court in connection with the world online offering. goldman
sachs international is named as a defendant in the writ served
on its dutch attorneys on march14, 2001. the amount of
damages sought is not specified in the writ. goldman sachs
international filed its statement of defense on january16,
2002 and a rejoinder on january14, 2003.
owens
corning, inc. bondholder litigation
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in a purported class action filed on april27,
2001 in the u.s. district court for the district of
massachusetts arising from a 1998 offering by owens corning,
inc. of two series of its notes. the defendants include certain
of owens cornings officers and directors and the
underwriters for the offering (including goldman, sachs &
co., which was the lead manager in the offering). the offering
included a total of $550million principal amount of notes,
of which goldman, sachs & co. underwrote $275 million.
the lawsuit, brought by certain institutional
purchasers of the notes, alleges that the prospectus issued in
connection with the offering was false and misleading in
violation of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws. the plaintiffs are seeking, among other things,
unspecified damages. the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss
the complaint on november14, 2001. by a decision dated
august26, 2002, the federal district court denied the
underwriter defendants motion to dismiss.
on october5, 2000, owens corning, inc.
filed for protection under the u.s. bankruptcy laws.
research
independence matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and its affiliates,
together with other financial services firms, have received
requests for information from various governmental agencies in
connection with their review of research independence issues,
including the new york state attorney general, the utah attorney
general, the nyse (which has issued a joint inquiry together
with the sec and nasd), the u.s. attorneys office for the
southern district of new york, and the u.s. house of
representatives committee on financial services. goldman sachs
is cooperating with their requests. on december20, 2002,
as part of a proposed global settlement involving the leading
securities firms operating in the united states, agreements in
principle were announced among goldman, sachs & co. and the
sec, the nyse, the nasd, the utah division of securities, the
new york state attorney general and the north american
securities administrators association (in the case of utah and
nasaa, on behalf of state securities regulators) to resolve
their investigations of goldman sachs relating to investment
research analysts conflicts of interest. pursuant to the
agreements in principle, goldman, sachs & co. has
agreed, among other things, to (i)pay $50
million in retrospective relief, (ii)contribute
$50million over five years to provide independent
third-party research to clients, (iii)contribute $10
million for investor education and (iv)adopt internal
structural and other safeguards to further ensure the integrity
of goldman, sachs& co. investment research. in
connection with the agreements, the firm also expects to be
joining the other leading securities firms who are part of the
proposed global settlement in an initiative that generally will
prohibit the allocation of shares in initial public offerings to
executives and directors of public companies.
goldman, sachs & co. is one of several
investment firms that have been named as defendants in
substantively identical purported class actions filed in the
u.s. district court for the southern district of new york on
august30, 2002 and september12, 2002 alleging
violations of the federal securities laws in connection with
research coverage of covad communications company and allied
riser communications corp., respectively. the actions seek
compensatory damages. on december26, 2002, defendants
moved to dismiss the action relating to covad communications
company, and on february6, 2003, the motion was granted
with leave to replead.
enron
exchangeable notes litigation
goldman, sachs &co. and/or co-managing
underwriters have been named as defendants in certain purported
securities class and individual actions commenced beginning on
december14, 2001 in the u.s. district court for the
southern district of texas and california superior court brought
by purchasers of $222,500,000 of exchangeable notes of enron
corp. in august1999. the notes were mandatorily
exchangeable in 2002 into shares of enron oil & gas company
held by enron corp. or their cash equivalent. the complaints
also name as defendants certain past and present officers and
directors of enron corp. and the companys outside
accounting firm. the complaints generally allege violations of
the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws
and/or state law, and seek compensatory damages. goldman, sachs
& co. underwrote $111,250,000 principal amount of the notes.
several funds which allegedly sustained
investment losses of approximately $125million in
connection with secondary market purchases of the notes as well
as zero coupon convertible notes of enron corp. commenced an
action in the u.s. district court for the southern district of
new york on january16, 2002. the lawsuit names as
defendants the underwriters of the august1999 offering as
well as the companys outside accounting firm, and alleges
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws, fraud and misrepresentation. on march20,
2002, goldman, sachs & co. moved to dismiss the complaint.
by an order dated june24, 2002, the judicial panel on
multidistrict litigation entered an order transferring that
action to the texas federal district court for purposes of
coordinated or consolidated pretrial proceedings with other
matters relating to enron.
on december2, 2001, enron corp. filed for
protection under the u.s. bankruptcy laws.
exodus
securities litigation
by an amended complaint dated july11, 2002,
goldman, sachs & co. and the other lead underwriters for the
february2001 offering of 13,000,000 shares of common stock
and $575,000,000 of 51/4% convertible subordinated notes
of exodus communications, inc. were added as defendants in a
purported class action pending in the u.s. district court for
the northern district of california. the complaint, which also
names as defendants certain officers and directors of exodus
communications, inc., alleges violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws and seeks
compensatory damages. on october23, 2002, the underwriter
defendants moved to dismiss the complaint. goldman, sachs &
co. underwrote 5,200,000 shares of common stock for a total
offering price of approximately $96,200,000, and $230,000,000
principal amount of the notes.
on september26, 2001, exodus
communications, inc. filed for protection under the u.s.
bankruptcy laws.
montana
power shareholders litigation
goldman, sachs & co. and the goldman sachs
group, inc. have been named as defendants in a purported class
action commenced against it on october1, 2001 in montana
district court, second judicial district on behalf of
shareholders of montana power company. the complaint generally
alleges that montana power company violated montana law by
failing to procure shareholder approval of certain corporate
strategies and transactions, that the companys board
breached its fiduciary duties in pursuing those strategies and
transactions, and that goldman, sachs & co. rendered
negligent advice as well as aided and abetted the boards
breaches in its role as financial advisor to the company. the
complaint seeks, among other things, compensatory damages. in
addition to goldman, sachs & co. and the goldman sachs
group, inc., the defendants include montana power company,
certain of its officers and directors, an outside law firm for
the montana power company, and certain companies that purchased
assets from montana power company. the montana state court
denied motions to dismiss by a decision dated august1,
2002. on january9, 2003, another defendant removed the
action to the u.s. district court for the district of montana,
and the plaintiffs moved to remand the action to state court on
february7, 2003.
worldcom
bondholders litigation
goldman, sachs & co. and other underwriters
of worldcom, inc. bonds have been named as defendants in certain
purported securities class and individual actions commenced
beginning on july19, 2002 alleging that the offering
materials issued in connection with certain securities offerings
were false and misleading. certain of the lawsuits (some of
which were originally filed in various state courts and removed
to federal court) have been transferred by order of the judicial
panel on multidistrict litigation to the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york, and similar
requests for transfer are pending in other actions. goldman,
sachs & co. underwrote $75,000,000 principal amount of 8%
notes due 2006 in a may24, 2000 offering out of a total
principal amount of $1,250,000,000 of the notes. among the
defendants in these actions in addition to the underwriters are
worldcom, inc., certain of worldcom, inc.s present or
former officers and/or directors, and/or worldcom, inc.s
outside accounting firm. each of these actions seeks, among
other things, compensatory damages.
on july21, 2002, worldcom, inc. filed for
protection under the u.s. bankruptcy laws.
asia
global crossing securities litigation
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in several purported class action lawsuits commenced,
beginning on november8, 2002, in the u.s. district court
for the southern district of new york and the central district
of california brought on behalf of purchasers of common stock of
asia global crossing corp. in a october2000 initial public
offering of 68,000,000 shares of common stock at a price of $7
per share. the defendants in the actions include asia global
crossing corp., certain of its officers and directors, and the
lead underwriters in the offering, including goldman, sachs
& co. the complaints allege violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws and seek
compensatory and/or rescissory damages. goldman, sachs & co.
underwrote 20,519,000 shares of common stock for a total
offering price of approximately $145 million.
on november17, 2002, asia global crossing
corp. filed for protection under the u.s. bankruptcy laws.
global
crossing securities litigation
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs
& co. have been added as defendants in a purported class
action lawsuit in the u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york relating to global crossing, ltd. the
consolidated amended complaint, filed on january28, 2003,
includes claims relating to global crossing, ltd.s
concurrent april2000 offerings of 43 million shares of
common stock at $33 per share and 4 million shares of
63/4% cumulative preferred stock at $250 per share.
goldman, sachs & co. acted as a co-lead underwriter of both
offerings, underwriting 12.9 million shares of common stock and
400,000 shares of convertible preferred stock. the defendants in
the action as to such claims include certain officers and
directors of global crossing, ltd., the lead underwriters in the
offerings, and the companys former outside auditors. the
complaint alleges violations of the disclosure requirements of
the federal securities laws as to such offerings and seeks
compensatory and/or rescissory damages.
on january28, 2002, global crossing, ltd.
filed for protection under the u.s. bankruptcy laws.
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
there were no matters submitted to a vote of
security holders during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year
ended november29, 2002.
executive officers of the goldman sachs group,
inc.
set forth below are the name, age, present title,
principal occupation, and certain biographical information for
the past five years for our executive officers as of
february1, 2003, all of whom have been appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of our board of directors.
henry m. paulson, jr., 56
mr.paulson has been our chairman and chief
executive officer since may1999, and has been a director
since august1998. he was co-chairman and chief executive
officer or co-chief executive officer of the goldman sachs
group,l.p. from june1998 to may1999 and served
as chief operating officer from december1994 to
june1998. mr.paulson is not on the board of any
public companies other than goldman sachs. he is a member of the
board of directors of the nyse. in addition, mr.paulson is
affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including as a
member of the board of directors of catalyst. he also serves on
the advisory board of the j.l.kellogg graduate school of
management at northwestern university and is a member of the
board of the deans advisors of the harvard business
school. he is a member of the advisory board of the tsinghua
university school of economics and management and a member of
the governing board of the indian school of business. he is also
a member of the board of governors of the nature conservancy,
co-chairman of the asia/ pacific council of the nature
conservancy and a member of the board of directors of the
peregrine fund, inc.
john a. thain, 47
mr.thain has been our president and
co-chief operating officer since may 1999, and has been a
director since august1998. he was president of the goldman
sachs group,l.p. from march1999 to may1999 and
co-chief operating officer from january1999 to
may1999. from december1994 to march1999, he
served as chief financial officer and head of operations,
technology and finance. from july1995 to
september1997, he was also co-chief executive officer for
european operations. mr.thain is not on the board of any
public companies other than goldman sachs. he is affiliated with
certain non-profit organizations, including as a member of the
mit corporation, the deans advisory council
mit/ sloan school of management, insead
u.s.national advisory board, the james madison council of
the library of congress and the federal reserve bank of
newyorks international capital markets advisory
committee. he is also a member of the french-american
foundation, the board of trustees of the national urban league
and the trilateral commission, as well as a governor of the new
york-presbyterian foundation, inc., a trustee of
newyork-presbyterian hospital, a general trustee of howard
university and chairman of the us-japan private sector/
government commission.
john l. thornton, 49
mr.thornton has been our president and
co-chief operating officer since may1999, and has been a
director since august1998. he was president of the goldman
sachs group,l.p. from march1999 to may1999 and
co-chief operating officer from january1999 to
may1999. from august1998 until january1999, he
had oversight responsibility for international operations. from
september1996 until august1998, he was chairman,
goldman sachs asia, in addition to his senior
strategic responsibilities in europe. from july1995 to
september1997, he was co-chief executive officer for
european operations. mr.thornton is also on the board of
the following public companies other than goldman sachs: ford
motor company, bskybplc, laura ashley holdingsplc
and pacific century group, inc. in addition, mr.thornton
is affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including
as a member of the council on foreign relations and a director
or trustee of the asia society, the brookings institution, the
goldman sachs foundation, the hotchkiss school, morehouse
college, and the tsinghua university school of economics and
management, and as a member of the advisory board of the yale
school of management.
lloyd c. blankfein, 48
mr.blankfein has been our vice chairman
since april2002. mr.blankfein has management
responsibility for the fixed income, currency and commodities
division (ficc)and the equities division. prior to
becoming vice chairman, he had been co-head of ficc since its
formation in 1997. previously, he headed the j.aron
currency and commodities division since 1994. mr.blankfein
has been nominated to serve as director of goldman sachs and is
not on the board of any other public companies. he is affiliated
with certain non-profit organizations, including as co-chair of
the harvard university financial aid task force and as a member
of the executive committee of the harvard university committee
on university resources. mr.blankfein is also a former
director of the futures industry association and a former member
of the foreign exchange committee of the federal reserve bank of
new york.
robert s. kaplan, 45
mr.kaplan has been our vice chairman since
april2002. mr.kaplan has management responsibility
for the investment banking and investment management divisions.
he served as global co-head of the investment banking division
from 1999 through 2001 and was co-chief operating officer of
global investment banking from 1998 to 1999. mr.kaplan
became head of the americas corporate finance department in
1994. previously, he had been head of asia-pacific investment
banking from 1990 through 1993. mr.kaplan is a director of
bed bath & beyond inc., which is a public company. in
addition, mr.kaplan is affiliated with certain non-profit
organizations, including as co-chairman of the board of the teak
fellowship, co-chairman of the board of project a.l.s. and a
director of the jewish theological seminary, everybody wins,
inc. and the jewish museum.
kevin w. kennedy, 54
mr.kennedy has been our executive vice
president human capital management since
december2001. from 1999 until 2001, he served as a member
of the executive office. from 1994 to 1999, mr.kennedy
served as head of the americas group, a combination of corporate
finance, investment banking services and structured finance for
the united states, canada and latin america, and, from 1988 to
1994, as head of corporate finance. he is a life trustee and a
former chairman of the board of hamilton college, a managing
director and vice president of the board of the metropolitan
opera, a trustee of the new york public library and an honorary
trustee of the chewonki foundation.
gregory k. palm, 54
mr.palm has been our general counsel and
executive vice president and head or co-head of the legal
department since may1999. he was general counsel of the
goldman sachs group,l.p. and co-head of the legal
department from 1992 to may1999. he also has senior
oversight responsibility for the firms compliance,
management controls and tax departments and is co-chairman of
the global compliance and control committee. from 1982 to 1992,
mr.palm was a partner in the law firm of
sullivan& cromwell. mr.palm is a member of the
american law institute, the mit corporation department of
economics visiting committee and the board of trustees of the
skowhegan school of painting and sculpture.
esta e. stecher, 45
ms.stecher has been our general counsel and
executive vice president and co-head of the legal department
since december2000. from 1994 to 2000, she was head of the
firms tax department. she also has senior oversight
responsibility for the compliance, management controls and tax
departments. she is also a trustee of the goldman sachs
foundation. from 1990 to 1994, ms.stecher was a partner in
the law firm of sullivan& cromwell.
robert k. steel, 51
mr.steel has been our vice chairman since
april2002. mr.steel has management responsibility
for ficc and the equities division. he served as co-head of the
equities division from 1998 through 2001, then as sole head
until his appointment as a vice chairman of the firm. from 1994
to 1998, he was responsible for all institutional equities in
the united states. from 1988 to 1994, mr.steel was
responsible for the equities division in europe. mr.steel
is a member of the nyse, where he has served on various
committees, and is a member of the board of directors of the
securities industry association. he is also vice chairman of
duke universitys board of trustees and chairman of the
duke university management co.
david a. viniar, 47
mr.viniar has been our chief financial
officer and executive vice president since may1999. he has
been the head of the operations, technology and finance division
since december2002. he was head of the finance division
and co-head of credit risk management and advisory and firmwide
risk from december2001 to december2002. he was
co-head of operations, finance and resources from
march1999 to december2001. he was chief financial
officer of the goldman sachs group,l.p. from
march1999 to may1999. from july1998 until
march1999, he was deputy chief financial officer and from
1994 until july1998, he was head of finance, with
responsibility for controllers and treasury. from 1992 to 1994,
mr.viniar was head of treasury and prior to that was in
the structured finance department of investment banking.
mr.viniar is a member of the board of trustees of
childrens aid and family services, serves on the board of
trustees of union college and is a member of the board of
trustees of the financial accounting foundation.
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity
and related stockholder matters
the principal market on which our common stock is
traded is the new york stock exchange. information relating to
the high and low sales prices per share on the new york stock
exchange for each full quarterly period during fiscal 2001 and
2002 is set forth under the caption supplemental financial
information common stock price range on
page91 of the 2002 annual report to shareholders, which is
incorporated herein by reference. as of january31, 2003,
there were 5,530 holders of record of our common stock.
during fiscal 2001 and 2002, dividends of $0.12
per share of common stock were declared on december18,
2000, march19, 2001, june18, 2001,
september25, 2001, december19, 2001, march18,
2002, june19, 2002 and september23, 2002. the
holders of our common stock share proportionately on a per share
basis in all dividends and other distributions declared by our
board of directors.
the declaration of dividends by goldman sachs is
subject to the discretion of our board of directors. our board
of directors will take into account such matters as general
business conditions, our financial results, capital
requirements, contractual, legal and regulatory restrictions on
the payment of dividends by us to our shareholders or by our
subsidiaries to us, the effect on our debt ratings and such
other factors as our board of directors may deem relevant. see
business regulation in item1 of
this annual report on form10-k for a discussion of
potential regulatory limitations on our receipt of funds from
our regulated subsidiaries.
on november20, 2002, our board of directors
authorized the repurchase of additional shares of the goldman
sachs group, inc.s common stock pursuant to our existing
share repurchase program. the repurchase program is being
effected from time to time, depending on market conditions and
other factors, through open market purchases and privately
negotiated transactions. the total remaining authorization under
the repurchase program was 17.2million shares as of
january31, 2003.
information relating to compensation plans under
which equity securities of the goldman sachs group, inc. are
authorized for issuance is set forth under equity
compensation plan information on page15 of the proxy
statement for our 2003 annual meeting of shareholders to be held
on april1, 2003 (the 2003 proxy statement) and
all such information is incorporated herein by reference.
item6.
selected financial data
the selected financial data table is set forth on
page92 of the 2002 annual report to shareholders and is
incorporated herein by reference.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations is set forth under
the caption managements discussion and
analysis on pages30 to 59 of the 2002 annual report
to shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference. all of
such information should be read in conjunction with the
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, which
are incorporated by reference in item8 of this annual
report on form10-k.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk
quantitative and qualitative disclosure about
market risk is set forth on pages46 to 53 of the 2002
annual report to shareholders under the caption
managements discussion and
analysis risk management and on
pages71 to 74 of such annual report in note4 to the
consolidated financial statements, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
the consolidated financial statements of the
registrant and its subsidiaries, together with the notes thereto
and the report of independent accountants thereon, are contained
in the 2002 annual report to shareholders on pages60 to
89, and are incorporated herein by reference. in addition, the
information on page90 of the 2002annual report to
shareholders under the caption supplemental financial
information quarterly results is incorporated
herein by reference.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
there were no changes in or disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure during the
last two fiscal years.
part iii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the
registrant
information relating to the registrants
executive officers is included on pages31 to 33 of this
annual report on form10-k. information relating to
directors of the registrant is set forth under the caption
election of directors on pages5 to 8 of the
2003 proxy statement and such information is incorporated herein
by reference. also incorporated herein by reference is the
information under the caption other matters
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance on page34 of the 2003 proxy statement.
item11.
executive compensation
information relating to the registrants
executive officer and director compensation is set forth under
the captions election of directors employment
contracts and change of control arrangements,
director compensation,
executive compensation,
stock options and
fiscal year-end option holdings on
pages9 to 14 of the 2003 proxy statement and all such
information is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder
matters
information relating to security ownership of
certain beneficial owners of the registrants common stock
is set forth under the caption beneficial owners of more
than fivepercent on page24 of the 2003 proxy
statement and information relating to the security ownership of
the registrants management is set forth under the caption
beneficial ownership of directors and executive
officers on pages23 to 24 of the 2003 proxy
statement and all such information is incorporated herein by
reference. information relating to compensation plans under
which equity securities of the registrant are authorized for
issuance is set forth under equity compensation plan
information on page15 of the 2003 proxy statement
and all such information is incorporated herein by reference.
item13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
information regarding certain relationships and
related transactions is set forth under the caption
certain relationships and related transactions on
page25 of the 2003 proxy statement and all such
information is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.
controls and procedures
within the 90-day period prior to the filing of
this report, an evaluation was carried out under the supervision
and with the participation of goldman sachs management,
including our chief executive officer and chief financial
officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
rule13a-14(c) under the securities exchange act of 1934).
based upon that evaluation, the chief executive officer and
chief financial officer concluded that the design and operation
of these disclosure controls and procedures were effective. no
significant changes were made in our internal controls or in
other factors that could significantly affect these controls
subsequent to the date of their evaluation.
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules,
and reports on form8-k
(a)documents filed as part of this
report:
1.
consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed in
this annual report on form10-k are listed on pagef-1
hereof and incorporated herein by reference to the corresponding
page number in the 2002 annual report to shareholders.
2.
financial statement schedules
the financial statement schedule required in this annual report
on form10-k is listed on pagef-1 hereof. the
required schedule appears on pagesf-3 through f-7 hereof.
3.
exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation.*
3.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation
of the goldman sachs group, inc.**
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs
group, inc.
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19, 1999, between
the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as
trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit6 to the
registrants registration statement on form8-a, filed
june29, 1999).
certain instruments defining the rights of
holders of long-term debt securities of the registrant and its
subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of
regulations-k. the registrant hereby undertakes to furnish
to the sec, upon request, copies of any such
instruments.
10.1
lease, dated june11, 1985, between
metropolitan life insurance company and goldman,
sachs& co.*
10.2
lease, dated april5, 1994, between the
chase manhattan bank (national association) and the goldman
sachs group, l.p., as amended.*
10.3
lease, dated september24, 1992, from ldt
partners to goldman sachs international (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.34 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-74449)).
10.4
agreement for lease, dated november29,
1998, between turbo top limited and goldman sachs (asia) finance
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.13 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-74449)).
10.5
summary of tokyo leases (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.14 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-74449)).
10.6
the goldman sachs 1999 stock incentive plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.15 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.7
the goldman sachs defined contribution plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.16 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.8
the goldman sachs partner compensation plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.18 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.9
form of employment agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.19 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.10
form of agreement relating to noncompetition and
other covenants (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.20
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.11
form of pledge agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.21 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.12
form of award agreement (discretionary rsus)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.23 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.13
form of option agreement (discretionary options)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.24 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.14
form of 2002 year-end option award
agreement.
10.15
form of 2002 year-end rsu award agreement.
10.16
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of
may7, 1999, by and among the goldman sachs group, inc. and
various parties (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.25
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.17
form of shareholders agreement among the
goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.26 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 1999).
10.18
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.27 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.19
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.28 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 1999).
10.20
registration rights instrument, dated as of
december10, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibitg to amendment no.1 to schedule13d,
filed december17, 1999, relating to the registrants
common stock (no.005-56295)).
10.21
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december10, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibith to amendment no.1 to schedule13d,
filed december17, 1999, relating to the registrants
common stock).
10.22
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.44 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 1999).
10.23
form of indemnification agreement, dated as of
july5, 2000 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.24
pledge agreement, dated as of may7, 1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibitf to amendment
no.4 to schedule13d, filed july11, 2000,
relating to the registrants common stock).
10.25
form of amendment no.1, dated as of
july10, 2000, to the pledge agreement (filed as
exhibit10.52) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.26
amendment no.1, dated as of
september5, 2000, to the tax indemnification agreement,
dated as of may7, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.3 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.27
form of non-employee director option agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.55 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.28
form of non-employee director rsu agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.56 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.29
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december21, 2000 (incorporated by reference to
exhibitaa to amendment no.12 to schedule13d,
filed january23, 2001, relating to the registrants
common stock).
10.30
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december21, 2001 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to registrants registration statement on
forms-3 (no.333-74006)).
10.31
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december20, 2002 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to registrants registration statement on
forms-3 (no.333-101093)).
10.32
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to dr.ruth j. simmons
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.63 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.33
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.john h. bryan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.64 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.34
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.james a. johnson
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.65 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.35
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to lord browne of madingley
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.66 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.36
letter, dated september24, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to ms.margaret c. whitman
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.38 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november30, 2001).
10.37
letter, dated november19, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to dr.morris chang (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.39 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november30, 2001).
10.38
letter, dated april15, 2002, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.stephen friedman
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may31, 2002).
10.39
letter, dated december18, 2002, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.william w. george.
10.40
amendment to the goldman sachs 1999 stock
incentive plan.
12.1
statement re computation of ratios of earnings to
fixed charges.
the following portions of the registrants
2002 annual report to shareholders, which are incorporated by
reference in this annual report on form10-k, are filed as
an exhibit:
13.1
managements discussion and
analysis (pages30 to 59).
13.2
consolidated financial statements of the
registrant and its subsidiaries, together with the notes thereto
and the report of independent accountants thereon (pages60
to 89).
13.3
supplemental financial
information quarterly results and
common stock price range (pages90
and 91).
13.4
selected financial data (page92).
21.1
list of subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group,
inc.
23.1
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp.
24.1
powers of attorney (included on signature page).
99.1
opinion of pricewaterhousecoopers llp with
respect to the selected financial data, which is incorporated by
reference in partii, item6 hereof.
*
incorporated by reference to the corresponding
exhibit to the registrants registration statement on
forms-1 (no.333-74449).
**
incorporated by reference to the corresponding
exhibit to the registrants registration statement on
forms-1 (no.333-75213).
this exhibit is a management contract or a
compensatory plan or arrangement.
(b)reports on form8-k:
on september24, 2002, we filed a current
report on form8-k reporting our earnings for our fiscal
third quarter ended august30, 2002.
on december19, 2002, we filed a current
report on form8-k reporting our earnings for our fiscal
fourth quarter ended november29, 2002.
on december23, 2002, we filed a current
report on form8-k reporting a settlement of certain
investigations into our investment research department.
on january15, 2003, we filed a current
report on form8-k reporting our purchase of convertible
preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. and
other related transactions.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
index to financial statements and financial
statement schedule
items14(a)(1) and 14(a)(2)
page reference
2002 annual
report to
form10-k
shareholders
consolidated financial statements
report of independent accountants
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
notes to consolidated financial statements
financial statement schedule
schedulei condensed financial
information of registrant (parent company only)
f-3 to f-7
report of independent accountants
f-2
condensed statements of earnings
f-3
condensed statements of financial condition
f-4
condensed statements of cash flows
f-5
notes to condensed financial statements
f-6
specifically incorporated elsewhere herein by
reference are certain portions of the following unaudited items:
(i)
managements discussion and analysis;
30 to 59
(ii)
supplemental financial information
quarterly results;
(iii)
supplemental financial information
common stock price range; and
(iv)
supplemental financial information
selected financial data.
schedules not listed are omitted because of the
absence of the conditions under which they are required or
because the information is included in the consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto in the 2002 annual report
to shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by
reference.
f-1
report of independent accountants
to the directors and shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
our audits of the consolidated financial
statements referred to in our report dated january27, 2003
appearing in the 2002 annual report to shareholders of the
goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries (which report and
consolidated financial statements are incorporated by reference
in this annual report on form10-k) also included an audit
of the financial statement schedule listed on pagef-1 of
this form10-k. in our opinion, this financial statement
schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the
information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the
related consolidated financial statements.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
january27, 2003.
f-2
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
condensed statements of earnings (parent
company only)
year ended november
(in millions)
revenues
equity in earnings of subsidiaries
$
2,754
$
3,820
$
3,986
principal investments
(124
)
interest income
2,135
3,785
4,577
total revenues
4,891
7,481
9,124
interest expense
2,131
3,882
4,806
revenues, net of interest expense
2,760
3,599
4,318
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
2,527
3,312
3,999
provision for taxes
1,002
net earnings
$
2,114
$
2,310
$
3,067
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these condensed financial statements.
f-3
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
condensed statements of financial condition
(parent company only)
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
financial instruments owned, at fair value
5,089
4,862
receivables from affiliates
56,026
49,184
subordinated loan receivables from affiliates
13,312
12,112
investments in subsidiaries
17,930
16,877
other assets
2,875
2,659
total assets
$
95,233
$
85,694
liabilities and shareholders equity
short-term borrowings, including the current
portion of long-term borrowings
$
35,001
$
33,593
payables to affiliates
2,294
2,624
other liabilities and accrued expenses
1,148
long-term borrowings
with third parties
35,123
29,769
with affiliates
2,844
total liabilities
76,230
67,463
commitments and contingencies
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share;
150,000,000 shares authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
4,000,000,000shares authorized, 515,084,810 and
499,017,511shares issued as of november 2002 and
november2001, respectively, and 472,940,724 and
476,228,933shares outstanding as of november2002 and
november 2001, respectively
restricted stock units
3,494
4,542
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01 per
share; 200,000,000shares authorized, no shares issued and
outstanding
additional paid-in capital
12,773
11,785
retained earnings
7,259
5,373
unearned compensation
(845
)
(1,220
)
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(122
)
(168
)
treasury stock, at cost, par value $0.01 per
share; 42,144,086 and 22,788,578shares as of
november2002 and november2001, respectively
(3,561
)
(2,086
)
total shareholders equity
19,003
18,231
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
95,233
$
85,694
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these condensed financial statements.
f-4
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
condensed statements of cash flows (parent
company only)
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
2,114
$
2,310
$
3,067
noncash items included in net earnings
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
(118
)
(1,246
)
(1,770
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
(240
)
stock-based compensation
other, net
(14
)
(9
)
(10
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(711
)
other, net
(928
)
(228
)
net cash provided by operating activities
2,172
2,571
cash flows from investing activities
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(1,165
)
(1,391
)
(165
)
receivables from affiliates, net
(6,568
)
(3,547
)
subordinated loan receivables from affiliates
(1,200
)
(3,358
)
investment in subsidiaries, net
(774
)
(456
)
(152
)
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(44
)
(134
)
(269
)
business combinations, net of cash acquired
(68
)
(314
)
(1,988
)
net cash used for investing activities
(9,819
)
(5,548
)
(5,380
)
cash flows from financing activities
short-term borrowings, net
4,332
3,957
(610
)
issuance of long-term borrowings
13,616
6,315
15,704
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the
current
portion of long-term borrowings
(8,657
)
(5,631
)
(9,116
)
common stock repurchased
(1,475
)
(1,438
)
(648
)
dividends paid
(228
)
(231
)
(217
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
net cash provided by financing activities
7,648
2,977
5,114
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash
equivalents
(1
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest approximated the
related expense for each of the fiscal years presented.
payments of income taxes were $546million,
$545million and $1.23billion for the years ended
november2002, november2001 and november2000,
respectively.
noncash activities:
the value of common stock issued in connection
with business combinations was $47million,
$223million and $3.41billion for the years ended
november2002, november2001 and november2000,
respectively.
stock-based compensation expense included in
subsidiary net earnings was $609million, $766million
and $1.30billion for the years ended november2002,
november2001 and november2000, respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these condensed financial statements.
f-5
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed financial
statements
(parent company only)
note1.significant
accounting policies
basis of presentation
the condensed unconsolidated financial statements
of the goldman sachs group, inc. (the parent company) should be
read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements
of the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries (the firm) and
notes thereto, which are incorporated by reference in this
form10-k.
investments in subsidiaries are accounted for
using the equity method.
these condensed unconsolidated financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united states of america
that require management to make estimates and assumptions
regarding investment valuations, the outcome of pending
litigation and other matters that affect the condensed
unconsolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
these estimates and assumptions are based on judgment and
available information and, consequently, actual results could be
materially different from these estimates.
certain reclassifications have been made to the
prior years financial statements to conform with the
current year presentation.
financial instruments owned
financial instruments owned, including principal
investments, are carried at fair value or amounts that
approximate fair value, with related unrealized gains or losses
recognized in the condensed statements of earnings. fair value
is based generally on listed market prices or broker or dealer
price quotations. if prices are not readily determinable or if
liquidating the position is reasonably expected to affect market
prices, fair value is based on either internal valuation models
or managements estimate of amounts that could be realized
under current market conditions, assuming an orderly liquidation
over a reasonable period of time. the firms valuation
models consider, among other inputs, contractual and market
prices, yield curves, credits, volatility factors, prepayment
rates and/or correlation of the underlying positions. downward
adjustments are made if management determines that realizable
value is less than the carrying value.
affiliate financings
most of the consolidated unsecured liquidity of
the firm is raised by the parent company. the parent company
then lends the necessary funds to its subsidiaries and
affiliates, as represented by receivables from
affiliates and subordinated loan receivables from
affiliates on the condensed statements of financial
condition. intercompany exposure is managed by generally
requiring intercompany loans to have maturities equal to or
shorter than the maturities of the aggregate borrowings of the
parent company. this policy ensures that the subsidiaries
obligations to the parent company will generally mature in
advance of the parent companys third-party long-term
borrowings. in addition, many of the subsidiaries and affiliates
pledge collateral to cover their intercompany borrowings. equity
investments in subsidiaries are generally funded with equity
capital.
the parent company guarantees certain obligations
of its subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business.
f-6
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed financial
statements
(parent company only)
(continued)
interest income is largely generated from loans
made to affiliates.
income taxes
income taxes are accounted for in accordance with
sfasno.109, accounting for income taxes,
which requires the recognition of tax benefits or expenses on
the temporary differences between the financial reporting and
tax bases of assets and liabilities. tax assets and liabilities
are presented as a component of other assets and
other liabilities and accrued expenses,
respectively, in the condensed statements of financial condition.
included in other assets are deferred
tax assets totaling approximately $800million and
$900million as of november2002 and november 2001,
respectively.
note2.restricted
stock units
total restricted stock units outstanding for the
years ended november 2002, november2001 and
november2000 were as follows:
no future service
future service
required
required
november2000(1)
33,502,219
46,335,940
november2001
25,629,933
41,669,062
november2002(2)
18,315,938
29,895,000
(1)
includes restricted stock units granted in
connection with the combination with slk and restricted stock
units granted to employees, subsequent to year-end, as part of
year-end compensation.
(2)
includes restricted stock units granted to
employees subsequent to year-end as part of year-end
compensation.
f-7
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/ david a. viniar
name:david a. viniar
title:chief financial officer
date: february27, 2003
ii-1
power of attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each
person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints
john a. thain, gregory k. palm, david a. viniar and esta e.
stecher, and each of them severally, his or her true and lawful
attorney-in-fact with power of substitution and resubstitution
to sign in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all
capacities, to do any and all things and execute any and all
instruments that such attorney may deem necessary or advisable
under the securities exchange act of 1934 and any rules,
regulations and requirements of the u.s. securities and exchange
commission in connection with this annual report on
form10-k and any and all amendments hereto, as fully for
all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in
person, and hereby ratifies and confirms all said
attorneys-in-fact and agents, each acting alone, and his or her
substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done
by virtue hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below on
behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
signatures
capacity
date
/s/ henry m. paulson,jr.
henry m. paulson,jr.
director, chairman and chief executive officer
(principal executive officer)
february27, 2003
/s/ robert j. hurst
robert j. hurst
director
february27, 2003
/s/ john a. thain
john a. thain
director
february27, 2003
/s/ john l. thornton
john l. thornton
director
february27, 2003
/s/ lord browne of madingley
lord browne of madingley
director
february27, 2003
/s/ john h. bryan
john h. bryan
director
february27, 2003
/s/ william w. george
william w. george
director
february27, 2003
/s/ james a. johnson
james a. johnson
director
february27, 2003
/s/ ruth j. simmons
ruth j. simmons
director
february27, 2003
/s/ david a. viniar
david a. viniar
chief financial officer (principal financial
officer)
february27, 2003
/s/ sarah e. smith
sarah e. smith
principal accounting officer
february27, 2003
ii-2
certifications
i, henry m. paulson, jr., certify that:
1. i have reviewed this annual report on
form10-k of the goldman sachs group, inc.;
2. based on my knowledge, this annual report does
not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to
state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in
light of the circumstances under which such statements were
made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
annual report;
3. based on my knowledge, the financial
statements, and other financial information included in this
annual report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual
report;
4. the registrants other certifying
officers and i are responsible for establishing and maintaining
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act
rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and have:
a) designed such disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made
known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b) evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrants disclosure controls and procedures as of a
date within 90days prior to the filing date of this annual
report (the evaluation date); and
c) presented in this annual report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls
and procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5. the registrants other certifying
officers and i have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation, to the registrants auditors and the audit
committee of registrants board of directors (or persons
performing the equivalent functions):
a) all significant deficiencies in the design or
operation of internal controls which could adversely affect the
registrants ability to record, process, summarize and
report financial data and have identified for the
registrants auditors any material weaknesses in internal
controls; and
b) any fraud, whether or not material, that
involves management or other employees who have a significant
role in the registrants internal controls; and
6. the registrants other certifying
officers and i have indicated in this annual report whether
there were significant changes in internal controls or in other
factors that could significantly affect internal controls
subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including
any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies
and material weaknesses.
/s/ henry m. paulson, jr.
name:henry m. paulson, jr.
title:chief executive officer
date: february27, 2003
ii-3
certifications
i, david a. viniar, certify that:
1. i have reviewed this annual report on
form10-k of the goldman sachs group, inc.;
2. based on my knowledge, this annual report does
not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to
state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in
light of the circumstances under which such statements were
made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
annual report;
3. based on my knowledge, the financial
statements, and other financial information included in this
annual report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual
report;
4. the registrants other certifying
officers and i are responsible for establishing and maintaining
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in exchange act
rules13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and have:
a) designed such disclosure controls and
procedures to ensure that material information relating to the
registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made
known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b) evaluated the effectiveness of the
registrants disclosure controls and procedures as of a
date within 90days prior to the filing date of this annual
report (the evaluation date); and
c) presented in this annual report our
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls
and procedures based on our evaluation as of the evaluation date;
5. the registrants other certifying
officers and i have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation, to the registrants auditors and the audit
committee of registrants board of directors (or persons
performing the equivalent functions):
a) all significant deficiencies in the design or
operation of internal controls which could adversely affect the
registrants ability to record, process, summarize and
report financial data and have identified for the
registrants auditors any material weaknesses in internal
controls; and
b) any fraud, whether or not material, that
involves management or other employees who have a significant
role in the registrants internal controls; and
6. the registrants other certifying
officers and i have indicated in this annual report whether
there were significant changes in internal controls or in other
factors that could significantly affect internal controls
subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including
any corrective actions with regard to significant deficiencies
and material weaknesses.
/s/ david a. viniar
name:david a. viniar
title:chief financial officer
date: february27, 2003
ii-4
