10-k
y94357e10vk.htm
the goldman sachs group, inc.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
table of contents
united states securities and exchange
commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d)
of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended november28,
commission file
number:001-14965
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
13-4019460
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
85broad street
new york, n.y.
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(212)902-1000
(registrants telephone number, including
area code)
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act:
title of each class:
name of each exchange on which registered:
common stock, par value $.01per share,
and attached shareholder protection rights
new
york stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb, 0.25%
exchangeable notes due 2007; index-linked notes due 2004;
1%exchangeable notes due 2007;0.75% exchangeable
notes due 2005;0.50% exchangeable equity-linked notes due
2007; index-linked notes due 2013; index-linked notes due april
2013; index-linked notes due may 2013; index-linked notes due
july 2010; basket-linked notes due 2004; and index-linked notes
due 2011
american
stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb,
7.35%notes due2009; 7.50%notes due 2005;
7.80%notes due2010; floating rate notes due
new
york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act: none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of regulations-k is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
an accelerated filer (as defined in exchange act
rule12b-2).yesnoo
as of may30, 2003, the aggregate market
value of the common stock of the registrant held by
non-affiliates of the registrant was approximately
$35billion.
as of february2, 2004, there were
483,311,736shares of the registrants common stock
outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference:
portions of the goldman sachs group,
inc.s 2003 annual report to shareholders are incorporated
by reference in this form10-k in response to partii,
items5, 6, 7, 7a and 8, and partiv, item15.
portions of the goldman sachs group, inc.s proxy statement
dated february24, 2004, for its 2004 annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on march31, 2004, are incorporated
by reference in this form10-k in response to
partiii, items10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item 6. selected financial data
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item 8. financial statements and supplementary data
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a. controls and procedures
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions
item 14. principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
signatures
subordinated debt indenture
form of 2003 year-end option award agreement
form of 2003 year-end rsu award agreement
computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
managements discussion and analysis
consolidated financial statements
supplemental financial information
selected financial data
list of subsidiaries
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
rule 13a-14(a) certifications
section 1350 certifications
opinion of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november28, 2003
page
form10-k itemnumber:
no.
part i
item1.
business
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
part iii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item14.
principal accountant fees and services
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form8-k
index to financial statements and financial
statement schedule
f-1
signatures
ii-1
table of contents
part i
item1.business
overview
goldman sachs is a leading global investment
banking, securities and investment management firm that provides
a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base. as of november28, 2003, we
operated offices in over 20 countries and approximately 34% of
our 19,476 employees were based outside the united states.
goldman sachs is the successor to a commercial
paper business founded in 1869 by marcus goldman. on may7,
1999, we converted from a partnership to a corporation and
completed an initial public offering of our common stock.
all references to 2003, 2002 and 2001 refer to
our fiscal year ended, or the date, as the context requires,
november28, 2003, november29, 2002 and
november30, 2001, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman sachs,
we, us and our, we mean the
goldman sachs group, inc., a delaware corporation, and its
consolidated subsidiaries.
financial information concerning our business
segments and geographic regions for each of 2003, 2002 and 2001
is set forth in managements discussion and
analysis, and the consolidated financial statements and
the notes thereto, in our 2003 annual report to shareholders,
which are incorporated by reference in partii, items 5, 6,
7, 7a and 8 of this annual report on form10-k.
our internet address is www.gs.com and the
investor relations section of our web site is located at
www.gs.com/investorrelations. we make
available free of charge, on or through the investor relations
section of our web site, annual reports on form10-k,
quarterly reports on form10-q and current reports on
form8-k and amendments to those reports filed or furnished
pursuant to section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 as soon as reasonably practicable after we
electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the
securities and exchange commission. also posted on our web site,
and available in print upon request of any shareholder to our
investor relations department, are our charters for our audit
committee, compensation committee and corporate governance and
nominating committee, our policy regarding director independence
determinations, our policy on reporting of concerns regarding
accounting and other matters, our corporate governance
guidelines and a code of business conduct and ethics governing
our directors, officers and employees. within the time period
required by the sec and the new york stock exchange, we will
post on our web site any amendment to the code of business
conduct and ethics and any waiver applicable to our senior
financial officers, as defined in the code, and our executive
officers or directors. in addition, information concerning
purchases and sales of our equity securities by our executive
officers and directors is posted on our web site.
our investor relations department can be
contacted at the goldman sachs group, inc., 85broad
street, 17th floor, new york, new york 10004, attn: investor
relations, telephone: 212-902-0300, e-mail:
gs-investorrelations@gs.com.
business segments
our activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking;
trading and principal investments; and
asset management and securities services.
table of contents
during 2003, we made certain changes to our
segment reporting structure. these changes included:
reclassifying equity commissions and clearing and
execution fees from the commissions component of the asset
management and securities services segment to the equities
component of the trading and principal investments segment;
reclassifying merchant banking overrides from the
commissions component of the asset management and securities
services segment to the principal investments component of the
trading and principal investments segment; and
reclassifying the matched book businesses from
the securities services component of the asset management and
securities services segment to the fixed income, currency and
commodities (ficc) component of the trading and principal
investments segment.
these reclassifications did not affect our
previously reported consolidated results of operations. prior
period segment operating results have been changed to conform to
the new segment reporting structure.
the following table sets forth the net revenues,
operating expenses and pre-tax earnings of our segments:
operating results by segment
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking:
net revenues
$
2,711
$
2,830
$
3,836
operating expenses
2,504
2,454
3,117
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
trading and principal investments:
net revenues
$
10,443
$
8,647
$
9,570
operating expenses
6,938
6,505
7,310
pre-tax earnings
$
3,505
$
2,142
$
2,260
asset management and securities
services:
net revenues
$
2,858
$
2,509
$
2,405
operating expenses
1,890
1,562
1,325
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
1,080
total
net revenues
$
16,012
$
13,986
$
15,811
operating expenses(1)
11,567
10,733
12,115
pre-tax earnings
$
4,445
$
3,253
$
3,696
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to our segments: (i)the amortization of
employee initial public offering awards of $80million,
$212million and $363million for the years ended
november 2003, november 2002 and november 2001, respectively,
and (ii)provisions for a number of litigation and
regulatory proceedings of $155million for the year ended
november 2003.
table of contents
these segments consist of various products and
activities that are set forth in the following chart:
business segment/component
primary products and activities
investment banking:
financial advisory
mergers and acquisitions advisory
services
financial restructuring advisory
services
underwriting
equity and debt underwriting
trading and principal investments:
ficc
commodities and commodity
derivatives, including our power generation business
credit products including
investment-grade corporate securities, high-yield securities,
bank loans, municipal securities, emerging market debt and
credit derivatives
currencies and currency derivatives
interest rate products
including interest rate derivatives and global government
securities
money market instruments, including
the matched book
mortgage-backed securities and loans
equities
equity securities and derivatives
securities, futures and options
clearing services
specialist and market-making services
in securities and options
principal investments
principal investments in connection
with merchant banking activities
investment in the convertible
preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc.
asset management and securities
services:
asset management
institutional and high-net-worth
asset management
merchant banking management fees
mutual funds
securities services
margin lending
prime brokerage
securities lending
table of contents
investment banking
investment banking represented 17% of 2003 net
revenues. we provide a broad range of investment banking
services to a diverse group of corporations, financial
institutions, governments and individuals and seek to develop
and maintain long-term relationships with these clients as their
lead investment bank.
our current structure, which is organized by
regional, industry and product groups, seeks to combine
client-focused investment bankers with execution and industry
expertise. because our businesses are global, we have adapted
our organization to meet the demands of our clients in each
geographic region. through our commitment to teamwork, we
believe that we provide services in an integrated fashion for
the benefit of our clients.
our investment banking segment is divided into
two components:
financial advisory.
financial advisory includes
advisory assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions,
divestitures, corporate defense activities, restructurings and
spin-offs; and
underwriting.
underwriting includes public
offerings and private placements of equity and debt instruments.
financial advisory
goldman sachs is a leading investment bank in
worldwide mergers and acquisitions. our mergers and acquisitions
capabilities are evidenced by our significant share of
assignments in large, complex transactions for which we provide
multiple services, including one-stop acquisition
financing and cross-border structuring expertise, as well as
services in other areas of the firm, such as currency hedging.
underwriting
we underwrite a wide range of securities and
other financial instruments, including common and preferred
stock, convertible and exchangeable securities, investment-grade
debt, high-yield debt, sovereign and emerging market debt,
municipal debt, bank loans, asset-backed securities and real
estate-related securities, such as mortgage-backed securities
and the securities of real estate investment trusts.
equity
underwriting. equity
underwriting has been a long-term core strength of goldman
sachs. as with mergers and acquisitions, we have been
particularly successful in winning mandates for large, complex
equity underwritings. we believe our leadership in worldwide
initial public offerings and worldwide public common stock
offerings reflects our expertise in complex transactions, prior
experience and distribution capabilities.
debt
underwriting. we engage in
the underwriting and origination of various types of debt
instruments, including investment-grade debt securities,
high-yield debt securities, bank and bridge loans and emerging
market debt securities, which instruments may be issued by,
among others, corporate, sovereign and agency issuers. in
addition, we underwrite and originate structured securities,
which include asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities and
collateralized debt obligations. we have employed a focused
approach in debt underwriting, emphasizing high value-added
areas in servicing our clients.
trading and principal investments
trading and principal investments represented 65%
of 2003 net revenues. trading and principal investments
facilitates customer transactions with a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, governments and
individuals and takes proprietary positions through market
making in, and trading of, fixed income and equity products,
currencies, commodities and
table of contents
derivatives on such products. in addition, we
engage in floor-based and electronic market making as a
specialist on u.s. equities and options exchanges and we clear
customer transactions on major stock, options and futures
exchanges worldwide. in connection with our merchant banking and
other investment activities, we make principal investments
directly and through funds that we raise and manage.
in order to meet the needs of our clients,
trading and principal investments is diversified across a wide
range of products. we believe our willingness and ability to
take risk distinguishes us from many of our competitors and
substantially enhances our client relationships.
our trading and principal investments segment is
divided into three components:
fixed income, currency and
commodities. we make markets in
and trade interest rate and credit products, mortgage-backed
securities and loans, currencies and commodities, structure and
enter into a wide variety of derivative transactions, and engage
in proprietary trading;
equities. we
make markets in, act as a specialist for, and trade equities and
equity-related products, structure and enter into equity
derivative transactions, and engage in proprietary trading. we
also execute and clear customer transactions on major stock,
options and futures exchanges worldwide; and
principal
investments. principal investments
primarily represents net revenues from our merchant banking
investments, including the increased share of the income and
gains derived from our merchant banking funds when the return on
a funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns
(merchant banking overrides), as well as unrealized gains or
losses on our investment in the convertible preferred stock of
sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg).
fixed income, currency and commodities and
equities
ficc and equities are large and diversified
operations through which we engage in a variety of
customer-driven and proprietary trading activities.
in their customer-driven businesses, ficc and
equities strive to deliver high-quality service by offering
broad market-making and market knowledge to our clients on a
global basis. in addition, we use our expertise to take
positions in markets, often by committing capital and taking
risk, to facilitate customer transactions and provide liquidity.
our willingness to make markets in a broad range of fixed
income, currency, commodity and equity products and their
derivatives is crucial both to our client relationships and to
support our underwriting business by providing secondary market
liquidity.
we generate trading net revenues from our
customer-driven businesses in three ways.
first, in large, highly liquid markets, we
undertake a high volume of transactions for modest spreads and
fees.
second, by capitalizing on our strong market
relationships and capital position, we undertake transactions in
less liquid markets where spreads and fees are generally larger.
finally, we generate net revenues from
structuring and executing transactions that address complex
client needs.
in our proprietary activities in both ficc and
equities, we assume a variety of risks and devote resources to
identify, analyze and benefit from these exposures. we leverage
our strong proprietary research capabilities and capitalize on
our analytical models to analyze information and make informed
trading judgments. for example, as part of our ficc credit and
mortgage products businesses, we have expanded and expect to
continue to expand the extent to which we make principal
investments in portfolios and single issues of distressed debt
as well as other
table of contents
special situation investments. in our proprietary
activities, we seek to benefit from perceived disparities in the
value of assets in the trading markets and from macroeconomic
and company-specific trends.
although ficc and equities involve distinct
product areas, we have recently increased coordination among
their businesses. among the steps we have taken are to
integrate, to an increasing extent, management of ficc and
equities and to integrate the facilities and personnel of some
of our ficc and equities businesses, especially in europe and
asia. we have also merged substantially all of our risk
management functions for ficc and equities. we expect to
continue to increase the integration and coordination of these
businesses in the future, as we respond to what we believe is
client demand for more centralized services and as we attempt to
take advantage of perceived synergies.
we believe that our trading and market-making
capabilities are key ingredients to our success. while these
businesses have generally earned attractive returns, we have in
the past incurred significant trading losses in periods of
market turbulence, such as in 1994 and the second half of 1998,
and from time to time in connection with large block trades.
in both our customer-driven and proprietary
activities in ficc and equities, we manage our exposure to
credit and other financial risks on a global basis across all
our products. our trading risk management process seeks to
balance our ability to profit from trading positions with our
exposure to potential losses. as part of this process, we
analyze not only market risk but also credit and other financial
risks. risk management includes input from all levels of goldman
sachs, from the trading desks to the firmwide risk committee.
for a further discussion of our risk management policies and
procedures, see managements discussion and analysis
risk management in the 2003 annual report to
shareholders, which is incorporated by reference in
partii, items7 and 7a of this annual report on
form10-k.
ficc.
ficcs principal businesses are:
commodities and commodity derivatives, including
our power generation business;
credit products, including investment-grade
corporate securities, high-yield securities, bank loans,
municipal securities, credit derivatives and emerging market
debt;
currencies and currency derivatives;
interest rate products, including interest rate
derivatives and global government securities;
money market instruments, including the matched
book; and
mortgage-backed securities and loans.
a core activity in ficc is market making in a
broad array of securities and products. for example, we are a
primary dealer in many of the largest government bond markets
around the world, including the united states, japan and the
united kingdom. we are a member of the major futures exchanges,
and also have interbank dealer status in the currency markets in
new york, london, tokyo and hong kong.
our ficc research capabilities enhance our
ability to provide high-quality products and service to our
clients and include quantitative and qualitative analyses of
global economic, currency and financial market trends, as well
as credit analyses of corporate and sovereign fixed income
securities.
as part of our commodities business, we recently
acquired equity interests in east coast power l.l.c. and
cogentrix energy, inc., companies engaged in the power
generation business. as of february1, 2004, we indirectly
owned interests in 26power plants located in the united
states and one plant located outside of the united states.
table of contents
equities. in
2003, we reorganized certain of our equities businesses. our
equities principal businesses are:
equities products group;
exchange-based trading; and
principal strategies.
equities products
group. our equities products group
(epg) includes primarily customer-driven activities in the
shares, convertible securities and derivatives businesses of the
firm. these activities also include clearing client transactions
on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide.
we trade equity securities and equity-related
products (such as convertible securities, options, futures and
over-the counter (otc) derivative instruments) on a global basis
as an agent, as a market maker or otherwise as a principal. as a
principal, we facilitate customer transactions, often by
committing capital and taking risk, to provide liquidity to
clients with large blocks of stocks or options. for example, we
are active in the execution of large block trades (trades of
50,000 or more shares).
we are a member of most of the worlds major
stock, options and futures exchanges, including those located in
new york, chicago, london, paris, frankfurt, tokyo and hong
kong. we are a designated market maker in over 3,000 stocks
traded on the nasdaq stock market.
in the options and futures markets, we structure,
distribute and execute derivatives on market indices, industry
groups and individual company stocks to facilitate customer
transactions and our proprietary activities. we develop
quantitative strategies and render advice with respect to
portfolio hedging and restructuring and asset allocation
transactions. we also create specially tailored instruments to
enable sophisticated investors to undertake hedging strategies
and establish or liquidate investment positions. we are one of
the leading participants in the trading and development of
equity derivative instruments. we are an active participant in
the trading of futures and options on most of the major
exchanges in the united states, europe and asia.
exchange-based trading.
our exchange-based trading business
includes our stock, option and exchange traded funds(etf)
specialist businesses. we engage in floor-based and electronic
market making as a specialist on u.s. equities and options
exchanges. in the united states, for stocks, we are one of the
leading specialists on the nyse. for options, we are a
specialist on the american stock exchange, the chicago board
options exchange, the international securities exchange and the
philadelphia stock exchange. for etfs, we are a specialist on
the american stock exchange and the nyse.
principal strategies.
our equities principal strategies
business includes equity arbitrage, as well as other proprietary
trading in equity and related securities, including convertible
securities and derivatives. equity arbitrage includes, among
other strategies, relative value trading (which involves trading
strategies to take advantage of perceived discrepancies in the
relative value of financial instruments, including debt and
equity instruments), statistical arbitrage (which involves
trading strategies based on analyses of historical price
relationships among sectors of the equities markets) and risk
arbitrage (which focuses on event-oriented special situations
such as corporate restructurings, recapitalizations, mergers and
acquisitions and legal and regulatory events).
principal investments
in connection with our merchant banking
activities, we invest by making principal investments directly
and through funds that we raise and manage. principal
investments also includes our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg, which we acquired on february7,
2003.
table of contents
as of november 2003, we managed private
investment funds with total equity capital commitments from our
clients and from goldman sachs of $39.05billion, including
funded amounts; goldman sachs also had outstanding commitments
to invest up to $1.38billion. the funds investments
generate capital appreciation or depreciation and, upon
disposition, realized gains or losses. see
asset management and securities
services asset management merchant
banking for a discussion of our merchant banking funds. as
of november 2003, the aggregate carrying value of our principal
investments held directly or through our merchant banking funds
was approximately $3.76billion. these carrying values were
comprised of corporate principal investments with an aggregate
carrying value of approximately $1.27billion, real estate
investments with an aggregate carrying value of approximately
$799million and our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg with a carrying value of
$1.68billion. principal investments includes revenues from
the increased share of the income and gains derived from our
merchant banking funds when the return on a funds
investments exceeds certain threshold returns (typically
referred to as an override).
asset management and securities
services
the components of the asset management and
securities services segment, which represented 18% of 2003 net
revenues, are set forth below:
asset management.
asset management provides
investment advisory and financial planning services to a diverse
client base of institutions and individuals and generates
revenues in the form of management and incentive fees; and
securities services.
securities services includes prime
brokerage, financing services and securities lending, all of
which generate revenues primarily in the form of interest rate
spreads or fees.
asset management
we offer a broad array of investment strategies,
advice and planning across all major asset classes: equity,
fixed income (including money markets) and currency and
alternative investment products (i.e., investment
vehicles with non-traditional investment strategies and
techniques).
assets under management typically generate fees
based on a percentage of their value or on their performance and
include our mutual funds, separate accounts managed for
institutional and individual investors, our merchant banking
funds and other alternative investment funds. we also earn
trading commissions on assets in brokerage accounts of
high-net-worth individuals (which revenues are included in the
equities component of our trading and principal investments
segment), although the trend in our private wealth management
business has been away from traditional brokerage accounts that
generate commission revenue to accounts that pay fees based on
the assets under management.
table of contents
the amount of assets under management is set
forth in the graph below. in the following graph, as well as in
the following tables, substantially all assets under management
are valued as of calendar month end.
assets under management
(in billions)
the following table sets forth assets under
management by asset class:
assets under management by asset
class
(in billions)
as of november
2003(2)
asset class
money markets
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity
alternative investments(1)
total
$
$
$
(1)
includes merchant banking funds,
quantitatively-driven investment funds and other funds with
non-traditional investment strategies and techniques that we
manage, as well as funds where we recommend one or more
subadvisors for our clients.
(2)
includes $4billion in non-money-market
assets acquired in our combination with the ayco company, l.p.,
a leading provider of sophisticated, fee-based financial
counseling in the united states that we acquired on july1,
2003.
clients. our
clients are institutions, high-net-worth individuals and retail
investors. we access institutional and high-net-worth clients
through both direct and third-party channels and retail clients
through third-party channels. our institutional clients include
pension funds, governmental organizations, corporations,
insurance companies, foundations and endowments. in the
third-party distribution channels, we distribute our mutual
funds and separate managed accounts through brokerage firms,
banks, insurance companies and other financial intermediaries.
our clients are located worldwide.
table of contents
the table below sets forth the amount of assets
under management by distribution channel and client category as
of november 2003:
assets under management by distribution
channel
(in billions)
assets under
management(1)
primary investment vehicles
directly distributed
institutional
$
separate managed accounts
high-net-worth individuals
commingled vehicles, such
asmutual funds andprivate
investment funds
brokerage accounts
separate managed accounts
third-party distributed
institutional,
high-net-worth and retail
commingled vehicles
separate managed accounts
total
$
(1)
excludes $18.47billion in certain of our
merchant banking funds.
merchant banking.
goldman sachs has sponsored
private investment funds in the corporate and real estate
merchant banking business with $39.05billion of committed
capital as of november 2003, of which $27.23billion has
been funded. we have provided a portion of those amounts. see
trading and principal investments
principal investments above. our clients, including
pension plans, endowments, charitable institutions and
high-net-worth individuals, have provided the remainder.
our strategy with respect to our merchant banking
funds generally is to invest opportunistically to build a
portfolio of investments that is diversified by industry,
product type, geographic region and transaction structure and
type. some of these investment funds pursue, on a global basis,
long-term investments in equity and debt securities in privately
negotiated transactions, leveraged buyouts and acquisitions. as
of november 2003, our corporate merchant banking funds had total
committed capital of $26.96billion. other funds, with
total committed capital of $12.09billion as of november
2003, invest in real estate operating companies, debt and equity
interests in real estate assets, and other real estate-related
investments.
merchant banking activities generate three
revenue streams. first, we receive a management fee that is
generally a percentage of a funds committed capital,
invested capital, total gross acquisition cost or asset value.
these annual management fees are included in our asset
management revenues. second, goldman sachs, as a substantial
investor in these funds, is allocated its proportionate share of
the funds unrealized appreciation or depreciation arising
from changes in fair value as well as gains and losses upon
realization. third, after the fund has achieved a minimum return
for fund investors, we receive an increased share of the
funds income and gains that is a percentage of the income
and gains from the funds investments. the second and third
of these revenue streams are included in net revenues of the
principal investments component of our trading and principal
investments segment.
table of contents
securities services
securities services activities include prime
brokerage, financing services and securities lending. we provide
these services to a diversified u.s. and international customer
base, including mutual funds, pension funds, hedge funds,
foundations, endowments and high-net-worth individuals.
we offer prime brokerage services to our clients,
allowing them the flexibility to trade with most brokers while
maintaining a single source for financing and consolidated
portfolio reports. our prime brokerage activities provide
clearing and custody in 50 markets (with revenues from clearing
and custody included in the equities component of the trading
and principal investments segment), consolidated multi-currency
accounting and reporting and offshore fund administration.
additionally, we provide financing to our clients for their
securities trading activities through margin and securities
loans that are collateralized by securities, cash or other
acceptable collateral held in the clients account.
securities lending activities principally involve
the borrowing and lending of equity securities to cover customer
and goldman sachs short sales and otherwise to make
deliveries into the market. in addition, we are an active
participant in the broker-to-broker securities lending business
and the third-party agency lending business.
global investment research
our global investment research division provides
fundamental research on companies, industries, economies,
currencies, commodities and portfolio and quantitative strategy
on a worldwide basis.
global investment research employs a team
approach that as of november 2003 provided research coverage of
approximately 1,750companies worldwide, over
50economies and 25stock markets. this is
accomplished by six departments:
the americas equity research department, the
europe equity research department and the asia equity research
department all provide fundamental analysis, forecasts and
investment opinions for companies and industries in their
respective regions. equity research analysts are organized
regionally by industry teams, which allows for extensive
collaboration and knowledge sharing among analysts on important
investment themes;
the economic research department, which has a
presence in the americas, europe and asia, formulates
macroeconomic forecasts for economic activity, foreign exchange
and interest rates based on the globally coordinated views of
its regional economists;
the commodities research department, which has a
presence in london and new york, provides research on the global
commodity markets; and
the strategy department, which includes portfolio
and quantitative strategy and has a presence in the americas,
europe and asia, formulates equity market forecasts and provides
opinions on both asset and industry sector allocation.
further information regarding research at goldman
sachs is provided under regulation
regulations applicable in and outside the united states,
certain factors that may affect our
business legal and regulatory and legal
proceedings research independence matters in
item3 of this annual report on form10-k.
table of contents
technology strategy
goldman sachs is committed to the ongoing
development, maintenance and use of technology throughout the
organization. our technology initiatives can be broadly
categorized into four efforts:
enhancing client service through increased
connectivity and the provision of value-added, tailored products
and services;
improving our trading, execution and clearing
capabilities;
risk management; and
overall efficiency, productivity and control.
we have tailored our services to our clients by
providing them with electronic access to our products and
services. in particular, we have extended our global electronic
trading and information distribution capabilities to our clients
via the internet and other forms of electronic connectivity.
these capabilities cover many of our fixed income, currency,
commodity, equity and mutual fund products around the world. we
have also used the internet to improve the ease and quality of
communication with our institutional and high-net-worth clients.
internet technology and electronic commerce have
changed and will continue to change the ways that securities and
other financial products are traded, distributed and settled.
this creates both opportunities and challenges for our
businesses. we remain committed to being at the forefront of
technological innovation in the global capital markets.
we have developed software that enables us to
monitor and analyze our market and credit risks. this risk
management software not only analyzes market risk on firmwide,
divisional and trading desk levels, but also breaks down our
risk into its underlying exposures, permitting management to
evaluate exposures on the basis of specific interest rate,
currency exchange rate, equity price or commodity price changes.
to assist further in the management of our credit exposures,
data from many sources are aggregated daily into credit
management systems that give senior management and professionals
in the credit and controllers departments the ability to receive
timely information with respect to credit exposures worldwide,
including netting information, and the ability to analyze
complex risk situations effectively. our software accesses this
data, allows for quick analysis at the level of individual
trades, and interacts with other goldman sachs systems.
technology has also been a significant factor in
improving the overall efficiency of many areas of goldman sachs.
by automating many trading procedures and operational and
accounting processes, we have substantially increased our
efficiency and accuracy.
employees
management believes that one of the strengths and
principal reasons for the success of goldman sachs is the
quality and dedication of its people and the shared sense of
being part of a team. we strive to maintain a work environment
that fosters professionalism, excellence, diversity and
cooperation among our employees worldwide.
instilling the goldman sachs culture in all
employees is a continuous process, in which training plays an
important part. all employees are offered the opportunity to
participate in education and periodic seminars that we sponsor
at various locations throughout the world. another important
part of instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee
review process. employees are reviewed by supervisors,
co-workers and employees they supervise in a 360-degree review
process that is integral to our team approach.
as of november 2003, we had
19,476employees, which excludes employees of goldman
sachs property management subsidiaries. substantially all
of the costs of the property
table of contents
management employees are reimbursed to goldman
sachs by the real estate investment funds to which these
subsidiaries provide property management services.
competition
the financial services industry and
all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and
we expect them to remain so. our competitors are other brokers
and dealers, investment banking firms, insurance companies,
investment advisors, mutual funds, hedge funds, commercial banks
and merchant banks. we compete with some of our competitors
globally and with others on a regional, product or niche basis.
our competition is based on a number of factors, including
transaction execution, our products and services, innovation,
reputation and price.
we also face intense competition in attracting
and retaining qualified employees. our ability to continue to
compete effectively in our businesses will depend upon our
ability to attract new employees and retain and motivate our
existing employees.
in recent years, there has been substantial
consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial
services industry, due in part to u.s.federal legislation
that has expanded the activities permissible for firms
affiliated with a u.s.bank. in particular, a number of
large commercial banks, insurance companies and other
broad-based financial services firms have established or
acquired broker-dealers or have merged with other financial
institutions. many of these firms have the ability to offer a
wide range of products, from loans, deposit-taking and insurance
to brokerage, asset management and investment banking services,
which may enhance their competitive position. they also have the
ability to support investment banking and securities products
with commercial banking, insurance and other financial services
revenues in an effort to gain market share, which could result
in pricing pressure in our businesses.
moreover, we have faced, and expect to continue
to face, pressure to retain market share by committing capital
to businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns that
may not be commensurate with their risks. in particular,
corporate clients sometimes seek to require such commitments
from financial services firms in connection with investment
banking assignments. in 2003, we established the william street
entities, through which we have issued commitments to lend to
counterparties, primarily investment grade clients.
substantially all of the credit risk associated with these
commitments has been hedged through credit loss protection
provided to goldman sachs by smfg. these arrangements may not be
sufficient, however, to fully satisfy our clients desire
for capital commitments. in addition, the credit loss protection
is limited generally to 95% of the first loss goldman sachs
realizes on approved investment-grade loan commitments, subject
to a maximum of $1billion, and 70% of the second loss on
such commitments, subject to a maximum of $1.125billion.
see managements discussion and analysis and
note6 to our consolidated financial statements for more
information regarding the william street entities, and our
current report on form8-k, dated january15, 2003,
for a description of the credit loss protection provided by smfg.
the trend toward consolidation and convergence
has significantly increased the capital base and geographic
reach of some of our competitors. this trend has also hastened
the globalization of the securities and other financial services
markets. as a result, we have had to commit capital to support
our international operations and to execute large global
transactions. in order to take advantage of some of our most
significant challenges and opportunities, we will have to
compete successfully with financial institutions that are larger
and better-capitalized and that may have a stronger local
presence and longer operating history outside the united states.
we have experienced intense price competition in
some of our businesses in recent years. there has been
considerable pressure in the pricing of large block trades,
including situations where the bidding dealers may not have been
able to pre-market the securities. also, equity and debt
underwriting discounts, as well as trading spreads, have been
under pressure for a number of years and the ability to execute
trades electronically, through the internet and through other
table of contents
alternative trading systems, has increased the
pressure on trading commissions. it appears that this trend
toward alternative trading systems will continue. we own
interests in and participate in a number of these trading
systems. moreover, the introduction of decimalization has led to
a reduction in the revenues of our specialist business and to
the implementation of a fee-based pricing structure in our
nasdaq trading business. we believe that we will experience
competitive pressures in these and other areas in the future as
some of our competitors seek to obtain market share by reducing
prices.
the trading of futures on single stocks commenced
in november 2002. it is too early to tell whether the
introduction of single stock futures contracts will have a
long-term adverse impact on the businesses of goldman sachs.
while commissions and clearing fees may increase, other aspects
of our business, in particular, our otc derivative business, may
be adversely affected.
regulation
goldman sachs, as a participant in the securities
and commodity futures and options industries, is subject to
extensive regulation in the united states and elsewhere. as a
matter of public policy, regulatory bodies in the united states
and the rest of the world are charged with safeguarding the
integrity of the securities and other financial markets and with
protecting the interests of customers participating in those
markets. they are not, however, charged with protecting the
interests of goldman sachs shareholders or creditors.
broker-dealers, in particular, are subject to
regulations that cover all aspects of the securities business,
including sales methods, trade practices, use and safekeeping of
customers funds and securities, capital structure,
record-keeping, the financing of customers purchases, and
the conduct of directors, officers and employees. a number of
our affiliates are regulated by investment advisory laws in and
outside the united states. additional legislation, changes in
rules promulgated by self-regulatory organizations, or changes
in the interpretation or enforcement of existing laws and rules,
either in the united states or elsewhere, may directly affect
the operation and profitability of goldman sachs.
regulation
in the united states
in the united states, the sec is the federal
agency responsible for the administration of the federal
securities laws. our principal broker-dealer in the united
states is goldman, sachs& co., which is registered as
a broker-dealer and as an investment adviser with the sec and as
a broker-dealer in all50 states and the district of
columbia. self-regulatory organizations, such as the nyse and
the national association of securities dealers, inc., adopt
rules that apply to, and examine, broker-dealers such as
goldman, sachs& co. in addition, state securities and
other regulators also have regulatory or oversight authority
over goldman, sachs& co. similarly, our businesses are
also subject to regulation by various non-u.s.governmental
and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory authorities in
virtually all countries where we have offices. spear,
leeds& kellogg, l.p. and certain of its affiliates are
registered u.s.broker-dealers and are regulated by the
sec, the nyse and the nasd. goldman sachs financial markets,
l.p. is registered with the sec as an otc derivatives dealer and
conducts certain otc derivatives businesses previously conducted
by other affiliates.
the commodity futures and commodity options
industry in the united states is subject to regulation under the
commodity exchange act, as amended. the commodity futures
trading commission is the federal agency charged with the
administration of the commodity exchange act and the regulations
thereunder. several of goldman sachs subsidiaries,
including goldman, sachs& co. and spear,
leeds& kellogg, l.p., are registered with the cftc and
act as futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators or
commodity trading advisors and are subject to the commodity
exchange act and the regulations thereunder. the rules and
regulations of various self-regulatory organizations, such as
the chicago board of trade, other futures
table of contents
exchanges and the national futures association,
also govern the commodity futures and commodity options
businesses of these entities.
as a registered broker-dealer and member of
various self-regulatory organizations, goldman, sachs&
co. is subject to the secs uniform net capital rule,
rule15c3-1. this rule specifies the minimum level of net
capital a broker-dealer must maintain and also requires that a
significant part of its assets be kept in relatively liquid
form. goldman, sachs& co. is also subject to the net
capital requirements of the cftc and various securities and
commodity exchanges. see note14 to the consolidated
financial statements incorporated by reference in partii,
item8 of this annual report on form10-k.
the sec and various self-regulatory organizations
impose rules that require notification when net capital falls
below certain predefined criteria, limit the ratio of
subordinated debt to equity in the regulatory capital
composition of a broker-dealer and constrain the ability of a
broker-dealer to expand its business under certain
circumstances. additionally, the secs uniform net capital
rule imposes certain requirements that may have the effect of
prohibiting a broker-dealer from distributing or withdrawing
capital and requiring prior notice to the sec for certain
withdrawals of capital.
goldman sachs has established the goldman sachs
trust company, n.a., a national bank limited to fiduciary
activities, in order to provide personal trust and estate
administration and related services to its high-net-worth
clients on a nationwide basis. gstc maintains collective
investment funds for eligible pension and profit sharing plan
clients. as a national bank, gstc is subject to regulation by
the office of the comptroller of the currency and is a member
bank of the federal reserve system. gstc will not accept
deposits or make loans and, as a result, it is not considered to
be a bank for purposes of the bank holding company act. it also
does not carry fdic insurance and is not subject to the
requirements of the community reinvestment act.
the usa patriot act of 2001, enacted in response
to the terrorist attacks on september11, 2001, contains
anti-money laundering and financial transparency laws and
mandates the implementation of various new regulations
applicable to broker-dealers and other financial services
companies, including standards for verifying client
identification at account opening, and obligations to monitor
client transactions and report suspicious activities. through
these and other provisions, the usa patriot act seeks to promote
cooperation among financial institutions, regulators and law
enforcement entities in identifying parties that may be involved
in terrorism or money laundering. anti-money-laundering laws
outside of the united states contain some similar provisions.
the increased obligations of financial institutions, including
goldman sachs, to identify their customers, watch for and report
suspicious transactions, respond to requests for information by
regulatory authorities and law enforcement agencies, and share
information with other financial institutions, requires the
implementation and maintenance of internal practices, procedures
and controls which have increased, and may continue to increase,
our costs and may subject us to liability.
in addition, our power generation business is
subject to extensive and evolving energy, environmental and
other governmental laws and regulations, as discussed under
certain factors that may affect our
business investments in the power generation
industry.
regulation
outside of the united states
goldman sachs is an active participant in the
international fixed income and equities markets. many of our
affiliates that participate in these markets are subject to
comprehensive regulations that include some form of capital
adequacy rules and other customer protection rules. goldman
sachs provides investment services in and from the united
kingdom under the regulation of the financial services authority
(fsa). various goldman sachs entities are regulated by the
banking and regulatory authorities of the other european
countries in which goldman sachs operates, including, among
others, the federal financial supervisory authority
table of contents
(bafin) and the bundesbank in germany, the
autorit des marchs financiers and banque de france
in france, the commissione nazionale per le societ e la
borsa (consob)in italy and the swiss federal banking
commission. goldman sachs entities are also regulated by the
european securities, derivatives and commodities exchanges of
which they are members. the investment services that are subject
to oversight by the fsa and other european regulators are
regulated in accordance with european union directives
requiring, among other things, compliance with certain capital
adequacy standards, customer protection requirements and conduct
of business rules. these standards, requirements and rules are
similarly implemented, under the same directives, throughout the
european union and are broadly comparable in scope and purpose
to the regulatory capital and customer protection requirements
imposed under the sec and cftc rules. european union directives
also permit local regulation in each jurisdiction, including
those in which we operate, to be more restrictive than the
requirements of such directives and these local requirements can
result in certain competitive disadvantages to goldman sachs.
in addition, the financial services agency, the
tokyo stock exchange, the osaka securities exchange, the tokyo
international financial futures exchange and the japan
securities dealers association in japan, the securities and
futures commission in hong kong, and the monetary authority of
singapore, among others, regulate various of our subsidiaries in
asia and also have capital standards and other requirements
comparable to the rules of the sec.
the european financial groups directive
(directive 2002/87/ec of the european parliament and of the
council) introduced certain changes to the way in which
financial conglomerates and other financial services
organizations operating in europe will be regulated, with the
changes to be implemented by member states for fiscal years
beginning in 2005. these changes may affect the regulation of
our european subsidiaries, and may have the effect of causing
activities that are currently conducted in unregulated entities
to become subject to certain forms of regulation, including
consolidated supervision and capital adequacy requirements.
the sec proposed new rules in october 2003 that
would establish voluntary regulatory frameworks for the
supervision of broker-dealers and their affiliates on a
consolidated basis and, to comply with the requirements of the
european financial groups directive, it is possible that we may
elect to become subject to such consolidated supervision by the
sec. if we become subject to such a framework, we will be
required to comply with stringent rules regarding, among others,
our group-wide internal risk management control system,
recordkeeping and periodic reporting, including reporting of
consolidated computations of allowable capital and risk
allowances consistent with the standards adopted by the basel
committee on banking supervision, which standards are currently
being revised.
we continue to work with our regulators to
understand the impact of these changes. we cannot fully predict
the practical effect that any of these actions by the european
union, the sec and the basel committee will have on our
business. however, these rules, to the extent they ultimately
apply to our businesses, may impose additional costs, affect our
decisions with respect to raising and using capital and
adversely affect our business.
regulations
applicable in and outside the united states
the u.s. and non-u.s.government agencies,
regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations, as well as
state securities commissions in the united states, are empowered
to conduct administrative proceedings that can result in
censure, fine, the issuance of cease-and-desist orders, or the
suspension or expulsion of a broker-dealer or its directors,
officers or employees. occasionally, our subsidiaries have been
subject to investigations and proceedings, and sanctions have
been imposed for infractions of various regulations relating to
our activities, none of which has had a material adverse effect
on us or our businesses.
table of contents
compliance with the net capital requirements of
u.s. and non-u.s.regulators could limit those operations
of our subsidiaries that require the intensive use of capital,
such as underwriting and trading activities, specialist
activities and the financing of customer account balances, and
also could restrict our ability to withdraw capital from our
regulated subsidiaries, which in turn could limit our ability to
repay debt or pay dividends on our common stock.
our specialist businesses are subject to
extensive regulation by a number of securities exchanges. the
rules of these exchanges generally require our specialists to
maintain orderly markets in the securities in which they are
specialists. these requirements, in turn, may require us to
commit significant amounts of capital to our specialist
businesses. recently, certain nyse specialist firms, including
our specialist unit, agreed in principle to a global settlement
with the sec and the nyse to resolve investigations into their
activities as nyse specialists during the years 1999 through
2003. we discuss this global settlement in principle and the
related investigations under legal proceedings
specialist matters in item3 of this annual report on
form10-k and under certain factors that
may affect our business legal and regulatory.
in addition, changes to the rules and regulations governing
stock markets and the conduct of specialists on those markets,
including the nyse, may impose additional costs on us, adversely
affect our specialist businesses or impair the value of our
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets relating to those
businesses.
the research areas of investment banks have been
and remain the subject of increased regulatory scrutiny. in 2002
and 2003, acting in part pursuant to a mandate contained in the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, the sec, the nyse and the nasd
adopted rules imposing heightened restrictions on the
interaction between equity research analysts and investment
banking personnel at member securities firms. various non-u.s.
jurisdictions have also changed or proposed to change their
requirements with respect to research. in addition, in 2003,
several leading securities firms operating in the united states,
including goldman, sachs & co., reached a settlement with
certain federal and state securities regulators and
self-regulatory organizations to resolve investigations into
their equity research analysts alleged conflicts of
interest pursuant to which the firms have been subject to
certain restrictions and undertakings. as part of this
settlement, restrictions have been imposed on the interaction
between research and investment banking departments and these
securities firms are required to fund the provision of
independent research to their customers.
in connection with the research settlement, the
firm has also subscribed to a voluntary initiative imposing
restrictions on the allocation of shares in initial public
offerings to executives and directors of public companies. the
fsa in the united kingdom has recently imposed new requirements
on the conduct of the allocation process in equity and fixed
income securities offerings (including initial public offerings
and secondary distributions). we cannot fully predict the
practical effect that such restrictions or measures will have on
our business, and the sec, nyse and nasd and non-u.s. regulators
such as the fsa may adopt additional and more stringent rules
with respect to offering procedures and the management of
conflicts of interest in the future.
certain factors that may affect our
business
market
conditions
as an investment banking, securities and
investment management firm, our businesses are materially
affected by conditions in the financial markets and economic
conditions generally, both in the united states and elsewhere
around the world. although business conditions improved somewhat
in the second half of 2003, in recent years we have been
operating in a very challenging environment: the number and size
of equity underwritings and mergers and acquisitions
transactions have declined significantly; the equities markets
in the united states and elsewhere have been volatile and are at
levels below their record highs; investors have
table of contents
exhibited concerns over the integrity of the
financial markets as a result of highly publicized financial
scandals; and the attention of management of many clients has
been diverted from capital-raising transactions and acquisitions
and dispositions in part as a result of corporate governance
regulations, such as the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, and related
uncertainty in capital markets.
adverse or uncertain economic and market
conditions have in the past adversely affected, and may in the
future adversely affect, our business and profitability in many
ways, including the following:
we have been committing increasing amounts of
capital in many of our businesses and generally maintain large
trading, specialist and investment positions. market
fluctuations and volatility may adversely affect the value of
those positions, including our interest rate and credit
products, currency, commodity and equity positions and our
merchant banking investments, or may reduce our willingness to
enter into some new transactions.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of
equity underwritings and mergers and acquisitions may continue
to have an adverse effect on our revenues and, because we may be
unable to reduce expenses correspondingly, our profit margins.
in particular, because a significant portion of our investment
banking revenues are derived from our participation in large
transactions, a decrease in the number of large transactions due
to uncertain or unfavorable market conditions may adversely
affect our investment banking business.
pricing and other competitive pressures have
continued, even as the volume and number of investment banking
transactions have started to increase. these pressures have been
particularly intense in the context of large block trades. in
addition, the trend (particularly in the equity underwriting
business) toward multiple book runners and co-managers handling
transactions, where previously there would have been a single
book runner, may adversely affect our business and reduce our
revenues.
reductions in the level of the equities markets
also tend to reduce the value of our clients portfolios,
which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for managing assets.
even in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or
market conditions, investment performance by our asset
management business below the performance of benchmarks or
competitors could result in a decline in assets under management
and therefore in the incentive and management fees we receive.
concentration of risk in the past has increased
the losses that we have incurred in our market-making,
proprietary trading, block trading, merchant banking,
underwriting and lending businesses and may continue to do so in
the future. this risk may increase to the extent we expand our
proprietary trading businesses or commit capital to facilitate
primarily client-driven business. for example, block trades are
increasingly being effected without an opportunity for goldman
sachs to pre-market the transaction, which increases the risk
goldman sachs may be unable to resell the purchased securities
at favorable prices. moreover, because of concentration of risk,
we may suffer losses even when economic and market conditions
are generally favorable for others in the industry.
we have been operating in a low or declining
interest rate market for the past several years. increasing or
high interest rates and/or widening credit spreads, especially
if such changes are rapid, may create a less favorable
environment for certain of our businesses.
the volume of transactions that we execute for
our customers and as a specialist may decline, which would
reduce the revenues we receive from commissions and spreads. in
our specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock exchange
rules to maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing
shares in a declining market. this may result in trading losses
and an increased need for liquidity. further weakness in global
equities
table of contents
markets, the trading of securities in multiple
markets and on multiple exchanges and the ongoing nyse and sec
investigations into the stock specialist business could
adversely impact our trading businesses and impair the value of
our goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
risk management, liquidity and
credit
if any of the variety of instruments and
strategies we utilize to hedge or otherwise manage our exposure
to various types of risk are not effective, we may incur losses.
our hedging strategies and other risk management techniques may
not be fully effective in mitigating our risk exposure in all
market environments or against all types of risk.
liquidity (i.e., ready access to funds) is
essential to our businesses. our liquidity could be impaired by
an inability to access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an
inability to access funds from our subsidiaries, or an inability
to sell assets. this situation may arise due to circumstances
that we may be unable to control, such as a general market
disruption or an operational problem that affects third parties
or us. further, our ability to sell assets may be impaired if
other market participants are seeking to sell similar assets at
the same time.
our credit ratings are important to our
liquidity. a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely
affect our liquidity and competitive position, increase our
borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or
trigger our obligations under certain bilateral provisions in
some of our trading and collateralized financing contracts.
under such provisions, counterparties could be permitted to
terminate contracts with goldman sachs or require us to post
additional collateral. termination of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts could cause us to sustain
losses and impair our liquidity by requiring us to find other
sources of financing or to make significant cash payments or
securities movements.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is a holding
company and, therefore, it depends on dividends, distributions
and other payments from its subsidiaries to fund dividend
payments and to fund all payments on its obligations, including
debt obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including goldman,
sachs & co., are subject to laws that authorize regulatory
bodies to block or reduce the flow of funds from those
subsidiaries to the goldman sachs group, inc. regulatory action
of that kind could impede access to funds that the goldman sachs
group, inc. needs to make payments on obligations, including
debt obligations, or dividend payments. in addition, to the
extent that the goldman sachs group, inc. (or any other entity)
holds equity interests in the firms regulated or
unregulated subsidiaries, its rights as an equity holder to the
assets of such subsidiaries are subject to the satisfaction of
the claims of the creditors of such subsidiaries.
we are exposed to the risk that third parties
that owe us money, securities or other assets will not perform
their obligations. these parties may default on their
obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity,
operational failure or other reasons. the amount and duration of
our credit exposures have been increasing over the past several
years, as has the breadth of the entities to which we have
credit exposures. as a clearing member firm, we finance our
customer positions and we could be held responsible for the
defaults or misconduct of our customers. in addition, we have
experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure to extend
credit and price more aggressively the credit risks we take. in
particular, corporate clients sometimes seek to require credit
commitments from us in connection with investment banking and
other assignments. although we regularly review credit exposures
to specific clients and counterparties and to specific
industries, countries and regions that we believe may present
credit concerns, default risk may arise from events or
circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee. in
addition, concerns about, or a default by, one institution could
lead to significant liquidity problems, losses or defaults by
other institutions, which in turn could adversely affect goldman
sachs.
table of contents
operations
and infrastructure
our businesses are highly dependent on our
ability to process, on a daily basis, a large number of
transactions across numerous and diverse markets in many
currencies, and the transactions we process have become
increasingly complex. if any of our financial, accounting or
other data processing systems do not operate properly or are
disabled or if there are other shortcomings or failures in our
internal processes, people or systems, we could suffer an
impairment to our liquidity, financial loss, a disruption of our
businesses, liability to clients, regulatory intervention or
reputational damage. these systems may fail to operate properly
or become disabled as a result of events that are wholly or
partially beyond our control, including a disruption of
electrical or communications services or our inability to occupy
one or more of our buildings. the inability of our systems to
accommodate an increasing volume of transactions could also
constrain our ability to expand our businesses.
we also face the risk of operational failure or
termination of any of the clearing agents, exchanges, clearing
houses or other financial intermediaries we use to facilitate
our securities transactions. any such failure or termination
could adversely affect our ability to effect transactions and
manage our exposure to risk.
in addition, despite the contingency plans we
have in place, our ability to conduct business may be adversely
impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that supports our
businesses and the communities in which they are located. this
may include a disruption involving electrical, communications,
transportation or other services used by goldman sachs or third
parties with which we conduct business. these disruptions may
occur, for example, as a result of events that affect only the
buildings of goldman sachs or such third parties, or as a result
of events with a broader impact on the cities where those
buildings are located. nearly all of our employees in our
primary locations, including new york, london, frankfurt, hong
kong and tokyo, work in close proximity to each other, in one or
more buildings. if a disruption occurs in one location and our
employees in that location are unable to communicate with or
travel to other locations, our ability to service and interact
with our clients may suffer and we may not be able to
successfully implement contingency plans that depend on
communication or travel.
our operations rely on the secure processing,
storage and transmission of confidential and other information
in our computer systems and networks. although we take
protective measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances
warrant, our computer systems, software and networks may be
vulnerable to unauthorized access, computer viruses or other
malicious code, and other events that could have a security
impact. if one or more of such events occur, this potentially
could jeopardize our or our clients or
counterparties confidential and other information
processed and stored in, and transmitted through, our computer
systems and networks, or otherwise cause interruptions or
malfunctions in our, our clients, our counterparties
or third parties operations. we may be required to expend
significant additional resources to modify our protective
measures or to investigate and remediate vulnerabilities or
other exposures, and we may be subject to litigation and
financial losses that are either not insured against or not
fully covered through any insurance maintained by us.
legal
and regulatory
substantial legal liability or significant
regulatory action against goldman sachs could have material
adverse financial effects or cause significant reputational harm
to goldman sachs, which in turn could seriously harm our
business prospects. we face significant legal risks in our
businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of damages
claimed in litigation and regulatory proceedings against
financial intermediaries have been increasing.
goldman sachs, as a participant in the financial
services industry, is subject to extensive regulation in
jurisdictions around the world. we face the risk of significant
intervention by regulatory authorities in all jurisdictions in
which we conduct business. among other things, we
table of contents
could be fined, prohibited from engaging in some
of our business activities or subject to limitations or
conditions on our business activities. new laws or regulations
or changes in enforcement of existing laws or regulations
applicable to our clients may also adversely affect our
businesses.
as discussed under regulation above,
the research areas of investment banks have been and remain the
subject of increased regulatory scrutiny which has led to
increased restrictions on the interaction between equity
research analysts and investment banking personnel at securities
firms. various non-u.s. jurisdictions have also changed or
proposed changing their requirements with respect to research
matters. in addition, several leading securities firms in the
united states, including goldman, sachs& co., have
reached a global settlement with certain federal and state
securities regulators and self-regulatory organizations to
resolve investigations into equity research analysts
alleged conflicts of interest pursuant to which the firms have
been subject to certain restrictions and undertakings. certain
of these requirements and restrictions may impose costs and
limitations on the conduct of our businesses. current or future
civil lawsuits implicating investment research analysts
conflicts of interest were not settled as part of the global
settlement. goldman sachs total potential liability in
respect of such civil cases cannot be reasonably estimated but
could be material to results of operations in a given period.
the global settlement also did not resolve potential charges
involving individual employees, including supervisors, and
regulatory investigations are continuing.
in addition, the sec and other federal and state
regulators have increased their scrutiny of complex, structured
finance transactions and have brought enforcement actions
against a number of financial institutions in connection with
such transactions. in some of the enforcement actions, clients
of the financial institutions allegedly engaged in accounting,
disclosure or other violations of the securities laws, and the
financial institutions allegedly facilitated these improprieties
by entering into transactions with the clients. we seek to
create innovative solutions to address our clients needs,
and we have entered into, and continue to enter into, structured
transactions with clients. while we have policies and procedures
in place that are intended to ensure that the structured
transactions we enter into comply with applicable laws and
regulations, it is possible that certain of these transactions
could give rise to litigation or enforcement actions. it is
possible that the heightened regulatory scrutiny of, and
litigation in connection with, structured finance transactions
will make our clients less willing to enter into these
transactions, and will adversely affect our business in this
area.
recently, there have been industry-wide and other
investigations by federal and state authorities concerning
market timing, late trading and other activities involving
mutual funds. federal and state authorities have reportedly made
informational requests regarding trading practices broadly
across all of the major fund companies and broker-dealers.
goldman sachs has received requests for information and has been
fully cooperating with those authorities. while we believe that
we have in place reasonable measures to detect and deter
disruptive and abusive trading practices and comply with
applicable legal and regulatory requirements, we cannot predict
the course that the existing inquiries and areas of focus may
take or the impact that any new laws or regulations governing
mutual funds may have on our business.
the nyse and the sec have also been conducting
investigations into certain trading practices of nyse specialist
firms, including our specialist unit. in february 2004, certain
of these nyse specialist firms, including our specialist unit,
agreed in principle to a global settlement with the sec and the
nyse to resolve charges that the firms violated certain federal
securities laws and nyse rules in connection with their
activities as nyse specialists during the years 1999 through
2003. the global settlement, if ultimately consummated, would
involve, among others, restitution and penalties, a censure,
cease and desist order and an undetermined form of undertaking.
the settlement would not resolve the related civil actions
discussed under legal proceedings specialist
matters in item3 of this annual report on
form10-k, or potential regulatory charges against
individuals. we cannot predict the impact that the final global
table of contents
settlement, including any restrictions that may
be imposed on the activities of our specialist unit, or new laws
or regulations governing specialists may have on our specialist
businesses. depending on the ultimate outcome of these
investigations and of the global settlement and any related
developments, our specialist businesses may be adversely
affected and the value of our goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets related to these businesses may be impaired.
there have been a number of highly publicized
cases involving fraud or other misconduct by employees in the
financial services industry in recent years, and we run the risk
that employee misconduct could occur. it is not always possible
to deter or prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we
take to prevent and detect this activity may not be effective in
all cases.
regulatory
impact on capital markets
financial scandals in recent years have led to
insecurity and uncertainty in the financial markets and
contributed to declines in capital markets. in response to these
scandals, the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 and the rules of the
sec, the nyse and nasdaq necessitate significant changes to
corporate governance and public disclosure. these provisions
generally apply to companies with securities listed on u.s.
securities exchanges, and some provisions apply to non-u.s.
issuers with securities traded on u.s. securities exchanges. to
the extent that private companies, in order to avoid becoming
subject to these new requirements, decide to forgo initial
public offerings, our equity underwriting business may be
adversely affected and our ability to successfully exit some of
our merchant banking investments may be adversely affected.
similarly, it is possible that the imposition of those
provisions on non-u.s. issuers may make these issuers less
likely to list their securities in the united states or
undertake merger or acquisition transactions that would result
in their securities being listed in the united states. if these
measures result in less activity by non-u.s. issuers in the
united states, the u.s. capital markets and our investment
banking business may be adversely affected.
the provisions of sarbanes-oxley and the nyse and
nasdaq corporate governance rules, coupled with existing
economic uncertainty, have diverted many companies
attention away from capital market transactions, including
securities offerings and acquisition and disposition
transactions. it is unclear how long this uncertainty and
diversion will last, but so long as it does, it will have a
negative impact on our investment banking business. in addition,
adopted or proposed accounting and disclosure changes, including
those relating to off-balance-sheet entities, may have an
adverse effect on our financial advisory and other revenues
relating to structured finance transactions.
competition
and conflicts of interest
the financial services industry and
all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and
we expect them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number
of factors, including transaction execution, our products and
services, innovation, reputation and price. we believe that we
may experience pricing pressures in the future as some of our
competitors seek to increase market share by reducing prices. in
recent years, there has been substantial consolidation and
convergence among companies in the financial services industry.
u.s. federal legislation, which significantly expanded the
activities permissible for firms affiliated with a u.s. bank,
may accelerate this consolidation and further increase
competition. this trend toward consolidation and convergence has
significantly increased the capital base and geographic reach of
our competitors. this trend has also hastened the globalization
of the securities and other financial services markets. as a
result, we have had to commit capital to support our
international operations and to execute large global
transactions.
our reputation is one of our most important
assets. as we have expanded the scope of our business and our
client base, we increasingly have to address conflicts of
interest. we have extensive procedures and controls that are
designed to address these issues. however,
table of contents
appropriately dealing with conflicts of interest
is complex and difficult and our reputation could be damaged if
we fail, or appear to fail, to deal appropriately with conflicts
of interest.
technology is fundamental to our overall business
strategy. the growth of the internet and electronic trading, and
the introduction of new technologies, is changing our business
and presenting us with new challenges. securities, futures and
options transactions are now being conducted through the
internet and other alternative, non-traditional trading systems,
and it appears that the trend toward alternative trading systems
will continue and probably accelerate. some of these alternative
trading systems compete with our trading businesses, including
our specialist businesses. a dramatic increase in electronic
trading may adversely affect our commission and trading
revenues, including our market-making revenues, reduce our
participation in the trading markets and associated access to
market information and lead to the creation of new and stronger
competitors. these developments may also require us to make
additional investments in technology or trading systems and may
impair the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets.
recruiting
and employee retention
our performance is largely dependent on the
talents and efforts of highly skilled individuals. competition
in the financial services industry for qualified employees is
intense. in addition, competition with businesses outside the
financial services industry for the most highly skilled
individuals has become more intense as the economic downturn has
lowered average compensation within the financial services
industry significantly. our continued ability to compete
effectively in our businesses depends on our ability to attract
new employees and to retain and motivate our existing employees.
changes in the business environment may cause us to move
employees from one business to another or to reduce the number
of employees in certain businesses; this may cause temporary
disruptions as our employees adapt to new roles and may reduce
our ability to take advantage of improvements in the business
environment. in addition, current and future laws (including
laws relating to immigration and outsourcing) may restrict our
ability to move responsibilities or personnel from one
jurisdiction to another. this may impact our ability to take
advantage of business opportunities or potential efficiencies.
acquisitions
we expect the growth of our core businesses to
come through both internal expansion and acquisitions. to the
extent we make acquisitions or enter into combinations, we face
numerous risks and uncertainties combining the businesses and
systems, including the need to combine accounting and data
processing systems and management controls and to integrate
relationships with customers and business partners. we may not
be able to meet these operational and business challenges.
investments
in the power generation industry
we own equity interests in companies engaged in
electric power generation, principally east coast power l.l.c.
and cogentrix energy, inc. as a result of these interests and
future investments that we may make in the power generation
industry, we face numerous risks and uncertainties.
we are a relatively new entrant to the power
generation business. as a result, we have less expertise and
experience in owning power generation businesses than many of
our competitors. our management has limited experience in owning
and managing companies engaged in power generation and we may
not be successful in owning and managing our power generation
facilities. in particular, in the future we may be unable to
attract and retain qualified independent contractors and
employees.
table of contents
the operation of power generation facilities may
be disrupted. the continued operation of power generation
facilities involves many risks, including the breakdown or
failure of power generation equipment, transmission lines or
other equipment or processes, and performance below expected
levels of output or efficiency. although our facilities contain
various redundancies and back-up mechanisms, a breakdown or
failure may prevent the affected facilities from performing
under applicable power sales agreements or otherwise operating
as planned.
we are subject to extensive and evolving energy,
environmental and other governmental laws and regulations. in
the past several years, intensified scrutiny of the energy
market by federal, state and local authorities and the public
has resulted in increased regulatory and legal proceedings
involving energy companies, including those engaged in power
generation. we may incur substantial costs in complying with
current or future laws and regulations relating to power
generation, and our overall businesses and reputation may be
adversely affected by legal and regulatory proceedings arising
out of our power generation business. in particular, our power
generation operations are subject to extensive federal, state
and local environmental laws and regulations relating to, among
others, air quality, water quality, waste management, natural
resources, site remediation, and health and safety. compliance
with these environmental laws and regulations may require us to
commit significant capital toward environmental monitoring,
installation of pollution control equipment, payment of emission
fees, and application for, and holding of, permits at our
facilities. our failure to comply with environmental laws or
regulations may result in the assessment of severe civil or
criminal liabilities against us and the need to expend
substantial additional capital for compliance or remediation.
insurance covering some of these environmental risks with
respect to our power generation facilities may not be available
and the proceeds from insurance recovery, if any, may not be
adequate to cover our liabilities in a particular incident. as a
result, our financial condition and results of operations may be
adversely affected by an environmental problem at one of our
facilities.
we are subject to the risk of unforeseen or
catastrophic events, including terrorist attacks and other
hostile or catastrophic events. we may not have insurance
against these risks and, if we do have insurance, the insurance
proceeds may be inadequate to cover our losses.
international
operations
in conducting our businesses and maintaining and
supporting our operations around the world, we are subject to
political, economic, legal, operational and other risks that are
inherent in operating in many countries, including risks of
possible nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital
controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental
actions, as well as the outbreak of hostilities. in many
countries, the laws and regulations applicable to the securities
and financial services industries are uncertain and evolving,
and it may be difficult for us to determine the exact
requirements of local laws in every market. our inability to
remain in compliance with local laws in a particular foreign
market could have a significant and negative effect not only on
our businesses in that market but also on our reputation
generally. we are also subject to the risk that transactions we
structure might not be legally enforceable in all cases.
in the last several years, various emerging
market countries have experienced severe economic and financial
disruptions, including significant devaluations of their
currencies, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or
negative growth rates in their economies. the possible effects
of these conditions include an adverse impact on our businesses
and increased volatility in financial markets generally.
shares
available for sale
a significant amount of our outstanding shares of
common stock are held by our former limited partners. a
significant number of these shares are subject to restrictions
on transfer that lapse in may 2004. in addition, significant
amounts of shares are delivered to our employees as
table of contents
compensation from time to time, and these shares
will generally be freely saleable upon delivery. future sales of
substantial amounts of common stock, or the perception that such
sales may occur, could adversely affect the prevailing market
price of our common stock.
cautionary statement pursuant to the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by reference in
this annual report on form10-k, and from time to time our
management may make, statements that may constitute
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the
safe harbor provisions of the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are not
historical facts but instead represent only our belief regarding
future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently
uncertain and outside of our control. these statements include
statements other than historical information or statements of
current condition and may relate to our future plans and
objectives and results, among other things, and may also include
our belief regarding the effect of various legal proceedings, as
set forth under legal proceedings in parti,
item3 of this annual report on form10-k, as well as
statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our
liquidity policies, statements about trends in our businesses
and statements about our investment banking transaction backlog,
incorporated by reference in partii, item7 of this
annual report on form10-k. it is possible that our actual
results may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated
results indicated in these forward-looking statements. important
factors that could cause actual results to differ from those in
the forward-looking statements include, among others, those
discussed below and under certain factors that
may affect our business.
in the case of statements about our investment
banking transaction backlog, such statements are subject to the
risk that the terms of these transactions may be modified or
that they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net
revenues that we expect to earn from these transactions may
differ, possibly materially, from those currently expected.
important factors that could result in a modification of the
terms of a transaction or a transaction not being completed
include, in the case of underwriting transactions, a decline in
general economic conditions, outbreak of hostilities, volatility
in the securities markets generally or an adverse development
with respect to the issuer of the securities and, in the case of
financial advisory transactions, a decline in the securities
markets, an adverse development with respect to a party to the
transaction or a failure to obtain a required regulatory
approval.
item2.properties
our principal executive offices are located at
85broad street, new york, new york, and comprise
approximately 969,000 square feet of leased space, pursuant to a
lease agreement expiring in june 2008 (with options to renew for
up to 20 additional years). we also occupy over 680,000 square
feet at one new york plaza under lease agreements expiring
primarily in 2009 (with options to renew for up to five
additional years), and we lease space at various other locations
in the new york metropolitan area. in total, we lease over
5.1million square feet in the new york metropolitan area,
including approximately 1million square feet under leases
expiring in 2004. we have additional offices in the united
states and elsewhere in the americas. together, these offices
comprise approximately 2million square feet of leased
space.
we own approximately four acres of land in jersey
city, new jersey, a portion of which we are using for the
construction of an office building. this project is being
developed to complement our offices in lower manhattan. the
initial phase of development is expected to include
approximately 1.3million square feet of office space, with
occupancy planned in phases beginning in april 2004.
we also have offices in europe, asia and africa.
in europe, we have offices that total approximately
1.9million square feet. our european headquarters is
located in london at peterborough court, pursuant to a lease
expiring in 2016 that covers a property in which we also
table of contents
have a 50% ownership interest. in total, we lease
approximately 1.5million square feet in london through
various leases, relating to various properties.
in asia, we have offices that total approximately
1.3million square feet. our headquarters in this region
are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in hong
kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently lease
290,918 square feet through a lease that expires in 2018 and
96,961 square feet through a lease that expires in 2005 at the
roppongi hills mori tower. in hong kong, we currently lease
approximately 300,000 square feet under lease agreements, the
majority of which expire in fiscal 2012.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated
with office space held in excess of our current requirements.
this excess space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as
incurred, is being held for potential growth or to replace
currently occupied space that we may exit in the future. we
continually evaluate our current and future space capacity in
relation to current and projected future staffing levels. in
2003, we reduced our global office space and incurred exit costs
of $153million. we may incur additional exit costs in 2004
and thereafter to the extent we (i)further reduce our
capacity or (ii)commit to new properties in the locations
in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of existing space
that had been held for potential growth. such exit costs may be
material to our results of operations in a given period.
item3.legal
proceedings
we are involved in a number of judicial,
regulatory and arbitration proceedings (including those
described below) concerning matters arising in connection with
the conduct of our businesses. we believe, based on currently
available information, that the results of such proceedings, in
the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our
financial condition, but might be material to our operating
results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the
operating results for such period.
ipo
process matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs
& co. are among the numerous financial services companies
that have been named as defendants in a variety of lawsuits
alleging improprieties in the process by which those companies
participated in the underwriting of public offerings in recent
years.
certain purported class actions have been brought
in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york
by purchasers of securities in public offerings, who claim that
the defendants engaged in conspiracies in violation of federal
antitrust laws in connection with these offerings. the
plaintiffs in each instance seek treble damages as well as
injunctive relief. one of the actions, which was commenced on
august21, 1998, alleges that the defendants have conspired
to discourage or restrict the resale of securities for a period
after the offerings, including by imposing penalty
bids. defendants moved to dismiss the complaint in
november 1998. the plaintiffs amended their complaint in
february 1999, modifying their claims in various ways, including
limiting the proposed class to retail purchasers of public
offerings. the defendants moved to dismiss the amended complaint
on may7, 1999, the motion was granted by a decision dated
december7, 2000, and the plaintiffs motion for
reconsideration of that decision was denied by an order dated
january22, 2001. plaintiffs appealed, and by a decision
dated december 20, 2002, the u.s. court of appeals for the
second circuit affirmed the dismissal of their complaint. the
plaintiffs filed a petition for review by the u.s. supreme court
of the ruling by the u.s. court of appeals for the second
circuit affirming dismissal of the complaint, and on
october6, 2003, the u.s. supreme court entered an order
declining to hear plaintiffs appeal from the ruling.
several other actions were commenced, beginning
on november3, 1998 by purchasers of securities in public
offerings as well as certain purported issuers of such
offerings, that allege
table of contents
that the defendants, many of whom are also named
in the other action discussed above, have conspired to fix at 7%
the discount that underwriting syndicates receive from issuers
of shares in certain offerings. on march15, 1999, the
purchaser plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended complaint. the
defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint
on april29, 1999. on february9, 2001, the federal
district court granted with prejudice the defendants
motion to dismiss the claims asserted by the purchasers of
securities on the ground that they lacked antitrust standing.
the plaintiffs in those actions appealed, and by a decision
dated december13, 2002, the u.s. court of appeals for the
second circuit vacated the dismissal on the ground that the
lower court had engaged in improper fact-finding on the motion
and remanded for consideration of other potential bases for
dismissal. on september28, 2001, the defendants moved to
dismiss the complaints filed by the issuer plaintiffs on statute
of limitations grounds. on september25, 2002, the federal
district court denied the underwriter defendants motion to
dismiss. on march26, 2003, defendants moved to dismiss the
claims asserted by both the issuers and the purchasers of
securities on preemption grounds, but the motion was denied on
june27, 2003. on june24, 2003, defendants filed a
motion to dismiss the claims asserted by the purchasers of
securities on standing grounds.
goldman, sachs & co. is one of numerous
financial services firms that have been named as defendants in
purported class actions filed beginning on march9, 2001 in
the u.s.district court for the southern district of new
york by purchasers of securities in public offerings, who claim
that the defendants engaged in a conspiracy to tie
allocations in certain offerings to higher customer brokerage
commission rates as well as purchase orders in the aftermarket,
in violation of federal antitrust laws. the plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint on january2, 2002. the
defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint
on may24, 2002, the motion was granted by a decision dated
november3, 2003, and the plaintiffs have moved for
reconsideration. the plaintiffs have also filed notices of
appeal. goldman, sachs& co. has also, together with
other underwriters in certain offerings as well as the issuers
and certain of their officers and directors, been named as a
defendant in a number of related lawsuits alleging, among other
things, that the prospectuses for the offerings violated the
federal securities laws by failing to disclose the existence of
the alleged tying arrangements. on july1,
2002, the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss those
complaints. by an opinion and order dated february19,
2003, the federal district court denied the motion to dismiss in
all material respects relating to the underwriter defendants. on
june26, 2003, plaintiffs announced that they had entered
into a memorandum of understanding regarding a proposed
settlement of their claims against the issuer defendants and the
issuers present or former officers and directors named in
the lawsuits.
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in an action commenced on may15, 2002 in new
york supreme court, new york county, by an official committee of
unsecured creditors on behalf of etoys, inc., alleging that the
firm intentionally underpriced etoys, inc.s initial public
offering. the action seeks, among other things, consequential
damages resulting from the alleged lower amount of offering
proceeds. on august1, 2002, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the complaint. on may2, 2003, the court
granted goldman, sachs& co.s motion to dismiss
as to five of the claims; plaintiff has appealed from the
dismissal of the five claims, and goldman, sachs& co.
has appealed from the denial of its motion as to the remaining
claim.
the goldman sachs group, inc. has also been named
as a defendant in a purported shareholder derivative action
commenced in delaware court of chancery on october23, 2002
alleging that certain officers and directors of ebay, inc. (who
are also defendants), aided and abetted by the goldman sachs
group, inc., breached their fiduciary duties and usurped
corporate opportunities by receiving allocations of initial
public offerings as customers of the
table of contents
goldman sachs group, inc. defendants moved to
dismiss the complaint on december23, 2002, but the motions
were denied by a decision dated january23, 2004.
the goldman sachs group, inc. has, together with
other underwriters in certain offerings, received subpoenas and
requests for documents and information from various governmental
agencies and the u.s. house of representatives committee on
financial services in connection with investigations relating to
the public offering process. in particular, the sec has been
conducting an investigation of certain allocation practices
employed by goldman, sachs& co. and other firms, and
the sec staff has advised that it is considering recommending
disciplinary charges alleging violations of the federal
securities laws. goldman sachs is cooperating with the
investigations.
stock
options litigation
hull trading co. l.l.c. and spear,
leeds& kellogg, l.p., affiliates of the goldman sachs
group, inc., are among the numerous market makers in listed
equity options which have been named as defendants, together
with five national securities exchanges, in a purported class
action brought in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york on behalf of persons who purchased or sold
listed equity options. the consolidated class action complaint,
filed on october4, 1999 (which consolidated certain
previously pending actions and added hull trading co. l.l.c. and
other market makers as defendants), generally alleges that the
defendants engaged in a conspiracy to preclude the multiple
listing of certain equity options on the exchanges and seeks
treble damages under the antitrust laws as well as injunctive
relief. certain of the parties, including hull trading co.
l.l.c. and spear, leeds & kellogg, l.p., have entered into a
stipulation of settlement, subject to court approval, pursuant
to which hull trading co. l.l.c. will be required to pay an
aggregate of $2.48million and spear, leeds&
kellogg, l.p. an aggregate of $19.59million. on
february14, 2001, the federal district court granted the
motion of certain non-settling defendants for summary judgment.
by a decision dated april24, 2001, the district court
ruled that in light of that order granting summary judgment, the
court lacked jurisdiction to entertain the proposed settlement.
plaintiffs appealed, and by a decision dated january9,
2003, the u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit
affirmed the grant of summary judgment, but held that the
decision did not divest the lower court of jurisdiction to
entertain the proposed settlement, and remanded for further
proceedings. by an order dated march17, 2003, the
u.s.court of appeals denied plaintiffs motion for
rehearing or rehearing en banc of the courts
january9, 2003 decision.
amf
securities litigation
the goldman sachs group, l.p., goldman,
sachs& co. and a goldman, sachs& co.
managing director have been named as defendants in several
purported class action lawsuits beginning on april27, 1999
in the u.s.district court for the southern district of new
york brought on behalf of purchasers of stock of amf bowling,
inc. in an underwritten initial public offering of 15,525,000
shares of common stock in november 1997 at a price of $19.50 per
share. defendants are amf bowling, inc., certain officers and
directors of amf bowling, inc. (including the goldman,
sachs& co. managing director), and the lead
underwriters of the offering (including goldman,
sachs& co.). the consolidated amended complaint
alleges violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws and seeks compensatory damages and/or
rescission. the complaint also asserts that the goldman sachs
group, l.p. and the goldman, sachs& co. managing
director are liable as controlling persons of amf bowling, inc.
under the federal securities laws because certain merchant
banking funds managed by goldman sachs owned a majority of the
outstanding common stock of amf bowling, inc. and the managing
director served as its chairman at the time of the offering. on
december22, 1999, the defendants moved to dismiss the
complaint. by a decision dated march22, 2001, the federal
district court denied the motion. by a decision dated
march25, 2002, the federal district court granted
table of contents
plaintiffs motion for class certification
with respect to a class under section11 of the securities
act of 1933, but denied the motion with respect to a subclass
under section12 of the securities act. by a decision dated
may21, 2002, the federal district court reconsidered its
march25, 2002 decision with respect to plaintiffs
motion for class certification and determined that the class
includes persons who purchased amf stock pursuant to the initial
public offering prior to february26, 1999. on
january30, 2004, the defendants moved for summary judgment.
on july30, 2001, amf bowling, inc. filed
for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
iridium
securities litigation
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in two purported class action lawsuits commenced,
beginning on may26, 1999, in the u.s.district court
for the district of columbia brought on behalf of purchasers of
classa common stock of iridium world communications, ltd.
in a january 1999 underwritten secondary offering of 7,500,000
shares of classa common stock at a price of $33.40 per
share, as well as in the secondary market. the defendants in the
actions include iridium, certain of its officers and directors,
motorola, inc. (an investor in iridium) and the lead
underwriters in the offering, including goldman,
sachs& co. on may13, 2002, plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint alleging substantively identical
claims as the original complaints. on july15, 2002, the
defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint.
the complaints in both actions allege violations
of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws
and seek compensatory and/or rescissory damages. goldman,
sachs& co. underwrote 996,500 shares of common stock
and goldman sachs international underwrote 320,625 shares of
common stock for a total offering price of approximately
$44million.
on august13, 1999, iridium world
communications, ltd. filed for protection under the
u.s.bankruptcy laws.
world
online litigation
several lawsuits have been commenced in the
netherlands courts based on alleged misstatements and omissions
relating to the initial public offering of world online in march
2000. goldman sachs and abn amro rothschild served as joint
global coordinators of the offering, which raised approximately
2.9billion.
goldman sachs international underwrote 20,268,846 shares and
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote 6,756,282 shares for a
total offering price of approximately
1.16billion.
on september11, 2000, several dutch world
online shareholders as well as a dutch entity purporting to
represent the interests of certain world online shareholders
commenced a proceeding in amsterdam district court against
abn amro bank n.v., also acting under the name of abn amro
rothschild, alleging misrepresentations and omissions
relating to the initial public offering of world online. the
lawsuit seeks, among other things, the return of the purchase
price of the shares purchased by the plaintiffs or unspecified
damages. by a decision dated may7, 2003, the court held
that the claims failed and dismissed the complaint. the
plaintiffs have appealed.
in march 2001, a dutch shareholders association
initiated legal proceedings in amsterdam district court in
connection with the world online offering. goldman sachs
international is named as a defendant in the writ served on its
dutch attorneys on march14, 2001. the amount of damages
sought is not specified in the writ. goldman sachs international
filed its statement of defense on january16, 2002 and a
rejoinder on january14, 2003. by a decision dated
december17, 2003, the court rejected the claims against
goldman sachs international, but found world online liable in an
amount to be determined.
table of contents
owens
corning bondholder litigation
goldman, sachs & co. has been named as a
defendant in a purported class action filed on april27,
2001 in the u.s.district court for the district of
massachusetts arising from a 1998 offering by owens corning of
two series of its notes. the defendants include certain of owens
cornings officers and directors and the underwriters for
the offering (including goldman, sachs& co., which was
the lead manager in the offering). the offering included a total
of $550million principal amount of notes, of which
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote $275million.
the lawsuit, brought by certain institutional
purchasers of the notes, alleges that the prospectus issued in
connection with the offering was false and misleading in
violation of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws. the plaintiffs are seeking, among other things,
unspecified damages. the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss
the complaint on november14, 2001. by a decision dated
august26, 2002, the federal district court denied the
underwriter defendants motion to dismiss.
on october5, 2000, owens corning filed for
protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
research
independence matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and its affiliates,
together with other financial services firms, have received
requests for information from various governmental agencies in
connection with their review of research independence issues,
including the new york state attorney general, the utah attorney
general, the nyse (which has issued a joint inquiry together
with the sec and nasd), the u.s.attorneys office for
the southern district of new york, and the u.s.house of
representatives committee on financial services. goldman sachs
is cooperating with the requests.
on april28, 2003, a final global settlement
relating to investment research analysts alleged conflicts
of interest and involving various of the leading securities
firms operating in the united states, including the goldman
sachs group, inc.s u.s.broker-dealer subsidiary
goldman, sachs& co., was announced. in that
connection, without admitting or denying the allegations,
findings or conclusions by various federal and state regulators,
goldman sachs entered into consents, agreements and other
definitive documentation with the sec, the nyse, the nasd and
the utah division of securities, to resolve their investigations
of goldman, sachs& co. relating to those matters.
pursuant to the final arrangements, goldman, sachs & co.
agreed, among other things, to (i)pay an aggregate of
$25million as penalties, (ii)pay an aggregate of
$25million as disgorgement of commissions and other
monies, (iii)contribute an aggregate of $50million
over five years to provide independent third-party research to
clients, (iv)contribute an aggregate of $10million
over five years for investor education, (v)adopt various
additional policies, systems, procedures and other safeguards to
ensure further the integrity of goldman, sachs& co.
investment research and (vi)be permanently restrained and
enjoined from violating certain rules of the nyse and the nasd
relating to investment research activities. in connection with
the global settlement, goldman, sachs& co. also
subscribed to a voluntary initiative imposing restrictions on
the allocation of shares in initial public offerings to
executives and directors of public companies. in connection with
effectuation of the global settlement, in a civil action brought
by the sec in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york against the settling firms, including
goldman, sachs& co., on october31, 2003, the
court entered a final judgment imposing the permanent restraint
and injunction. in addition, goldman, sachs& co. has
entered into 50 separate settlement stipulations with states and
certain u.s.territories and expects to reach similar
arrangements with most or all of the remaining states, the
district of columbia and the commonwealth of puerto rico.
current or future civil lawsuits implicating investment research
analysts conflicts of interest were not settled as part of
the global settlement. the global settlement also did not
resolve potential charges involving individual employees,
including supervisors, and regulatory investigations are
continuing.
table of contents
goldman, sachs & co. is one of several
investment firms that have been named as defendants in
substantively identical purported class actions filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
alleging violations of the federal securities laws in connection
with research coverage of certain issuers and seeking
compensatory damages. in one such action, commenced on
august30, 2002 with respect to coverage of covad
communications company, defendants moved to dismiss the action
on december26, 2002, and on february6, 2003, the
motion was granted with leave to replead. plaintiffs filed an
amended complaint on april9, 2003, defendants moved to
dismiss the amended complaint on may8, 2003, the motion
was granted by a decision dated june30, 2003, and
plaintiffs have appealed. in a second action relating to
coverage of allied riser communications corp. commenced on
september12, 2002, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint
on june5, 2003, goldman, sachs& co. moved to
dismiss the amended complaint on august8, 2003, and the
motion was granted by decision dated october20, 2003. in a
third action relating to coverage of rsl communications, inc.
commenced on july5, 2003, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the complaint on january13, 2004.
goldman, sachs& co. is also a defendant in several
actions relating to coverage of exodus communications, inc.
commenced beginning in may 2003.
a purported shareholder derivative action was
filed in new york supreme court, new york county on
june13, 2003 against the goldman sachs group, inc. and its
board of directors alleging that the directors breached their
fiduciary duties in connection with the firms research
activities.
the goldman sachs group, inc., goldman,
sachs& co. and henry m. paulson,jr. have been
named as defendants in a purported class action filed on
july18, 2003 in the u.s.district court for the
district of nevada on behalf of purchasers of the goldman sachs
group, inc. stock from july1, 1999 through may7,
2002. the complaint alleges that defendants breached their
fiduciary duty and violated the federal securities laws in
connection with the firms research activities. the
complaint seeks, among other things, unspecified compensatory
damages and/or rescission.
on june23, 2003, the west virginia attorney
general filed an action against all of the settling securities
firms in west virginia circuit court, marshall county, alleging
violations of the west virginia consumer credit and protection
act in connection with their research activities and seeking
monetary penalties. on august25, 2003, defendants moved to
dismiss the complaint and to disqualify the private law firms
retained by the attorney general in connection with the action.
enron
litigation matters
goldman sachs affiliates are defendants in
certain actions arising relating to enron corp., which filed for
protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on
december2, 2001.
goldman, sachs & co. and co-managing
underwriters have been named as defendants in certain purported
securities class and individual actions commenced beginning on
december14, 2001 in the u.s.district court for the
southern district of texas and california superior court brought
by purchasers of $222,500,000 of exchangeable notes of enron
corp. in august 1999. the notes were mandatorily exchangeable in
2002 into shares of enron oil& gas company held by
enron corp. or their cash equivalent. the complaints also name
as defendants certain past and present officers and directors of
enron corp. and the companys outside accounting firm. the
complaints generally allege violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws and/or state law,
and seek compensatory damages. goldman, sachs& co.
underwrote $111,250,000 principal amount of the notes.
several funds which allegedly sustained
investment losses of approximately $125million in
connection with secondary market purchases of the exchangeable
notes as well as zero coupon convertible notes of enron corp.
commenced an action in the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york on january16, 2002. the
lawsuit names as defendants the
table of contents
underwriters of the august 1999 offering as well
as the companys outside accounting firm, and alleges
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws, fraud and misrepresentation. by an order dated
june24, 2002, the judicial panel on multidistrict
litigation entered an order transferring that action to the
texas federal district court for purposes of coordinated or
consolidated pretrial proceedings with other matters relating to
enron corp. on march20, 2002, goldman, sachs&
co. moved to dismiss the complaint. by a decision dated
december10, 2003, the motion was granted in part and
denied in part; goldman, sachs& co. has sought
clarification and reconsideration of the decision.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman,
sachs& co. have been named as defendants in two
substantively identical purported class actions filed on
june5, 2003 in oregon circuit court, multnomah county, on
behalf of former shareholders of portland general corporation.
the complaints generally allege that defendants breached their
fiduciary duties in connection with portland generals 1997
merger with enron corp., in respect of which goldman,
sachs& co. acted as financial advisor to portland
general. the defendants also include arthur andersen, llp,
andersen-u.s., and certain former officers and directors of
portland general. the complaints seek unspecified compensatory
damages. in july 2003, defendants removed the actions to the
u.s.district court for the district of oregon, and the
actions have been transferred by the judicial panel on
multidistrict litigation to the u.s.district court for the
southern district of texas for coordinated proceedings with
other actions relating to enron corp.
on september26, 2003, enron north america
corp. commenced an adversary proceeding in the
u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york
against goldman sachs capital markets, l.p., the goldman sachs
group, inc. and the goldman sachs group, l.p. seeking to recover
approximately $45million and other unspecified damages in
connection with the early termination in late 2001 of an
agreement for the trading of over-the-counter derivatives
between enron north america corp. and goldman sachs capital
markets, l.p., whose obligations under the agreement were
allegedly guaranteed by the goldman sachs group, inc. and its
predecessor, the goldman sachs group, l.p.
goldman, sachs & co. is among numerous
defendants in two substantively identical actions filed in the
u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york
beginning in november 2003 seeking to recover as fraudulent
transfers and/or preferences payments made by enron corp. in
repurchasing its commercial paper shortly before its bankruptcy
filing. goldman, sachs& co., which had acted as a
commercial paper dealer for enron corp., resold to enron corp.
approximately $30million of commercial paper as principal,
and as an agent facilitated enron corp.s repurchase of
additional commercial paper from various customers who have also
been named as defendants. goldman, sachs & co. moved to
dismiss the complaints on february19, 2004.
exodus
securities litigation
by an amended complaint dated july11, 2002,
goldman, sachs& co. and the other lead underwriters
for the february 2001 offering of 13,000,000 shares of common
stock and $575,000,000 of 51/4% convertible subordinated
notes of exodus communications, inc. were added as defendants in
a purported class action pending in the u.s. district court for
the northern district of california. the complaint, which also
names as defendants certain officers and directors of exodus
communications, inc., alleges violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws and seeks
compensatory damages. on october23, 2002, the underwriter
defendants moved to dismiss the complaint. by a decision dated
august19, 2003, the california district court granted the
defendants motion to dismiss with leave to replead, and
the plaintiffs filed an amended complaint on january15,
2004. goldman, sachs& co. underwrote 5,200,000 shares
of common stock for a total offering price of approximately
$96,200,000, and $230,000,000 principal amount of the notes.
table of contents
on september26, 2001, exodus
communications, inc. filed for protection under the
u.s.bankruptcy laws.
montana
power shareholders litigation
goldman, sachs & co. and the goldman sachs
group, inc. have been named as defendants in a purported class
action commenced against it originally on october1, 2001
in montana district court, second judicial district on behalf of
shareholders of montana power company. the complaint generally
alleges that montana power company violated montana law by
failing to procure shareholder approval of certain corporate
strategies and transactions, that the companys board
breached its fiduciary duties in pursuing those strategies and
transactions, and that goldman, sachs& co. rendered
negligent advice as well as aided and abetted the boards
breaches in its role as financial advisor to the company. the
complaint seeks, among other things, compensatory damages. in
addition to goldman, sachs& co. and the goldman sachs
group, inc., the defendants include montana power company,
certain of its officers and directors, an outside law firm for
the montana power company, and certain companies that purchased
assets from montana power company. the montana state court
denied motions to dismiss by a decision dated august1,
2002. on july18, 2003, following the bankruptcies of
certain defendants in the action, defendants removed the action
to federal court. on august7, 2003, plaintiffs moved to
remand the action to the state court, but on october3,
2003, plaintiffs entered into a stipulation pursuant to which
plaintiffs withdrew their motion to remand with prejudice and
agreed not to contest the jurisdiction of the federal court. by
a stipulation dated december9, 2003, the action has been
stayed until april12, 2004.
worldcom
bondholders litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and other
underwriters of worldcom, inc. bonds have been named as
defendants in certain purported securities class and individual
actions commenced beginning on july19, 2002 alleging that
the offering materials issued in connection with certain
securities offerings were false and misleading. certain of the
lawsuits (some of which were originally filed in various state
courts and removed to federal court) have been transferred by
order of the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation to the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york,
and similar requests for transfer are pending in other actions.
goldman, sachs & co. underwrote $75,000,000 principal amount
of 8% notes due 2006 in a may24, 2000 offering out of a
total principal amount of $1,250,000,000 of the notes. among the
defendants in these actions in addition to the underwriters are
worldcom, inc., certain of worldcom, inc.s present or
former officers and/or directors, and/or worldcom, inc.s
outside accounting firm. each of these actions seeks, among
other things, compensatory damages. the district court denied
the underwriter defendants motion to dismiss by a decision
dated may19, 2003 and granted plaintiffs motion for
class certification by an order dated october24, 2003.
on july21, 2002, worldcom, inc. filed for
protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
global
crossing and asia global crossing securities
litigation
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman,
sachs& co. have been named as defendants in a
consolidated class action lawsuit in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york relating to various
securities offerings by the global crossing, ltd. and asia
global crossing ltd. in which goldman, sachs& co.
acted as an underwriter. the claims had originally been asserted
in separate actions, reflected in an amended complaint filed on
january28, 2003 as to the global crossing, ltd. and in a
complaint filed on november8, 2002 as to asia global
crossing ltd., but the claims were consolidated into a single
amended complaint on august11, 2003. the consolidated
action includes claims relating to the global crossing,
ltd.s concurrent april 2000 offerings of 43million
shares of common stock at $33 per share and 4.6million
shares (including the overallotment) of 63/4% cumulative
preferred stock at
table of contents
$250 per share, as well as asia global crossing
ltd.s october 2000 initial public offering of
68,500,000shares (including the overallotment) of common
stock at a price of $7 per share. goldman, sachs& co.
acted as a co-lead underwriter of both global crossing, ltd.
offerings, underwriting 12.9million shares of common stock
and 1,840,000shares of convertible preferred stock.
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote 20,670,000shares
of common stock in the asia global crossing ltd. offering for a
total offering price of approximately $145million. the
claims assert violations of the disclosure requirements of the
federal securities laws as to such offerings and seek
compensatory and/or rescissory damages. the defendants as to
such claims include certain officers and directors of the global
crossing, ltd. and asia global crossing ltd., the lead and other
underwriters in the offerings, and the companys former
outside auditors. on april21, 2003, the underwriter
defendants as to the global crossing, ltd. offerings moved to
dismiss the claims relating to such offerings; the motion was
denied in significant part by a decision dated december18,
2003. on october10, 2003, the underwriter defendants as to
the asia global crossing ltd. offering moved to dismiss the
claims relating to that offering.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is among numerous
defendants named in an adversary proceeding commenced in the
u.s. bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york on
february6, 2004 by the global crossing, ltd., as the
liquidating trustee of the global crossing liquidating trust.
the complaint names as defendants various former officers and
directors of the global crossing, ltd., the companys
former outside accountants, and various financial services firms
that allegedly performed services for the global crossing, ltd.
from time to time. with respect to its claims against the
financial services defendants, the complaint alleges that such
defendants received fraudulent conveyances or preferential
transfers in respect of their services, and otherwise aided and
abetted misconduct by the former officers and directors thereby
contributing to unspecified damage to the global crossing, ltd.
the global crossing, ltd. filed for protection
under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on january28, 2002,
and asia global crossing corp. filed for such protection on
november17, 2002.
adelphia
communications fraudulent conveyance litigation
goldman, sachs& co. is among numerous
entities named as defendants in an adversary proceeding
commenced in the u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern
district of new york on july6, 2003 by a creditors
committee of adelphia communications, inc. the complaint seeks,
among other things, to recover, as fraudulent conveyances,
payments made by adelphia communications, inc. and its
affiliates to certain brokerage firms, including approximately
$62.9million allegedly paid to goldman, sachs&
co., in respect of margin calls made in the ordinary course of
business on accounts owned by members of the family that
formerly controlled adelphia communications, inc.
specialist
matters
spear, leeds& kellogg specialists llc
and certain affiliates have received requests for information
from the sec and the nyse as part of an industry-wide
investigation relating to the activities of nyse floor
specialists in recent years. goldman sachs is cooperating with
the requests. on february17, 2004, spear, leeds&
kellogg specialists llc and certain other specialist firms
agreed in principle to a global settlement with the sec and the
nyse to resolve charges that the firms violated certain federal
securities laws and nyse rules in connection with their
activities as nyse specialists during the years 1999 through
2003. the settlement, which would involve no admission or denial
of wrongdoing, is subject to, among other things, approval by
the sec and the nyse as well as negotiation of definitive
documentation, and if consummated will involve relief ordered as
part of an administrative proceeding that is expected to include
restitution and penalties for spear, leeds& kellogg
specialists llc totaling approximately $45.5million, a
censure, cease and desist order, and an undetermined form of
undertaking. the settlement would not resolve the related civil
actions discussed below (although a significant
table of contents
portion of the payment is expected to be
committed to restitution for allegedly injured investors), or
potential regulatory charges against individuals.
spear, leeds& kellogg specialists llc,
spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p. and the goldman sachs
group, inc. are among numerous defendants named in purported
class actions brought on behalf of investors beginning in
october 2003 in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york alleging violations of the federal
securities laws in connection with nyse floor specialist
activities. the actions seek unspecified compensatory damages,
restitution, and disgorgement on behalf of purchasers and
sellers of unspecified securities between october17, 1998
and october15, 2003. spear, leeds& kellogg
specialists llc and the goldman sachs group, inc. are also among
the defendants in a purported class action filed in december
2003 in california superior court, los angeles county alleging
violation of california law in connection with the same conduct.
treasury
proceeding
on september4, 2003, the sec announced that
goldman, sachs& co. had settled an administrative
proceeding arising from certain trading in u.s.treasury
bonds over an approximately eight-minute period after goldman,
sachs& co. received an october31, 2001 telephone
call from a washington, d.c.-based political consultant
concerning a forthcoming treasury refunding announcement. the
administrative complaint alleged that goldman, sachs&
co. (i)violated section15(c)(1) and rule15c1-2
of the securities exchange act of 1934 as a result of the
trading; and (ii)violated section15(f) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 by failing to maintain policies
and procedures specifically addressed to the possible misuse of
information obtained by consultants from confidential government
sources. without admitting or denying the allegations, goldman,
sachs& co. consented to the entry of an order that,
among other things, (i)censured goldman, sachs&
co.; (ii)directed goldman, sachs& co. to cease
and desist from committing or causing any violations of
section15(c)(1)(a)& (c)and 15(f) of, and
rule15c1-2 under, the securities exchange act of 1934;
(iii)ordered goldman, sachs& co. to pay
disgorgement and prejudgment interest in the amount of
$1,742,642, and a civil monetary penalty of $5million; and
(iv)directed goldman, sachs& co. to conduct a
review of its policies and procedures and adopt, implement and
maintain policies and procedures consistent with the order and
that review. goldman, sachs& co. also undertook to pay
$2,562,740 in disgorgement and interest relating to certain
trading in u.s.treasury bond futures during the same
eight-minute period.
mutual
fund investigations
goldman, sachs& co. and certain mutual
fund affiliates have received subpoenas and requests for
information from various regulators including the sec as part of
the industry-wide investigation relating to the practices of
mutual funds and their customers. goldman, sachs & co. and
its affiliates are cooperating with such requests.
corporate
bond mark-up investigation
on december23, 2003, in connection with an
industry-wide investigation relating to corporate bond
transactions, the nasd advised that its staff had preliminarily
determined that goldman, sachs& co. and certain of its
employees had charged undisclosed mark-up or mark-downs on five
specific transactions during the years 2000 and 2001 that
exceeded permissible levels, in violation of certain nasd rules
and the federal securities laws. goldman, sachs& co.
has cooperated with the investigation.
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
there were no matters submitted to a vote of
security holders during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year
ended november28, 2003.
table of contents
executive officers of the goldman sachs group,
inc.
set forth below are the name, age, present title,
principal occupation, and certain biographical information for
our executive officers as of february13, 2004, all of whom
have been appointed by and serve at the pleasure of our board of
directors.
henry m. paulson, jr., 57
mr.paulson has been our chairman and chief
executive officer since may 1999, and has been a director since
august 1998. he was co-chairman and chief executive officer or
co-chief executive officer of the goldman sachs group, l.p. from
june 1998 to may 1999 and served as chief operating officer from
december 1994 to june 1998. mr.paulson is not on the board
of any public company other than goldman sachs. he is affiliated
with certain non-profit organizations, including as a member of
the board of directors of catalyst. he also serves on the
advisory board of the j.l.kellogg graduate school of
management at northwestern university and is a member of the
board of the deans advisors of the harvard business
school. mr.paulson is a member of the advisory board of
the tsinghua university school of economics and management and a
member of the governing board of the indian school of business.
he is also chairman of the board of governors of the nature
conservancy, co-chairman of the asia/ pacific council of the
nature conservancy and a member of the board of directors of the
peregrine fund, inc.
lloyd c. blankfein, 49
mr.blankfein has been our president and
chief operating officer since january15, 2004, and has
been a director since april 2003. prior to serving as our
president and chief operating officer, since april 2002 he was a
vice chairman, with shared management responsibility for the
fixed income, currency and commodities division (ficc) and the
equities division. prior to becoming vice chairman, he had been
co-head of ficc since its formation in 1997. from 1994 until
then, he headed or co-headed the j.aron currency and
commodities division. mr.blankfein is not on the board of
any public company other than goldman sachs. he is affiliated
with certain non-profit organizations, including as co-chair of
the harvard university financial aid task force, as a member of
the executive committee of the harvard university committee on
university resources and as a member of the board of directors
of the robin hood foundation.
alan m. cohen, 53
mr.cohen has been our executive vice
president and global head of compliance since february 2004.
from 1991 until january 2004, he was a partner in the law firm
of omelveny& myers llp. mr.cohen is also
affiliated with the chelsea piers scholarship fund, a non-profit
organization.
edward c. forst, 43
mr. forst has been our executive vice president
and chief administrative officer since february13, 2004.
prior to that, he was our chief of staff for ficc from november
2003 to february 2004 (after having served in that position
earlier from july 2000 to march 2002), our chief of staff for
the equities division from august 2003 to february 2004, and
co-head of global credit markets in ficc from march 2002 to
august 2003. prior to july 2000, mr.forst served as
co-head of our global bank debt business. mr.forst also
serves as vice chairman of the board of directors and as a
member of the executive committee of the bond market association
and as a corporation member of the woods hole oceanographic
institution, a non-profit organization.
table of contents
robert s. kaplan, 46
mr.kaplan has been our vice chairman since
april 2002. he served as global co-head of the investment
banking division from 1999 through april 2002 and was co-chief
operating officer of global investment banking from 1998 to
1999. he became head of the americas corporate finance
department in 1994. previously, he had been head of asia-pacific
investment banking from 1990 through 1993. mr.kaplan is a
director of bed bath& beyond inc., which is a public
company. in addition, he is affiliated with certain non-profit
organizations, including as co-chairman of the board of the teak
fellowship, co-chairman of the board of project a.l.s. and a
director of the jewish theological seminary, everybody wins,
inc. and the jewish museum.
kevin w. kennedy, 55
mr.kennedy has been our executive vice
president human capital management since december
2001. from 1999 until 2001, he served as a member of the
executive office. from 1994 to 1999, he served as head of the
americas group, in the investment banking division, and, from
1988 to 1994, as head of corporate finance. mr.kennedy is
a life trustee and a former chairman of the board of hamilton
college, a managing director and vice president of the board of
the metropolitan opera, a trustee of the new york public
library, a member of the board of directors of the wallace
foundation and an honorary trustee of the chewonki foundation.
gregory k. palm, 55
mr.palm has been our general counsel and
executive vice president and head or co-head of the legal
department since may 1999. he was general counsel of the goldman
sachs group, l.p. and co-head of the legal department from 1992
to may 1999.
esta e. stecher, 46
ms.stecher has been our general counsel and
executive vice president and co-head of the legal department
since december 2000. from 1994 to 2000, she was head of the
firms tax department, and she continues to have senior
oversight responsibility for the tax department. she is also a
trustee of columbia university.
david a. viniar, 48
mr.viniar has been our chief financial
officer and executive vice president since may 1999. he has been
the head of the operations, technology and finance division
since december 2002. he was head of the finance division and
co-head of credit risk management and advisory and firmwide risk
december 2001 to december 2002. mr.viniar was co-head of
operations, finance and resources from march 1999 to december
2001. he was chief financial officer of the goldman sachs group,
l.p. from march 1999 to may 1999. from july 1998 until march
1999, he was deputy chief financial officer and from 1994 until
july 1998, he was head of finance, with responsibility for
controllers and treasury. from 1992 to 1994, he was head of
treasury and prior to that was in the structured finance
department of investment banking. he also serves on the board of
trustees of union college.
table of contents
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
the principal market on which our common stock is
traded is the nyse. information relating to the high and low
sales prices per share on the nyse for each full quarterly
period during fiscal 2002 and 2003 is set forth under the
caption supplemental financial information
common stock price range on page102 of the 2003
annual report to shareholders, which is incorporated herein by
reference. as of february2, 2004, there were 6,038 holders
of record of our common stock.
during fiscal 2002 and 2003, dividends of $0.12
per share of common stock were declared on december19,
2001, march18, 2002, june19, 2002,
september23, 2002, december18, 2002 and
march19, 2003, and dividends of $0.25 per share of common
stock were declared on june24, 2003 and september23,
2003. the holders of our common stock share proportionately on a
per share basis in all dividends and other distributions
declared by our board of directors.
the declaration of dividends by goldman sachs is
subject to the discretion of our board of directors. our board
of directors will take into account such matters as general
business conditions, our financial results, capital
requirements, contractual, legal and regulatory restrictions on
the payment of dividends by us to our shareholders or by our
subsidiaries to us, the effect on our debt ratings and such
other factors as our board of directors may deem relevant. see
business regulation in item1 of
this annual report on form10-k for a discussion of
potential regulatory limitations on our receipt of funds from
our regulated subsidiaries.
the table below sets forth the information with
respect to purchases made by or on behalf of the goldman sachs
group, inc. or any affiliated purchaser (as defined
in rule10b-18(a)(3) under the securities exchange act of
1934), of our common stock during the fourth quarter of our
fiscal year ended november28, 2003.
total number of
maximum number of
shares purchased
shares that may yet
total number
average
as part of publicly
be purchased under
of shares
price paid
announced plans
the plans or
period
purchased(1)
per share
or programs(2)
programs(2)
month #1
149,300
$
86.00
149,300
9,779,153
(august30, 2003 to
september26, 2003)
month #2
1,200,700
$
87.59
1,200,700
8,578,453
(september27, 2003
to october31, 2003)
month #3
n/a
8,578,453
(november1, 2003 to
november28, 2003)
total(3)
1,350,000
$
87.41
1,350,000
(1)
no shares were purchased other than through our
publicly announced repurchase program during the fourth quarter
of our fiscal year ended november28, 2003.
(2)
on march21, 2000, we announced that our
board of directors had approved a share repurchase program,
pursuant to which up to 15million shares of our common
stock may be repurchased. this repurchase program was increased
by an aggregate of 60million shares by resolutions of our
board of directors adopted on june18, 2001, march18,
2002, november20, 2002 and january30, 2004. the
repurchase program is being effected from time to time,
depending on market conditions and other factors, through open
market purchases and privately negotiated transactions. the
total remaining authorization under the
table of contents
repurchase program was 20.28million shares
as of february2, 2004; the repurchase program has no set
expiration or termination date.
(3)
as a matter of policy, goldman sachs did not
repurchase, during the third month of the fourth quarter, shares
of its common stock as part of the repurchase program due to a
standard self-imposed black-out period prior to the
release of its quarterly earnings.
information relating to compensation plans under
which equity securities of the registrant are authorized for
issuance is set forth under part iii, item12 of this
form10-k and such information is incorporated herein by
reference.
item6.
selected financial data
the selected financial data table is set forth on
page 103 of the 2003 annual report to shareholders and is
incorporated herein by reference.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations is set forth under
the caption managements discussion and
analysis on pages32 to 66 of the 2003 annual report
to shareholders and is incorporated herein by reference. all of
such information should be read in conjunction with the
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, which
are incorporated by reference in item8 of this annual
report on form10-k.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures
about market risk
quantitative and qualitative disclosure about
market risk is set forth on pages54 to 64 of the 2003
annual report to shareholders under the caption
managements discussion and analysis risk
management and on pages80 to 84 of such annual
report in note3 to the consolidated financial statements,
and is incorporated herein by reference.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
the consolidated financial statements of the
registrant and its subsidiaries, together with the notes thereto
and the report of independent auditors thereon, are contained in
the 2003 annual report to shareholders on pages67 to 100,
and are incorporated herein by reference. in addition, the
information on page 101 of the 2003 annual report to
shareholders under the caption supplemental financial
information quarterly results is incorporated
herein by reference.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
there were no changes in or disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure during the
last two fiscal years.
item9a.
controls and procedures
as of the end of the period covered by this
report, an evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs
management, with the participation of our chief executive
officer and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of our
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
rule13a-15(e) under the securities exchange act of 1934).
based upon that evaluation, our chief executive officer and
chief financial officer concluded that these disclosure controls
and procedures were effective as of the end of the period
covered by this report. in addition, no change in our internal
control over financial reporting (as defined in
rule13a-15(f) under the securities exchange act of 1934)
occurred during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended
table of contents
november28, 2003 that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our
internal control over financial reporting.
part iii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the
registrant
information relating to the registrants
executive officers is included on pages37 to 38 of this
annual report on form10-k. information relating to
directors of the registrant, including its audit committee and
audit committee financial experts, is set forth under the
caption election of directors on pages5 to 9
of the proxy statement for its 2004 annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on march31, 2004 (the 2004
proxy statement) and such information is incorporated
herein by reference. also incorporated herein by reference is
the information under the caption other
matters section16(a) beneficial ownership
reporting compliance on pages30 to 31 of the 2004
proxy statement. information relating to the registrants
code of business conduct and ethics that applies to its senior
financial officers, as defined in the code, is included on
page2 of this annual report on form10-k.
item11.
executive compensation
information relating to the registrants
executive officer and director compensation is set forth under
the captions election of directors employment
contracts and change of control arrangements,
director compensation,
executive compensation and
fiscal year-end option holdings on
pages10 to 15 of the 2004 proxy statement and all such
information is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder
matters
information relating to security ownership of
certain beneficial owners of the registrants common stock
is set forth under the caption beneficial owners of more
than five percent on pages27 to 28 of the 2004 proxy
statement and information relating to the security ownership of
the registrants management is set forth under the caption
beneficial ownership of directors, nominees and executive
officers on pages26 to 27 of the 2004 proxy
statement and all such information is incorporated herein by
reference.
table of contents
the following table provides information as of
november28, 2003, the last day of fiscal 2003, regarding
securities issued under our equity compensation plans that were
in effect during fiscal 2003, including those granted on
december17, 2003 for fiscal 2003 performance.
number of
securities
remaining
available for
number of
weighted-
future issuance
securities to be
average
under equity
issued upon
exercise price
compensation
exercise of
of outstanding
plans (excluding
outstanding
options,
securities reflected
options, warrants
warrants
in the second
plan category
and rights
and rights
column)
equity compensation plans approved by security
holders
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock
incentive plan(1)
89,152,100
(2)
$
75.4575
(2)
284,290,366
(3)(4)
equity compensation plans not approved by
security holders
none
total
89,152,100
(2)
284,290,366
(3)(4)
(1)
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock
incentive plan (the sip) was approved by the
shareholders of goldman sachs at our 2003 annual meeting of
shareholders and is a successor plan to the goldman sachs 1999
stock incentive plan, which was approved by our shareholders
immediately prior to our initial public offering in may 1999 and
under which no additional awards will be granted.
(2)
the number of securities to be issued upon
exercise of outstanding options, warrants and rights, as well as
the weighted-average exercise price of the outstanding options,
warrants and rights, excludes approximately 240,000 options
granted with a strike price of $0.01 or less in foreign
jurisdictions that were intended to replicate the economic
effect of our restricted stock units.
(3)
the total number of shares of common stock that
may be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the sip
initially may not exceed 250,000,000shares. beginning
november29, 2008 and each fiscal year thereafter, the
number of shares of common stock that may be delivered pursuant
to awards granted after april1, 2003 under the sip may not
exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock,
determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding
fiscal year, increased by the number of shares available for
awards in previous fiscal years but not then covered by awards
granted in such years.
(4)
of the 284,290,366shares remaining
available for future issuance under the sip (including shares
that may be delivered in the future under existing awards),
47,498,349 of these shares may be issued pursuant to outstanding
restricted stock units.
item13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
information regarding certain relationships and
related transactions is set forth under the caption
certain relationships and related transactions on
page28 of the 2004 proxy statement and all such
information is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.
principal accountant fees and
services
information regarding principal accountant fees
and services is set forth under the caption ratification
of selection of independent auditors fees paid to
independent auditors on page29 of the 2004 proxy
statement and all such information is incorporated herein by
reference.
table of contents
part iv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules,
and reports on form8-k
(a)documents filed as part of this
report:
1.
consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed in
this annual report on form10-k are listed on pagef-1
hereof and incorporated herein by reference to the corresponding
page number in the 2003 annual report to shareholders.
2.
financial statement schedule
the financial statement schedule required in this annual report
on form10-k is listed on pagef-1 hereof. the
required schedule appears on pagesf-3 through f-11 hereof.
3.
exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation.*
3.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation
of the goldman sachs group, inc. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3.1 to the registrants registration statement
on forms-1 (no. 333-75213)).
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs
group, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to
the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended august29, 2003).
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19, 1999, between
the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as
trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit6 to the
registrants registration statement on form8-a, filed
june29, 1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated as of
february20, 2004, between the goldman sachs group, inc.
and the bank of new york, as trustee.
certain instruments defining the rights of
holders of long-term debt securitiesof the registrant and
its subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to
item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulations-k. the registrant
hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon request, copies of
any such instruments.
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock
incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1
to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for
the period ended february28, 2003).
10.2
the goldman sachs defined contribution plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.16 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.3
the goldman sachs restricted partner compensation
plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended february28, 2003).
10.4
form of employment agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.19 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.5
form of agreement relating to noncompetition and
other covenants (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.20
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.6
form of pledge agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.21 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
table of contents
10.7
form of award agreement (discretionary rsus)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.23 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.8
form of option agreement (discretionary options)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.24 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.9
form of 2003 year-end option award
agreement.
10.10
form of 2003 year-end rsu award agreement.
10.11
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of
may7, 1999, by and among the goldman sachs group, inc. and
various parties (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.25
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.12
form of shareholders agreement among the
goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.26 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 1999).
10.13
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.27 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.14
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.28 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 1999).
10.15
registration rights instrument, dated as of
december10, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibitg to amendment no.1 to schedule13d,
filed december17, 1999, relating to the registrants
common stock (no.005-56295)).
10.16
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december10, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibith to amendment no.1 to schedule13d,
filed december17, 1999, relating to the registrants
common stock).
10.17
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.44 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 1999).
10.18
form of indemnification agreement, dated as of
july5, 2000 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.19
pledge agreement, dated as of may7, 1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibitf to amendment
no.4 to schedule13d, filed july11, 2000,
relating to the registrants common stock).
10.20
form of amendment no.1, dated as of
july10, 2000, to the pledge agreement (filed as
exhibit10.52) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.21
amendment no.1, dated as of
september5, 2000, to the tax indemnification agreement,
dated as of may7, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.3 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.22
form of non-employee director option agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.55 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
table of contents
10.23
form of non-employee director rsu agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.56 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.24
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december21, 2000 (incorporated by reference to
exhibitaa to amendment no.12 to schedule13d,
filed january23, 2001, relating to the registrants
common stock).
10.25
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december21, 2001 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to registrants registration statement on
forms-3 (no.333-74006)).
10.26
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december20, 2002 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to registrants registration statement on
forms-3 (no.333-101093)).
10.27
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to dr.ruth j. simmons
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.63 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.28
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.john h. bryan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.64 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.29
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.james a. johnson
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.65 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.30
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to lord browne of madingley
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.66 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.31
letter, dated december18, 2002, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.william w. george
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.39 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november29, 2002).
10.32
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.claes dahlbck
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.33
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the
goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.edward m. liddy
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.34
supplemental registration rights instrument,
dated as of december19, 2003 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to the registrants registration statement
on forms-3 (no.333-110371)).
12.1
statement re computation of ratios of earnings to
fixed charges.
the following portions of the registrants
2003 annual report to shareholders, which are incorporated by
reference in this annual report on form10-k, are filed as
an exhibit:
13.1
managements discussion and
analysis (pages32 to 66).
table of contents
13.2
consolidated financial statements of the
registrant and its subsidiaries, together with the notes thereto
and the report of independent accountants thereon (pages67
to 100).
13.3
supplemental financial
information quarterly results and
common stock price range (pages101
and 102).
13.4
selected financial data (page103).
21.1
list of subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group,
inc.
23.1
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp.
24.1
powers of attorney (included on signature page).
31.1
rule13a-14(a) certifications.
32.1
section1350 certifications.
99.1
opinion of pricewaterhousecoopers llp with
respect to the selected financial data, which is incorporated by
reference in partii, item6 hereof.
*
incorporated by reference to the corresponding
exhibit to the registrants registration statement on
forms-1 (no.333-74449).
this exhibit is a management contract or a
compensatory plan or arrangement.
(b)reports on form8-k:
on september23, 2003, we filed a current
report on form8-k reporting our earnings for our fiscal
third quarter ended august29, 2003.
on december12, 2003, we filed a current
report on form8-k announcing certain changes to our
business segment reporting structure.
on december18, 2003, we filed a current
report on form8-k reporting our earnings for our fiscal
fourth quarter and fiscal year ended november28, 2003.
on december19, 2003, we filed a current
report on form8-k announcing certain management changes.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
index to financial statements and financial
statement schedule
items 15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
page reference
2003 annual
report to
form10-k
shareholders
consolidated financial statements
report of independent auditors
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
notes to consolidated financial statements
financial statement schedule
schedulei condensed financial
information of registrant (parent company only)
f-3 to f-11
report of independent auditors
f-2
condensed statements of earnings
f-3
condensed statements of financial condition
f-4
condensed statements of cash flows
f-5
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
f-6
specifically incorporated elsewhere herein by
reference are certain portions of the following unaudited items:
(i)
managements discussion and analysis;
32 to 66
(ii)
supplemental financial information
quarterly results;
(iii)
supplemental financial information
common stock price range; and
(iv)
supplemental financial information
selected financial data.
schedules not listed are omitted because of the
absence of the conditions under which they are required or
because the information is included in the consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto in the 2003 annual report
to shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by
reference.
f-1
table of contents
report of independent auditors
to the directors and shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
our audits of the consolidated financial
statements referred to in our report dated january26, 2004
appearing in the 2003 annual report to shareholders of the
goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries (which report and
consolidated financial statements are incorporated by reference
in this annual report on form10-k) also included an audit
of the financial statement schedule listed on pagef-1 of
this form10-k. in our opinion, this financial statement
schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the
information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the
related consolidated financial statements.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
january26, 2004
f-2
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
condensed statements of earnings (parent
company only)
year ended november
(in millions)
revenues
equity in earnings of subsidiaries
$
3,571
$
2,754
$
3,820
principal investments
(124
)
interest income
2,181
2,135
3,785
total revenues
6,218
4,891
7,481
interest expense
2,154
2,131
3,882
revenues, net of interest expense
4,064
2,760
3,599
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
3,836
2,527
3,312
provision for taxes
1,002
net earnings
$
3,005
$
2,114
$
2,310
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these condensed financial statements.
f-3
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
condensed statements of financial condition
(parent company only)
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
financial instruments owned, at fair value
6,702
5,089
receivables from affiliates
68,925
56,026
subordinated loan receivables from affiliates
16,784
13,312
investments in subsidiaries
20,625
17,930
other assets
2,133
2,875
total assets
$
115,170
$
95,233
liabilities and shareholders equity
short-term borrowings, including the current
portion of long-term borrowings
$
37,870
$
35,001
payables to affiliates
2,545
2,294
other liabilities and accrued expenses
1,073
long-term borrowings
with third parties
49,087
35,123
with affiliates
2,963
2,844
total liabilities
93,538
76,230
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share;
150,000,000 shares authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
4,000,000,000 shares authorized, 527,371,946 and
515,084,810shares issued as of november 2003 and november
2002, respectively, and 473,014,926 and 472,940,724shares
outstanding as of november 2003 and november 2002, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
2,984
3,517
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01 per
share; 200,000,000shares authorized, no shares issued and
outstanding
additional paid-in capital
13,562
12,750
retained earnings
9,914
7,259
unearned compensation
(339
)
(845
)
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(122
)
treasury stock, at cost, par value $0.01 per
share; 54,357,020 and 42,144,086shares as of november 2003
and november 2002, respectively
(4,500
)
(3,561
)
total shareholders equity
21,632
19,003
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
115,170
$
95,233
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these condensed financial statements.
f-4
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
condensed statements of cash flows (parent
company only)
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
3,005
$
2,114
$
2,310
noncash items included in net earnings
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
(1,323
)
(118
)
(1,246
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
stock-based compensation
other, net
(17
)
(14
)
(9
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(2,126
)
other, net
(928
)
net cash provided by operating activities
2,172
2,571
cash flows from investing activities
receivables from affiliates, net
(12,025
)
(6,568
)
(3,547
)
subordinated loan receivables from affiliates
(3,472
)
(1,200
)
investment in subsidiaries, net
(165
)
(774
)
(456
)
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(8
)
(44
)
(134
)
business combinations
(740
)
(68
)
(314
)
other investments
(1,165
)
(1,391
)
net cash used for investing activities
(16,071
)
(9,819
)
(5,548
)
cash flows from financing activities
short-term borrowings, net
4,332
3,957
issuance of long-term borrowings
22,168
13,616
6,315
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the
current portion of long-term borrowings
(5,363
)
(8,657
)
(5,631
)
common stock repurchased
(939
)
(1,475
)
(1,438
)
dividends paid
(350
)
(228
)
(231
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
net cash provided by financing activities
15,823
7,648
2,977
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash
equivalents
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest were
$1.97billion, $2.21billion and $3.84billion
for the years ended november 2003, november 2002 and november
2001, respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds,
were $324million, $546million and $545million
for the years ended november 2003, november 2002 and november
2001, respectively.
noncash activities:
the value of common stock issued in connection
with business combinations was $165million,
$47million and $223million for the years ended
november 2003, november 2002 and november 2001, respectively.
stock-based compensation expense included in
subsidiary net earnings was $644million, $609million
and $766million for the years ended november 2003,
november 2002 and november 2001, respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these condensed financial statements.
f-5
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
(parent company only)
note1.significant
accounting policies
basis of presentation
the condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements of the goldman sachs group, inc. (the parent company)
should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial
statements of the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
(the firm) and notes thereto (the consolidated financial
statements), which are incorporated by reference in this
form10-k.
investments in subsidiaries are accounted for
using the equity method.
these condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles that require management to make
estimates and assumptions regarding fair value measurement,
accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, the
provision for potential losses that may arise from litigations
and regulatory proceedings and other matters that affect the
condensed nonconsolidated financial statements and related
disclosures. these estimates and assumptions are based on the
best available information; nonetheless, actual results could be
materially different from these estimates.
certain reclassifications have been made to
previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
affiliate transactions
most of the consolidated unsecured liquidity of
the firm is raised by the parent company. the parent company
then lends the necessary funds to its subsidiaries and
affiliates, as represented by receivables from
affiliates and subordinated loan receivables from
affiliates on the condensed statements of financial
condition. intercompany exposure is managed by generally
requiring intercompany loans to have maturities equal to or
shorter than the maturities of the aggregate borrowings of the
parent company. this policy ensures that the subsidiaries
obligations to the parent company will generally mature in
advance of the parent companys third-party long-term
borrowings. in addition, many of the subsidiaries and affiliates
pledge collateral to cover their intercompany borrowings. equity
investments in subsidiaries are generally funded with equity
capital.
in addition, the parent company charges certain
affiliates for rental and other costs relating to properties
occupied by those affiliates.
interest income is largely generated from loans
made to affiliates.
f-6
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
(parent company only)
(continued)
note2.long-term
borrowings
long-term borrowings with third parties are set
forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s. dollar
$
26,647
$
18,104
non-u.s. dollar
8,303
4,124
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s. dollar
8,776
9,768
non-u.s. dollar
5,361
3,127
total
$
49,087
$
35,123
(1)
during 2003 and 2002, interest rates on
u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from 4.13% to
12.00% and from 5.50% to 12.00%, respectively. during 2003 and
2002, interest rates on non-u.s.dollar fixed rate
obligations ranged from 0.70% to 8.88% and from 1.20% to 8.88%,
respectively.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on
libor, the u.s.treasury bill rate or the federal funds
rate. certain equity-linked and indexed instruments are included
in floating rate obligations.
long-term borrowings with third parties by fiscal
maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2003(1)(2)(3)
2002(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
6,801
$
$
6,959
6,765
3,438
10,203
4,803
2,725
7,528
4,471
1,580
6,051
1,349
2,232
1,400
1,465
2,881
2,236
5,117
2009-thereafter
20,463
5,853
26,316
13,797
2,565
16,362
total
$
35,423
$
13,664
$
49,087
$
27,871
$
7,252
$
35,123
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year and
certain long-term borrowings that may be redeemable within one
year at the option of the holder are included as
short-term borrowings in the condensed
non-consolidated statements of financial condition.
(2)
long-term borrowings repayable at the option of
the parent company are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. certain long-term borrowings that may be redeemable prior
to
f-7
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
(parent company only)
(continued)
maturity at the option of the holder are
reflected at the date such options first become exercisable.
(3)
long-term borrowings have maturities that range
from one to 30years from the date of issue.
the parent company enters into derivative
contracts with affiliates, such as interest rate futures
contracts, interest rate swap agreements, currency swap
agreements and equity-linked contracts, to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its long-term borrowings into
u.s.dollar-based floating rate obligations. accordingly,
the aggregate carrying value of these long-term borrowings and
related hedges approximates fair value.
the effective weighted average interest rates for
long-term borrowings, after hedging activities, are set forth
below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
10.99
%
$
10.85
%
floating rate obligations
48,450
1.73
34,431
2.23
total
$
49,087
1.85
$
35,123
2.40
long-term borrowings with affiliates are set
forth below:
as of
november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s. dollar
$
$
non-u.s. dollar
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s. dollar
1,796
1,796
non-u.s. dollar
total
$
2,963
$
2,844
(1)
during 2003 and 2002, the interest rate on
u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations was 5.78%. during 2003
and 2002, interest rates on non-u.s.dollar fixed rate
obligations ranged from 3.35% to 6.00%.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on
libor.
f-8
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
(parent company only)
(continued)
long-term borrowings with affiliates by fiscal
maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2003(1)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
$
$
2009-thereafter
2,181
2,449
2,181
2,403
total
$
2,478
$
$
2,963
$
2,478
$
$
2,844
(1)
long-term borrowings with affiliates have
maturities that range from three to eight years from the date of
issue.
note3.
commitments, contingencies and
guarantees
commitments
the parent company provides letters of credit
issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu of securities
or cash to satisfy various collateral and margin deposit
requirements. letters of credit outstanding were
$119million and $164million as of november 2003 and
november 2002, respectively.
the parent company acts as an investor in
merchant banking transactions, which includes making long-term
investments in equity and debt securities in privately
negotiated transactions, corporate acquisitions and real estate
transactions. in connection with these activities, the parent
company had commitments to invest up to $1.30billion and
$1.33billion in corporate and real estate merchant banking
investment funds as of november 2003 and november 2002,
respectively.
the parent company had other purchase commitments
of $5million and $7million as of november 2003 and
november 2002, respectively.
the parent company has obligations under
long-term noncancelable lease agreements, principally for office
space occupied by affiliates, expiring on various dates through
2029. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation
provisions for increases in real estate taxes and
f-9
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
(parent company only)
(continued)
other charges. future minimum rental payments,
which are generally reimbursed by affiliates, are set forth
below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2009-thereafter
total
$
1,404
contingencies
the parent company is involved in a number of
judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings concerning
matters arising in connection with the conduct of its
businesses. management believes, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on the
firms financial condition, but may be material to the
parent companys operating results for any particular
period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such
period.
guarantees
the parent company guarantees many of the
obligations of its consolidated subsidiaries including its
largest operating entities in europe and asia and many of its
primary derivatives and commodities trading entities as well as
certain other subsidiaries. the parent company typically does
not guarantee all of the obligations of any particular
subsidiary; rather, it guarantees obligations on a
transaction-by-transaction basis, as negotiated with the
counterparty. the parent company typically does not issue
guarantees of the obligations of its u.s.broker-dealer
subsidiaries, although the parent company is the general partner
of goldman, sachs& co. the parent company is unable to
develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these
guarantees. however, because the guaranteed obligations are
obligations of consolidated subsidiaries, the parent
companys liabilities as guarantor are included in the
liabilities of the firm that are already reported and disclosed
in the consolidated financial statements.
f-10
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
(parent company only)
(continued)
the following table sets forth certain
information about guarantees issued by the parent company in
respect of non-consolidated affiliates and third parties as of
november 2003:
maximum payout by period of expiration(1)
carrying
2005-
2007-
2009-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
fund related commitments
$
$
$
$
$
$
miscellaneous
(1)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated
losses in connection with these contracts.
in the normal course of its business, the parent
company indemnifies and guarantees certain service providers,
such as custody agents, trustees and administrators, against
specified potential losses in connection with their acting as an
agent of, or providing services to, the parent company or its
affiliates. the parent company also indemnifies some clients
against potential losses incurred in the event specified
third-party service providers, including subcustodians and
third-party brokers, improperly execute transactions. the parent
company is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout
under these guarantees and indemnifications. however, management
believes that it is unlikely the parent company will have to
make material payments under these arrangements, and no
liabilities related to these guarantees and indemnifications
have been recognized in the condensed non-consolidated financial
statement as of november 2003.
the parent company provides representations and
warranties to counterparties in connection with a variety of
commercial transactions and occasionally indemnifies them
against potential losses caused by the breach of those
representations and warranties. the parent company may also
provide indemnifications protecting against changes in or
adverse application of certain u.s. tax laws in connection with
ordinary-course transactions such as securities issuances,
borrowings or derivatives. in addition, the parent company may
provide indemnifications to some counterparties to protect them
in the event additional taxes are owed or payments are withheld,
due either to a change in or an adverse application of certain
non-u.s. tax laws. these indemnifications generally are standard
contractual terms and are entered into in the normal course of
business. generally, there are no stated or notional amounts
included in these indemnifications, and the contingencies
triggering the obligation to indemnify are not expected to
occur. the parent company is unable to develop an estimate of
the maximum payout under these guarantees. however, management
believes that it is unlikely the parent company will have to
make material payments under these arrangements, and no
liabilities related to these arrangements have been recognized
in the condensed non-consolidated financial statements as of
november 2003.
f-11
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/ david a. viniar
name:david a. viniar
title:chief financial officer
date: february24, 2004
ii-1
table of contents
power of attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each
person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints
henry m. paulson,jr., lloyd c. blankfein, david a. viniar,
gregory k. palm and esta e. stecher, and each of them severally,
his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact with power of
substitution and resubstitution to sign in his or her name,
place and stead, in any and all capacities, to do any and all
things and execute any and all instruments that such attorney
may deem necessary or advisable under the securities exchange
act of 1934 and any rules, regulations and requirements of the
u.s.securities and exchange commission in connection with
this annual report on form10-k and any and all amendments
hereto, as fully for all intents and purposes as he or she might
or could do in person, and hereby ratifies and confirms all said
attorneys-in-fact and agents, each acting alone, and his or her
substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done
by virtue hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signatures
capacity
date
/s/ henry m. paulson,jr.
henry m. paulson,jr.
director, chairman and chief executive officer
(principal executive officer)
february24, 2004
/s/ lloyd c. blankfein
lloyd c. blankfein
director
february24, 2004
/s/ lord browne of madingley
lord browne of madingley
director
february24, 2004
/s/ john h. bryan
john h. bryan
director
february24, 2004
/s/ claes dahlbck
claes dahlbck
director
february24, 2004
/s/ william w. george
william w. george
director
february24, 2004
/s/ james a. johnson
james a. johnson
director
february24, 2004
/s/ edward m. liddy
edward m. liddy
director
february24, 2004
/s/ ruth j. simmons
ruth j. simmons
director
february24, 2004
/s/ david a. viniar
david a. viniar
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
february24, 2004
/s/ sarah e. smith
sarah e. smith
principal accounting officer
february24, 2004
ii-2
