10-k
e05053e10vk.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended november26, 2004
commission file number: 001-14965
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-4019460
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
85 broad street
new york, n.y.
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(212)902-1000
(registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class:
name of each exchange on which registered:
common stock, par value $.01per share, and attached shareholder protection rights
new york stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb, 0.25% exchangeable notes due 2007; 0.75% exchangeable notes due 2005; index-linked notes due 2013;
index-linked notes due april2013; index-linked notes due may2013;
index-linked notes due july2010; and index-linked notes due
american stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb, 7.35%notes due 2009; 7.50% notes due 2005; 7.80%notes due 2010; floating rate notes due 2005
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90days.yes
xno
o
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and
will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of the annual report on form10-k or any
amendment to the annual report on form10-k.
x
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
is an accelerated filer (as defined in exchange act rule12b-2).
yesxno
o
as of may28, 2004, the aggregate market
value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant was
approximately $42.8billion.
as of january28, 2005, there were
482,303,971shares of the registrants common stock outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference: portions
of the goldman sachs group, inc.s definitive proxy statement for its 2005 annual meeting of shareholders to
be held on april6, 2005 are incorporated by reference in the annual report on form10-k
in response to partiii, items10,11, 12, 13 and 14.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended november26, 2004
index
page
form 10-k item number:
no.
parti
item1.
business
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related
stockholder matters and issuerpurchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and resultsof operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financialdisclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
partiii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and relatedstockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
index to financial statements and financial statement scheduleitems15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
f-1
signatures
ii-1
ex-10.8: form of 2004 year-end rsu award agreement
ex-10.32: form of amendment
ex-10.33: form of 2004 rsu award agreement
ex-10.34: form of 2004 rsu award agreement
ex-10.35: non-qualified deferred compensation plan
ex-10.36: non-qualified deferred compensation plan
ex-10.37: non-qualified deferred compensation plan
ex-10.38: non-qualified deferred compensation plan
ex-12.1: statement re computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
ex-21.1: list of significant subsidiaries
ex-23.1: consent of independent registered public accounting firm
ex-31.1: certifications
ex-32.1: certifications
ex-99.1: report of independent registered public accounting firm on selected financial data
table of contents
parti
item1.
business
overview
goldman sachs is a leading global
investment banking, securities and investment management firm that
provides a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals. as of
november26, 2004, we operated offices in over 20 countries and
approximately 36% of our 20,722 employees were based outside the
united states.
goldman sachs is the successor to a
commercial paper business founded in 1869 by marcus goldman. on may7,
1999, we converted from a partnership to a corporation and
completed an initial public offering of our common stock.
all references to 2004, 2003 and 2002
refer to our fiscal years ended, or the dates, as the context
requires, november26, 2004, november28, 2003 and november29,
2002, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman
sachs, we, us and our, we mean the goldman sachs group,
inc., a delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.
references herein to the annual report on form10-k are to our
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november26,
2004.
financial information concerning our
business segments and geographic regions for each of 2004, 2003 and
2002 is set forth in managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations, and the
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, which are
in partii, items7, 7a and 8 of the annual report on form 10-k.
our internet address is www.gs.com
and the investor relations section of our web site is located
at www.gs.com/investor_relations. we make available free
of charge, on or through the investor relations section of our web
site, annual reports on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q
and current reports on form8-k and amendments to
those reports filed or furnished pursuant to section 13(a) or
15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 as soon as reasonably
practicable after we electronically file such material with, or
furnish it to, the securities and exchange commission. also posted
on our web site, and available in print upon request of any
shareholder to our investor relations department, are our charters
for our audit committee, compensation committee and corporate
governance and nominating committee, our policy regarding director
independence determinations, our policy on reporting of concerns
regarding accounting and other matters, our corporate governance
guidelines and a code of business conduct and ethics governing our
directors, officers and employees. within the time period required
by the sec and the new york stock exchange, we will post on our web
site any amendment to the code of business conduct and ethics and
any waiver applicable to our senior financial officers, as defined
in the code, and our executive officers or directors. in addition,
our web site includes information concerning purchases and sales of
our equity securities by our executive officers and directors, as
well as disclosure relating to certain non-gaap financial measures
(as defined in the secs regulationg) that we may make public
orally, telephonically, by webcast, by broadcast or by similar
means from time to time.
our investor relations department can
be contacted at the goldman sachs group, inc., 85broad street,
17th floor, new york, new york 10004, attn: investor relations,
telephone: 212-902-0300, e-mail: gs-investorrelations@gs.com.
table of contents
business segments
our activities are divided into three
segments:
investment banking;
trading and principal investments;and
asset management and securities services.
the following table sets forth the
net revenues, operating expenses and pre-tax earnings of our
segments:
operating results by segment
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking
net revenues
$
3,374
$
2,711
$
2,830
operating expenses
2,973
2,504
2,454
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
trading and principal
net revenues
$
13,327
$
10,443
$
8,647
investments
operating expenses
8,287
6,938
6,505
pre-tax earnings
$
5,040
$
3,505
$
2,142
asset management and
net revenues
$
3,849
$
2,858
$
2,509
securities services
operating expenses
2,430
1,890
1,562
pre-tax earnings
$
1,419
$
$
total
net revenues
$
20,550
$
16,012
$
13,986
operating expenses(1)
13,874
11,567
10,733
pre-tax earnings
$
6,676
$
4,445
$
3,253
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to our segments: (i)the amortization
of employee initial public offering awards, net of
forfeitures, of $19million, $80million and $212million
for the years ended november2004,
november2003 and november2002, respectively; (ii)net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory
proceedings of $103million and $155million for
the years ended november2004 and november2003,
respectively; and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of goldman sachs gao
hua securities company limited, an investment banking and
securities venture in china, for the year ended november2004.
table of contents
these segments consist of various
products and activities that are set forth in the following chart:
business segment/component
primary products and activities
investment banking:
financial advisory
mergers and acquisitions advisory services
financial restructuring advisory services
underwriting
equity and debt underwriting
trading and principal investments:
ficc
commodities and commodity derivatives, including our power generation business
credit products, including credit derivatives, investment-grade corporate securities, high-yield securities, bank loans, municipal securities, emerging market debt and other distressed debt
currencies and currency derivatives
interest rate products, including interest rate derivatives and global government securities
money market instruments, including the matched book
mortgage-backed securities and loans
equities
equity securities and derivatives
securities, futures and options clearing services
specialist and market-making activities in securities and options
principal investments
principal investments in connection with merchant banking activities
investment in the convertible preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc.
asset management and securities services:
asset management
asset management provides services across all major asset classes, including money markets, fixed income and currencies, equities and alternative investments, for institutional and high-net-worth clients
management of merchant banking funds
securities services
prime brokerage
financing services
securities lending
table of contents
investment banking
investment banking represented 16% of
2004net revenues. we provide a broad range of investment
banking services to a diverse group of corporations, financial
institutions, governments and individuals and seek to develop and
maintain long-term relationships with these clients as their lead
investment bank.
our current structure, which is
organized by regional, industry and product groups, seeks to
combine client-focused investment bankers with execution and
industry expertise. we continually assess and adapt our
organization to meet the demands of our clients in each geographic
region. through our commitment to teamwork, we believe that we
provide services in an integrated fashion for the benefit of our
clients.
in order to more effectively service
our clients, in 2004 we created a global financing group to
increase coordination among our equity and debt underwriting
businesses and our corporate risk and liability management
businesses. this increased coordination is intended to better
assist our clients engaged in equity and debt underwritings in
managing the asset and liability exposures resulting from those
transactions.
our investment banking segment is
divided into two components:
financial advisory. financial advisory includes advisory assignments with respect
to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities,
restructurings and spin-offs;and
underwriting. underwriting includes public offerings and private placements of
equity, equity-related and debt instruments.
financial advisory
goldman sachs is a leading investment
bank in worldwide mergers and acquisitions. our mergers and
acquisitions capabilities are evidenced by our significant share of
assignments in large, complex transactions for which we provide
multiple services, including one-stop acquisition financing and
cross-border structuring expertise, as well as services in other
areas of the firm, such as currency hedging.
underwriting
we underwrite a wide range of
securities and other financial instruments, including common and
preferred stock, convertible and exchangeable securities,
investment-grade debt, high-yield debt, sovereign and emerging
market debt, municipal debt, bank loans, asset-backed securities
and real estate-related securities, such as mortgage-backed
securities and the securities of real estate investment trusts.
equity underwriting. equity
underwriting has been a long-term core strength of goldman sachs.
as with mergers and acquisitions, we have been particularly
successful in winning mandates for large, complex transactions. we
believe our leadership in worldwide initial public offerings and
worldwide public common stock offerings reflects our expertise in
complex transactions, prior experience and distribution
capabilities.
debt underwriting. we engage in the
underwriting and origination of various types of debt instruments,
including investment-grade debt securities, high-yield debt
securities, bank and bridge loans and emerging market debt
securities, which instruments may be issued by, among others,
corporate, sovereign and agency issuers. in addition, we underwrite
and originate structured securities, which include asset-backed and
mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations. we
have employed a focused approach in debt underwriting, emphasizing
high value-added areas in servicing our clients.
table of contents
trading and principal investments
trading and principal investments
represented 65% of 2004net revenues. trading and principal
investments facilitates customer transactions with a diverse group
of corporations, financial institutions, governments and
individuals and takes proprietary positions through market making
in, and trading of, fixed income and equity products, currencies,
commodities and derivatives on such products. in addition, we
engage in floor-based and electronic market making as a specialist
on u.s.equities and options exchanges and we clear customer
transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges
worldwide. in connection with our merchant banking and other
investment activities, we make principal investments directly and
through funds that we raise and manage.
in order to meet the needs of our
clients, trading and principal investments is diversified across a
wide range of products. we believe our willingness and ability to
take risk distinguishes us from many of our competitors and
substantially enhances our client relationships.
our trading and principal investments
segment is divided into three components:
fixed income, currency and commodities. we make markets in and trade interest rate
and credit products, mortgage-backed securities and loans, currencies and
commodities, structure and enter into a wide variety of derivative transactions, and
engage in proprietary trading;
equities. we make markets in, act as a specialist for, and trade equities and
equity-related products, structure and enter into equity derivative transactions,
and engage in proprietary trading. we also execute and clear customer transactions
on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide;and
principal investments. principal investments primarily represents net revenues
from our merchant banking investments, including the increased share of the income
and gains derived from our merchant banking funds when the return on a funds
investments exceeds certain threshold returns (merchant banking overrides), as well
as unrealized gains or losses from our investment in the convertible preferred stock
of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg).
fixed income, currency and commodities and equities
fixed income, currency and
commodities (ficc)and equities are large and diversified
operations through which we engage in a variety of customer-driven
and proprietary trading activities.
in their customer-driven businesses,
ficc and equities strive to deliver high-quality service by
offering broad market-making and market knowledge to our clients on
a global basis. in addition, we use our expertise to take positions
in markets, by committing capital and taking risk, to facilitate
customer transactions and provide liquidity. our willingness to
make markets, commit capital and take risk in a broad range of
fixed income, currency, commodity and equity products and their
derivatives is crucial both to our client relationships and to
support our underwriting business by providing secondary market
liquidity.
we generate trading net revenues from
our customer-driven businesses in three ways.
first, in large, highly liquid markets, we undertake a high volume of transactions
for modest spreads and fees.
second, by capitalizing on our strong market relationships and capital position,
we undertake transactions in less liquid markets where spreads and fees are
generally larger.
finally, we generate net revenues from structuring and executing transactions that
address complex client needs.
table of contents
in our proprietary activities in both
ficc and equities, we assume a variety of risks and devote
resources to identify, analyze and benefit from these exposures. we
leverage our strong proprietary research capabilities and
capitalize on our analytical models to analyze information and make
informed trading judgments. in our proprietary activities, we seek
to benefit from perceived disparities in the value of assets in the
trading markets and from macroeconomic and company-specific trends.
we continue to increase coordination
among our ficc and equities businesses as we respond to what we
believe is client demand for more centralized services and as we
attempt to take advantage of perceived synergies.
we believe that our trading and
market-making capabilities are key ingredients to our success.
while these businesses have generally earned attractive returns, we
have in the past incurred significant trading losses in periods of
market turbulence, such as in 1994 and the second half of 1998, and
from time to time in connection with large block trades.
in both our customer-driven and
proprietary activities in ficc and equities, we manage our exposure
to credit and other financial risks on a global basis across all
our products. our trading risk management process seeks to balance
our ability to profit from trading positions with our exposure to
potential losses. as part of this process, we analyze not only
market risk but also credit and other financial risks. risk
management includes input from all levels of goldman sachs, from
the trading desks to the firmwide risk committee. for a further
discussion of our risk management policies and procedures, see
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations risk management in partii, item7
of the annual report on form10-k.
ficc. ficcs primary businesses are:
commodities and commodity derivatives, including our power generation business;
credit products, including credit derivatives, investment-grade corporate
securities, high-yield securities, bank loans, municipal securities, emerging market
debt and other distressed debt;
currencies and currency derivatives;
interest rate products, including interest rate derivatives and global government
securities;
money market instruments, including the matched book;and
mortgage-backed securities and loans.
a core activity in ficc is market
making in a broad array of securities and products. for example, we
are a primary dealer in many of the largest government bond markets
around the world, including the united states, japan and the united
kingdom. we are a member of the major futures exchanges, and also
have interbank dealer status in the currency markets in new york,
london, tokyo and hong kong.
our ficc research and strategy group
provides services that enhance our ability to provide high-quality
products and service to our clients, including quantitative and
qualitative analyses of global economic, currency and financial
market trends, as well as credit analyses of corporate and
sovereign fixed income securities.
as part of our commodities business,
we acquired in 2003 cogentrix energy, inc. and the common equity
interests in east coast power l.l.c., companies engaged in the
electric power generation business. in addition, on january31,
2005, we acquired interests in power plants and related businesses
from national energy& gas transmission, inc., including
additional interests in some of the same power plants and a natural
gas pipeline in which cogentrix energy, inc. already
table of contents
holds interests. as of january31, 2005, we indirectly owned
interests in 29 power plants located in the united states and one
power plant located outside the united states. of these plants, 12
are fueled by natural gas, 11 by coal, five by waste coal, one by
oil and one by wind power. most of our power plants have contracted
to sell their electricity to utilities under long-term agreements.
we seek to generate attractive risk-adjusted returns from our
portfolio of power plants that have entered into these contracts by
using our commodities trading and capital markets expertise
selectively to restructure the underlying power sale contracts and
to refinance related project and corporate-level debt.
equities. our equities primary
businesses are:
equities products group;
principal strategies;and
specialist activities.
equities products group. our equities
products group (epg)includes primarily customer-driven
activities in the shares, convertible securities and derivatives
businesses of the firm. these activities also include clearing
client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges
worldwide. we offer clients direct electronic access to these
markets through the electronic transaction services division of our
specialist subsidiary.
we trade equity securities and
equity-related products (such as convertible securities, options,
futures and over-the-counter (otc)derivative instruments) on a
global basis as an agent, as a market maker or otherwise as a
principal. as a principal, we facilitate customer transactions,
often by committing capital and taking risk, to provide liquidity
to clients with large blocks of stocks or options. for example, we
are active in the execution of large block trades (trades of 50,000
or more shares).
we are a member of most of the
worlds major stock, options and futures exchanges, including those
located in new york, chicago, london, paris, frankfurt, tokyo and
hong kong, and we are a designated market maker in a number of
stocks traded on the nasdaq stock market.
in the options and futures markets,
we structure, distribute and execute derivatives on market indices,
industry groups and individual company stocks to facilitate
customer transactions and our proprietary activities. we develop
quantitative strategies and render advice with respect to portfolio
hedging and restructuring and asset allocation transactions. we
also create specially tailored instruments to enable sophisticated
investors to undertake hedging strategies and establish or
liquidate investment positions. we are one of the leading
participants in the trading and development of equity derivative
instruments. we are an active participant in the trading of futures
and options on most of the major exchanges in the united states,
europe and asia.
principal strategies. our equities
principal strategies business includes a multi-strategy proprietary
investment business that invests and trades for the firms own
account. principal strategies trades and invests the firms capital
across global markets employing equity arbitrage and other
strategies that are primarily focused in public markets. some
strategies include fundamental equities and relative value trading
(which involves trading strategies to take advantage of perceived
discrepancies in the relative value of financial instruments,
including equity, equity-related and debt instruments). other
strategies include event-driven investments (i.e., those that focus
on event-oriented special situations such as corporate
restructurings, recapitalizations, mergers and acquisitions and
legal and regulatory events) as well as convertible bond trading,
various types of volatility trading and some principal finance
(private structured investments in public companies).
specialist activities. our specialist
activities business includes our stock, exchange-traded funds (etf)
and option specialist and market-making businesses. we engage in
floor-based and
table of contents
electronic specialist and market-making activities
on u.s.equities and options exchanges. in the united states,
we are one of the leading stock specialists on the nyse. for etfs,
we are a specialist on the nyse and a specialist and market maker
on the american stock exchange. in options, we are a specialist and
market maker on the chicago board options exchange and the
international securities exchange and a market maker on the boston
options exchange.
principal investments
in connection with our merchant
banking activities, we invest by making principal investments
directly and through funds that we raise and manage. as of november
2004, the aggregate carrying value of our principal investments
held directly or through our merchant banking funds was
approximately $4.65billion. in addition, we have outstanding
equity capital commitments of up to $1.04billion. these carrying
values were comprised of corporate principal investments with an
aggregate carrying value of approximately $1.27billion, real
estate investments with an aggregate carrying value of
approximately $820million and our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg with a carrying value of $2.56billion.
principal investments includes revenues from the
increased share of the income and gains derived from our merchant
banking funds when the return on a funds investments exceeds
certain threshold returns (typically referred to as an override).
principal investments also includes
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg, which we
acquired on february7, 2003. this preferred stock is generally
nontransferable. we will have the right to convert the smfg
preferred stock into shares of smfg common stock beginning on
february8, 2005. upon conversion, one-third of the underlying
shares of smfg common stock will become transferable on february8,
2005, with the remaining shares of common stock becoming
transferable in equal installments on february7, 2006 and
february7, 2007. in addition, restrictions on our ability to
hedge the underlying common stock will lapse in three equal annual
installments beginning on february7, 2005.
asset management and securities services
the components of the asset
management and securities services segment, which represented 19%
of 2004net revenues, are set forth below:
asset management. asset management provides investment advisory and financial
planning services to a diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
primarily generates revenues in the form of management and incentive fees;and
securities services. securities services provides prime brokerage, financing
services and securities lending services to mutual funds, pension funds, hedge
funds, foundations and high-net-worth individuals worldwide, and generates revenues
primarily in the form of interest rate spreads or fees.
asset management
we offer a broad array of investment
strategies, advice and planning. we provide asset management
services across all major asset classes: money markets, fixed
income and currencies, equities and alternative investments (i.e.,
hedge funds, private equity, asset allocation overlay, currency
overlay and products within our manager of manager business).
through our subsidiary, the ayco company, l.p. (ayco), we also
provide fee-based financial counseling in the united states.
assets under management (aum)typically
generate fees as a percentage of asset value or based on
investment performance. aum include our mutual funds, alternative
investment funds and separately managed accounts for institutional
and individual investors. aum also include our
table of contents
merchant banking
funds, which generate revenue as described below under merchant
banking. we may also earn commissions, mark-ups and spreads on
assets in accounts of high-net-worth individuals, and these
revenues are included in the trading and principal investments
segment. the trend in our private wealth management business has
been away from accounts that generate commission revenue to
accounts that pay fees based on the assets under management.
the amount of aum is set forth in the
graph below. in the following graph, as well as in the following
tables, substantially all assets under management are valued as of
november30.
assets under management
(in billions)
the following table sets forth assets
under management by asset class:
assets under management by asset class
(in billions)
as of november30
2003(3)
money markets
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity(1)
alternative investments(2)
total
$
$
$
(1)
includes both our fundamental equity and our
quantitative equity strategies.
(2)
includes other quantitative and/or nontraditional
investment strategies (e.g., hedge funds), merchant
banking funds and vehicles where we contract with
subadvisors for our clients.
(3)
includes $4billion in non-money market
assets acquired in our july1, 2003 combination with ayco.
clients. our clients are institutions
and individuals, including both high-net-worth and retail
investors. we access institutional and high-net-worth clients
through both direct and third-party channels and retail clients
through third-party channels. our institutional clients include
pension funds, governmental organizations, corporations, insurance
companies, foundations and endowments. in the third-party
distribution channels, we distribute our mutual funds and
separately managed accounts through brokerage firms, banks,
insurance companies and other financial intermediaries. our clients
are located worldwide.
table of contents
the table below sets forth the amount
of assets under management by distribution channel and client
category as of november2004:
assets under management by distribution channel
(in billions)
assets under
management(1)
directly distributed
institutional
$
high-net-worth individuals
third-party distributed
institutional, high-net-worth and retail
total
$
(1)
the primary investment vehicles for these assets
under management are separately managed accounts and
commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and private
investment funds.
merchant banking. goldman sachs has
sponsored numerous corporate and real estate private investment
funds. our strategy with respect to these funds generally is to
invest opportunistically to build a portfolio of investments that
is diversified by industry, product type, geographic region and
transaction structure and type. our corporate investment funds
pursue on a global basis, long-term investments in equity and debt
securities in privately negotiated transactions, leveraged buyouts,
acquisitions and investments in funds managed by external parties.
our real estate investment funds invest in real estate operating
companies, debt and equity interests in real estate assets, and
other real estate-related investments. our clients in private
investment funds include pension plans, endowments, charitable
institutions and high-net-worth individuals.
since inception, we have raised $40.67billion
of committed equity capital in these funds, of which
$28.54billion relates to our corporate funds and $12.13billion
relates to our real estate funds. as of november2004,
$31.75billion of the committed equity capital was funded and
assets under management in these funds were $27.81billion.
merchant banking activities generate
three primary revenue streams. first, we receive a management fee
that is generally a percentage of a funds committed capital,
invested capital, total gross acquisition cost or asset value.
these annual management fees are included in our asset management
net revenues. second, goldman sachs, as a substantial investor in
these funds, is allocated its proportionate share of the funds
unrealized appreciation or depreciation arising from changes in
fair value as well as gains and losses upon realization. third,
after the fund has achieved a minimum return for fund investors, we
receive an increased share of the funds income and gains that is a
percentage of the income and gains from the funds investments. the
second and third of these revenue streams are included in net
revenues of the principal investments component of our trading and
principal investments segment.
securities services
securities services provides prime
brokerage, financing services and securities lending services to
mutual funds, pension funds, hedge funds, foundations and
high-net-worth individuals worldwide.
we offer prime brokerage services to
our clients, allowing them the flexibility to trade with most
brokers while maintaining a single source for financing and
consolidated portfolio reports. our prime brokerage activities
provide clearing and custody in 45 markets (with revenues from
clearing and
table of contents
custody included in the trading and principal
investments segment), consolidated multi-currency accounting and
reporting and offshore fund administration. additionally, we
provide financing to our clients for their securities trading
activities through margin and securities loans that are
collateralized by securities, cash or other acceptable collateral.
securities lending activities
principally involve the borrowing and lending of securities to
cover customer and goldman sachs short sales and otherwise to make
deliveries into the market. in addition, we are an active
participant in the broker-to-broker securities lending business and
the third-party agency lending business.
global investment research
our global investment research
division provides fundamental research on companies, industries,
economies, currencies, commodities and portfolio and quantitative
strategy on a worldwide basis.
global investment research employs a
team approach that as of november2004 provided research coverage
of approximately 1,725companies worldwide, over 50 economies
and 25 stock markets. this is accomplished by six departments:
the americas equity research department, the europe equity research department and
the asia equity research department all provide fundamental analysis, forecasts and
investment opinions for companies and industries in their respective regions. equity
research analysts are generally organized by regional industry teams, which allows
for extensive collaboration and knowledge sharing among analysts on important
investment themes;
the economic research department, which has a presence in the americas, europe and
asia, formulates macroeconomic forecasts for economic activity, foreign exchange and
interest rates based on the globally coordinated views of its global and regional
economists;
the commodities research department, which has a presence in london and new york,
provides research on the global commodity markets;and
the strategy department, which includes portfolio and quantitative strategy and
has a presence in the americas, europe and asia, formulates equity market forecasts
and provides opinions on both asset and industry sector allocation.
further information regarding
research at goldman sachs is provided below under regulation
regulations applicable in and outside the united states, certain
factors that may affect our business legal and
regulatory and legal proceedings research independence
matters in parti, item3 of the annual report on form
10-k.
technology strategy
goldman sachs is committed to the
ongoing development, maintenance and use of technology throughout
the organization. our technology initiatives can be broadly
categorized into four efforts:
enhancing client service through increased connectivity and the provision of
value-added, tailored products and services;
improving our trading, execution and clearing capabilities;
risk management;and
overall efficiency, productivity and control.
we have tailored our services to our
clients by providing them with electronic access to our products
and services. in particular, we have extended our global electronic
trading and information distribution capabilities; such
capabilities cover many of our fixed income, currency, commodity,
equity and mutual fund products around the world.
table of contents
electronic commerce and technology
have changed and will continue to change the ways that securities
and other financial products are traded, distributed and settled.
this creates both opportunities and challenges for our businesses.
we remain committed to being at the forefront of technological
innovation in the global capital markets.
employees
management believes that one of the
strengths and principal reasons for the success of goldman sachs is
the quality and dedication of its people and the shared sense of
being part of a team. we strive to maintain a work environment that
fosters professionalism, excellence, diversity and cooperation
among our employees worldwide.
instilling the goldman sachs culture
in all employees is a continuous process, in which training plays
an important part. all employees are offered the opportunity to
participate in education and periodic seminars that we sponsor at
various locations throughout the world. another important part of
instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee review
process. employees are reviewed by supervisors, co-workers and
employees they supervise in a 360-degree review process that is
integral to our team approach.
as of november2004, we had 20,722
employees, which excludes 1,206 employees of goldman sachs
property management and loan servicing subsidiaries. the majority
of the costs of the property management and loan servicing
employees are reimbursed to goldman sachs by the investment funds
for which these subsidiaries provide services. this also excludes
employees of certain consolidated entities that are held for
investment purposes only.
competition
the financial services industry
and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we
expect them to remain so. our competitors are other brokers and
dealers, investment banking firms, insurance companies, investment
advisors, mutual funds, hedge funds, private equity funds,
commercial banks and merchant banks. we compete with some of our
competitors globally and with others on a regional, product or
niche basis. our competition is based on a number of factors,
including transaction execution, our products and services,
innovation, reputation and price.
we also face intense competition in
attracting and retaining qualified employees. our ability to
continue to compete effectively in our businesses will depend upon
our ability to attract new employees and retain and motivate our
existing employees.
over time, there has been substantial
consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial
services industry, due in part to u.s.federal legislation that
has expanded the activities permissible for firms affiliated with a
u.s.bank. in particular, a number of large commercial banks,
insurance companies and other broad-based financial services firms
have established or acquired broker-dealers or have merged with
other financial institutions. many of these firms have the ability
to offer a wide range of products, from loans, deposit-taking and
insurance to brokerage, asset management and investment banking
services, which may enhance their competitive position. they also
have the ability to support investment banking and securities
products with commercial banking, insurance and other financial
services revenues in an effort to gain market share, which has
resulted in pricing pressure in certain of our businesses and could
result in pricing pressure in other of our businesses.
moreover, we have faced, and expect
to continue to face, pressure to retain market share by committing
capital to businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns
that may not be commensurate with their risks. in particular,
corporate clients sometimes seek such commitments (such as
agreements to participate in their commercial paper backstop or
other revolving loan facilities) from financial services firms in
connection with investment banking and other assignments. in 2003,
we established the william street entities, through which we have
issued commitments to
table of contents
lend to counterparties, primarily investment-grade clients. substantially all of the credit risk
associated with these commitments has been covered by credit loss
protection provided to goldman sachs by smfg. these arrangements
may not be sufficient, however, to fully satisfy our clients
desire for capital commitments. in addition, the credit loss
protection is limited generally to 95% of the first loss goldman
sachs realizes on approved investment-grade loan commitments,
subject to a maximum of $1billion, and goldman sachs may also
obtain protection for 70% of the second loss on such commitments,
subject to a maximum of $1.125billion. see managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations in partii, item7 of the annual report on form10-k
and note6 to our consolidated financial statements
in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for more information regarding the william street entities and for
a description of the credit loss protection provided by smfg. we
also issue capital commitments through goldman sachs credit
partners l.p. and other entities in connection with investment banking
transactions.
the trend toward consolidation and
convergence has significantly increased the capital base and
geographic reach of some of our competitors. this trend has also
hastened the globalization of the securities and other financial
services markets. as a result, we have had to commit capital to
support our international operations and to execute large global
transactions. in order to take advantage of some of our most
significant challenges and opportunities, we will have to compete
successfully with financial institutions that are larger and better
capitalized and that may have a stronger local presence and longer
operating history outside the united states.
we have experienced intense price
competition in some of our businesses in recent years. there has
been considerable pressure in the pricing of large block trades.
also, equity and debt underwriting discounts, as well as trading
spreads, have been under pressure for a number of years and the
ability to execute trades electronically, through the internet and
through other alternative trading systems, has increased the
pressure on trading commissions. it appears that this trend toward
alternative trading systems will continue. we own interests in and
participate in a number of these trading systems. we believe that
we will continue to experience competitive pressures in these and
other areas in the future as some of our competitors seek to obtain
market share by reducing prices.
regulation
goldman sachs, as a participant in
the securities and commodity futures and options industries, is
subject to extensive regulation in the united states and elsewhere.
as a matter of public policy, regulatory bodies in the united
states and the rest of the world are charged with safeguarding the
integrity of the securities and other financial markets and with
protecting the interests of customers participating in those
markets. they are not, however, charged with protecting the
interests of goldman sachs shareholders or creditors.
broker-dealers, in particular, are
subject to regulations that cover all aspects of the securities
business, including sales methods, trade practices, use and
safekeeping of customers funds and securities, capital structure,
recordkeeping, the financing of customers purchases, and the
conduct of directors, officers and employees. a number of our
affiliates are regulated by investment advisory laws in and outside
the united states. additional legislation, changes in rules
promulgated by self-regulatory organizations, or changes in the
interpretation or enforcement of existing laws and rules, either in
the united states or elsewhere, may directly affect the operation
and profitability of goldman sachs.
regulation in the united states
in the united states, the sec is the
federal agency responsible for the administration of the federal
securities laws. our principal broker-dealer in the united states
is goldman, sachs& co., which is registered as a broker-dealer and as an investment adviser with the sec and as a broker-
table of contents
dealer in
all 50states and the district of columbia. self-regulatory
organizations, such as the nyse and the national association of
securities dealers, inc. (nasd), adopt rules that apply to, and
examine, broker-dealers such as goldman, sachs& co. in
addition, state securities and other regulators also have
regulatory or oversight authority over goldman, sachs& co.
similarly, our businesses are also subject to regulation by various
non-u.s.governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory
authorities in virtually all countries where we have offices.
goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p. (formerly known as
spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p.) and certain of its affiliates are
registered u.s.broker-dealers and are regulated by the sec,
the nyse and the nasd. goldman sachs financial markets, l.p. is
registered with the sec as an otc derivatives dealer and conducts
certain otc derivatives businesses.
the commodity futures and commodity
options industry in the united states is subject to regulation
under the commodity exchange act, as amended. the commodity futures
trading commission (cftc)is the federal agency charged with
the administration of the commodity exchange act and the
regulations thereunder. several of goldman sachs subsidiaries,
including goldman, sachs& co. and goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p., are registered with the cftc and act as futures
commission merchants, commodity pool operators or commodity trading
advisors and are subject to the commodity exchange act and the
regulations thereunder. the rules and regulations of various
self-regulatory organizations, such as the chicago board of trade,
other futures exchanges and the national futures association, also
govern the commodity futures and commodity options businesses of
these entities.
as a registered broker-dealer and
member of various self-regulatory organizations, goldman, sachs&
co. is subject to the secs uniform net capital rule, rule15c3-1.
this rule specifies the minimum level of net capital a
broker-dealer must maintain and also requires that a significant
part of its assets be kept in relatively liquid form. goldman, sachs&
co. is also subject to the net capital requirements of the
cftc and various securities and commodity exchanges. see note14
to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on form10-k.
the sec has adopted rule amendments
that establish alternative net capital requirements for
broker-dealers that are part of a consolidated supervised entity.
as a condition to its use of the alternative method, a
broker-dealers ultimate holding company and affiliates (referred
to collectively as a consolidated supervised entity or cse)must
consent to group-wide supervision and examination by the sec.
goldman, sachs& co. anticipates applying for permission to use
this alternative method. we expect that doing so will enable us to
comply with the requirements of the financial groups directive
described below. on becoming subject to the secs group-wide
supervision, goldman sachs will be required to report to the sec
computations of our capital adequacy.
the sec recently adopted rules
requiring the registration of hedge funds advisers under the
investment advisers act of 1940. we cannot predict at this time the
impact of the adoption of these rules on our trading, prime
brokerage and other business relationships with hedge funds.
the sec and various self-regulatory
organizations impose rules that require notification when net
capital falls below certain predefined criteria, limit the ratio of
subordinated debt to equity in the regulatory capital composition
of a broker-dealer and constrain the ability of a broker-dealer to
expand its business under certain circumstances. additionally, the
secs uniform net capital rule imposes certain requirements that
may have the effect of prohibiting a broker-dealer from
distributing or withdrawing capital and requiring prior notice to
the sec for certain withdrawals of capital.
goldman sachs has established the
goldman sachs trustcompany, n.a. (gstc), a national bank
limited to fiduciary activities, in order to provide personal trust
and estate administration and related services to its
high-net-worth clients on a nationwide basis. gstc maintains
collective investment funds for eligible pension and profit sharing
plan clients. as a national bank, gstc is subject to regulation by
the office of the comptroller of the currency and is a member bank
of the federal reserve system. gstc will not accept deposits or
make loans and, as a result, it is not
table of contents
considered to be a bank for purposes of the bank holding company act. it also does not carry
fdic insurance and is not subject to the requirements of the
community reinvestment act.
goldman sachs has established goldman
sachs bank usa (gs bank), a utah-chartered industrial loan company,
in order to extend credit and to take deposits, other than demand
deposits. gs bank is subject to regulation by the fdic and the utah
commissioner of financial institutions. because it does not accept
demand deposits, gs bank is not considered to be a bank for
purposes of the bank holding company act. the deposits maintained
at gs bank are insured by the fdic to the extent permitted by law,
and gs bank is subject to the requirements of the community
reinvestment act.
j.aron& company is
authorized by the federal energy regulatory commission (ferc)to
sell wholesale physical power at market-based rates. as a
ferc-authorized power marketer, j. aron& company is subject to
regulation under the federal power act and ferc regulations.
the effort to combat money laundering
and terrorist financing is a priority in governmental policy with
respect to financial institutions. the usa patriot act of 2001
contains anti-money laundering and financial transparency laws and
mandates the implementation of various new regulations applicable
to broker-dealers and other financial services companies, including
standards for verifying client identification at account opening,
and obligations to monitor client transactions and report
suspicious activities. through these and other provisions, the usa
patriot act of 2001 seeks to promote the identification of parties
that may be involved in terrorism or money laundering. anti-money
laundering laws outside the united states contain some similar
provisions. the obligation of financial institutions, including
goldman sachs, to identify their customers, watch for and report
suspicious transactions, respond to requests for information by
regulatory authorities and law enforcement agencies, and share
information with other financial institutions, has required the
implementation and maintenance of internal practices, procedures
and controls which have increased, and may continue to increase,
our costs, and any failure with respect to our programs in this
area could subject us to substantial liability and regulatory
damages.
certain of our businesses are subject
to compliance with regulations enacted by u.s.federal and
state governments, the european union, other jurisdictions and/or
enacted by various regulatory organizations or exchanges relating
to the privacy of client information, and any failure to comply
with these regulations could expose us to liability and/or
reputational damage.
in addition, our power generation
business is subject to extensive and evolving energy, environmental
and other governmental laws and regulations, as discussed below
under certain factors that may affect our business
investments in the power generation industry.
regulationoutside the united states
goldman sachs is an active
participant in the international fixed income and equity markets.
many of our principal subsidiaries that participate in these
markets are subject to comprehensive regulations in the united
states and elsewhere that include some form of capital adequacy
rules and other customer protection rules. goldman sachs provides
investment services in and from the united kingdom under the
regulation of the financial services authority (fsa). various
goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking and regulatory
authorities of the other european countries in which goldman sachs
operates, including, among others, the federal financial
supervisory authority (bafin) and the bundesbank in germany, the
autorit des marchs financiers and banque de france in france,
banca ditalia and the commissione nazionale per le societ e la
borsa (consob)in italy and the swiss federal banking
commission. goldman sachs entities are also regulated by the
european securities, derivatives and commodities exchanges of which
they are members. the investment services that are subject to
oversight by the fsa and other european regulators are regulated in
accordance with european union directives requiring, among other
things, compliance with certain capital adequacy standards,
customer protection requirements and conduct of business rules.
these standards, requirements and rules are similarly implemented,
under the
table of contents
same directives, throughout the european union and are
broadly comparable in scope and purpose to the regulatory capital
and customer protection requirements imposed under the sec and cftc
rules. some european union directives also permit local regulation
in each jurisdiction, including those in which we operate, to be
more restrictive than the requirements of such directives and these
local requirements can result in certain competitive disadvantages
to goldman sachs.
in addition, the financial services
agency, the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka securities exchange,
the tokyo international financial futures exchange and the japan
securities dealers association in japan, the securities and futures
commission in hong kong, the monetary authority of singapore and
the china securities regulatory commission, among others, regulate
various of our subsidiaries in asia and also have capital standards
and other requirements comparable to the rules of the sec.
the european financial groups
directive (directive 2002/87/ec of the european parliament and of
the council) introduced certain changes to the way in which
financial conglomerates and other financial services organizations
operating in europe will be regulated, with the changes to be
implemented by member states for fiscal years beginning in 2005.
these changes will cause activities that are currently conducted in
unregulated entities to become subject to certain forms of
regulation, including consolidated supervision and capital adequacy
requirements. our efforts to comply with the directive involve
applying to be subject to the consolidated supervised entity rules
described above under regulation in the united states.
regulations applicable in and outside the united states
the u.s. and non-u.s.government
agencies, regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations, as
well as state securities commissions in the united states, are
empowered to conduct administrative proceedings that can result in
censure, fine, the issuance of cease and desist orders, or the
suspension or expulsion of a broker-dealer or its directors,
officers or employees. from time to time, our subsidiaries have
been subject to investigations and proceedings, and sanctions have
been imposed for infractions of various regulations relating to our
activities, none of which has had a material adverse effect on us
or our businesses.
compliance with the net capital
requirements of u.s. and non-u.s.regulators could limit those
operations of our subsidiaries that require the intensive use of
capital, such as underwriting and trading activities, specialist
activities and the financing of customer account balances, and also
could restrict our ability to withdraw capital from our regulated
subsidiaries, which in turn could limit our ability to repay debt
or pay dividends on our common stock.
our specialist businesses are subject
to extensive regulation by a number of securities exchanges. the
rules of these exchanges generally require our specialists to
maintain orderly markets in the securities in which they are
specialists. these requirements, in turn, may require us to commit
significant amounts of capital to our specialist businesses. in
addition, changes to the rules and regulations governing stock
markets and the conduct of specialists on those markets, including
the nyse, may impose additional costs on us, adversely affect our
specialist businesses or impair the value of our goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets relating to those businesses.
the research areas of investment
banks have been and remain the subject of increased regulatory
scrutiny. in 2002 and 2003, acting in part pursuant to a mandate
contained in the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, the sec, the nyse and
the nasd adopted rules imposing heightened restrictions on the
interaction between equity research analysts and investment banking
personnel at member securities firms. various non-u.s.jurisdictions
have also changed or proposed to change their
requirements with respect to research. in addition, in 2003,
several leading securities firms operating in the united states,
including goldman, sachs& co., reached a settlement with
certain federal and state securities regulators and self-regulatory
organizations to resolve investigations into their equity research
analysts alleged conflicts of interest pursuant to which the firms
have been subject to certain restrictions and undertakings. as part
of this settlement, restrictions have been
table of contents
imposed on the interaction between research and investment banking departments,
and these securities firms are required to fund the provision of
independent research to their customers.
in connection with the research
settlement, the firm has also subscribed to a voluntary initiative
imposing restrictions on the allocation of shares in initial public
offerings to executives and directors of public companies. during
2004, the fsa in the united kingdom imposed new requirements on the
conduct of the allocation process in equity and fixed income
securities offerings (including initial public offerings and
secondary distributions). the nasd has proposed rules that would
further affect the manner in which securities are distributed and
allocated in registered public offerings. we cannot fully predict
the practical effect that such restrictions or measures will have
on our business, and the sec, nyse and nasd and non-u.s.regulators
such as the fsa may adopt additional and more stringent
rules with respect to offering procedures and the management of
conflicts of interest in the future.
certain factors that may affect our business
market conditions
as an investment banking, securities
and investment management firm, our businesses are materially
affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic
conditions generally. business conditions continued to improve in
2004, after improving somewhat during the second half of 2003: the
number and size of equity underwritings and completed mergers and
acquisitions transactions increased significantly in 2004, after
declining for three straight years, and fixed income origination
levels remained strong; fixed income market conditions remained
generally favorable, as interest rates, although rising, remained
low by historical standards, and corporate credit spreads remained
narrow; and in the global equity markets, although volatility
levels and commission rates continued to decline, price levels and
volumes were generally stronger.
adverse or uncertain economic and
market conditions have in the past adversely affected, and may in
the future adversely affect, our business and profitability in many
ways, including the following:
we have been operating in a low interest rate market for the past several years.
increasing or high interest rates and/or widening credit spreads, especially if such
changes are rapid, may create a less favorable environment for certain of our
businesses.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of our businesses
and generally maintain large trading, specialist and investment positions. market
fluctuations and volatility may adversely affect the value of those positions,
including our interest rate and credit products, currency, commodity and equity
positions and our merchant banking investments, or may reduce our willingness to
enter into new transactions. conversely, certain of our trading businesses depend on
market volatility to provide trading and arbitrage opportunities, and decreases in
volatility may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect the results of these
businesses.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings and mergers and
acquisitions may have an adverse effect on our revenues and, because we may be
unable to reduce expenses correspondingly, our profit margins. in particular,
because a significant portion of our investment banking revenues are derived from
our participation in large transactions, a decrease in the number of large
transactions due to uncertain or unfavorable market conditions may adversely affect
our investment banking business.
pricing and other competitive pressures have continued, even as the volume and
number of investment banking transactions have started to increase. these pressures
have been particularly intense in the context of large block trades. in addition,
the trend (particularly in the equity underwriting business) toward multiple book
runners and co-managers handling
table of contents
transactions, where previously there would have
been a single book runner, may adversely affect our business and reduce our revenues.
reductions in the level of the equity markets also tend to reduce the value of our
clients portfolios, which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for managing assets.
even in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or market conditions,
investment performance by our asset management business below the performance of
benchmarks or competitors could result in a decline in assets under management and,
therefore, in the incentive and management fees we receive.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, proprietary trading, block trading, merchant banking, underwriting
and lending businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand our
proprietary trading businesses or commit capital to facilitate primarily
client-driven business. for example, large blocks of stock are increasingly being sold in
block trades rather than on a marketed basis, which increases the risk that goldman
sachs may be unable to resell the purchased securities at favorable prices.
moreover, because of concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic
and market conditions are generally favorable for others in the industry. we also
regularly enter into large transactions as part of our trading businesses. the
number and size of such transactions may affect our results of operations in a given
period.
the volume of transactions that we execute for our customers and as a specialist
may decline, which would reduce the revenues we receive from commissions and
spreads. in our specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock exchange rules to
maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing shares in a declining market.
this may result in trading losses and an increased need for liquidity. weakness in
global equity markets and the trading of securities in multiple markets and on
multiple exchanges could adversely impact our trading businesses and impair the
value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
risk management, liquidity and credit
if any of the variety of instruments,
processes and strategies we utilize to manage our exposure to
various types of risk are not effective, we may incur losses. our
risk management strategies and techniques may not be fully
effective in mitigating our risk exposure in all market
environments or against all types of risk.
liquidity is essential to our
businesses. our liquidity could be impaired by an inability to
access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an inability to
access funds from our subsidiaries or an inability to sell assets.
this situation may arise due to circumstances that we may be unable
to control, such as a general market disruption or an operational
problem that affects third parties or us. further, our ability to
sell assets may be impaired if other market participants are
seeking to sell similar assets at the same time.
our credit ratings are important to
our liquidity. a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely
affect our liquidity and competitive position, increase our
borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or trigger
our obligations under certain bilateral provisions in some of our
trading and collateralized financing contracts. under such
provisions, counterparties could be permitted to terminate
contracts with goldman sachs or require us to post additional
collateral. termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our liquidity
by requiring us to find other sources of financing or to make
significant cash payments or securities movements.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is a
holding company and, therefore, it depends on dividends,
distributions and other payments from its subsidiaries to fund
dividend payments and to fund all payments on its obligations,
including debt obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including
goldman, sachs& co., are subject to laws that authorize
regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of
table of contents
funds from those subsidiaries to the goldman sachs group, inc. regulatory action of
that kind could impede access to funds that the goldman sachs
group, inc. needs to make payments on obligations, including debt
obligations, or dividend payments. in addition, to the extent that
the goldman sachs group, inc. (or any other entity) holds equity
interests in the firms regulated or unregulated subsidiaries, its
rights as an equity holder to the assets of such subsidiaries are
subject to the satisfaction of the claims of the creditors of such
subsidiaries.
we are exposed to the risk that third
parties that owe us money, securities or other assets will not
perform their obligations. these parties may default on their
obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational
failure or other reasons. we are also subject to the risk that our
rights against third parties may not be enforceable in all
circumstances. the amount and duration of our credit exposures have
been increasing over the past several years, as has the breadth of
the entities to which we have credit exposures. as a clearing
member firm, we finance our customer positions and we could be held
responsible for the defaults or misconduct of our customers. in
addition, we have experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure
to extend credit and price more aggressively the credit risks we
take. in particular, corporate clients sometimes seek to require
credit commitments from us in connection with investment banking
and other assignments. although we regularly review credit
exposures to specific clients and counterparties and to specific
industries, countries and regions that we believe may present
credit concerns, default risk may arise from events or
circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee. in addition,
concerns about, or a default by, one institution could lead to
significant liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other
institutions, which in turn could adversely affect goldman sachs.
operations and infrastructure
our businesses are highly dependent
on our ability to process, on a daily basis, a large number of
transactions across numerous and diverse markets in many
currencies, and the transactions we process have become
increasingly complex. if any of our financial, accounting or other
data processing systems do not operate properly or are disabled or
if there are other shortcomings or failures in our internal
processes, people or systems, we could suffer an impairment to our
liquidity, financial loss, a disruption of our businesses,
liability to clients, regulatory intervention or reputational
damage. these systems may fail to operate properly or become
disabled as a result of events that are wholly or partially beyond
our control, including a disruption of electrical or communications
services or our inability to occupy one or more of our buildings.
the inability of our systems to accommodate an increasing volume of
transactions could also constrain our ability to expand our
businesses.
we also face the risk of operational
failure or termination of any of the clearing agents, exchanges,
clearing houses or other financial intermediaries we use to
facilitate our securities transactions. any such failure or
termination could adversely affect our ability to effect
transactions and manage our exposure to risk.
in addition, despite the contingency
plans we have in place, our ability to conduct business may be
adversely impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that
supports our businesses and the communities in which we are
located. this may include a disruption involving electrical,
communications, transportation or other services used by goldman
sachs or third parties with which we conduct business. these
disruptions may occur, for example, as a result of events that
affect only the buildings of goldman sachs or such third parties,
or as a result of events with a broader impact on the cities where
those buildings are located. nearly all of our employees in our
primary locations, including new york, london, frankfurt, hong kong
and tokyo, work in close proximity to each other, in one or more
buildings. if a disruption occurs in one location and our employees
in that location are unable to communicate with or travel to other
locations, our ability to service and interact with our clients may
suffer and we may not be able to successfully implement contingency
plans that depend on communication or travel.
table of contents
our operations rely on the secure
processing, storage and transmission of confidential and other
information in our computer systems and networks. although we take
protective measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances
warrant, our computer systems, software and networks may be
vulnerable to unauthorized access, computer viruses or other
malicious code and other events that could have a security impact.
if one or more of such events occur, this potentially could
jeopardize our or our clients or counterparties confidential and
other information processed and stored in, and transmitted through,
our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause interruptions
or malfunctions in our, our clients, our counterparties or third
parties operations. we may be required to expend significant
additional resources to modify our protective measures or to
investigate and remediate vulnerabilities or other exposures, and
we may be subject to litigation and financial losses that are
either not insured against or not fully covered through any
insurance maintained by us.
business continuity and information security
business continuity and information
security are high priorities for goldman sachs. our business
continuity program has been developed to provide reasonable
assurance of business continuity in the event of disruptions at the
firms critical facilities. the key elements of the program are
crisis management, business recovery, systems and data recovery,
people recovery facilities and process improvement. in the area of
information security, a framework of principles, policies and
technology has been developed to protect the information assets of
the firm and its clients. safeguards are applied to maintain the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information
resources.
legal and regulatory
firms in the financial services
industry have been operating in a difficult regulatory environment.
the industry has experienced increased scrutiny from a variety of
regulators, including the sec, nyse, nasd and state attorneys
general. penalties and fines sought by regulatory authorities have
increased substantially over the last several years. this
environment has led some of our clients to be less willing to
engage in transactions that may carry a risk of increased scrutiny
by regulators. in addition, while the firm always strives to fully
comply with all legal and regulatory requirements, this regulatory
and enforcement environment has created uncertainty with respect to
a number of transactions that had historically been entered into by
financial services firms, including our firm, and that were
generally believed to be permissible and appropriate. this
environment has led us and our competitors to modify transaction
structures and, in some cases, to limit or cease our execution of
some types of transactions. we have also implemented additional
policies and procedures, and have enhanced existing policies and
procedures, to address the risks arising from the current
environment.
substantial legal liability or
significant regulatory action against goldman sachs could have
material adverse financial effects or cause significant
reputational harm to goldman sachs, which in turn could seriously
harm our business prospects. we face significant legal risks in our
businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of damages and
penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory proceedings against
financial institutions have been increasing.
goldman sachs, as a participant in
the financial services industry, is subject to extensive regulation
in jurisdictions around the world. we face the risk of significant
intervention by regulatory authorities in all jurisdictions in
which we conduct business. among other things, we could be fined,
prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities or
subject to limitations or conditions on our business activities.
new laws or regulations or changes in enforcement of existing laws
or regulations applicable to our clients may also adversely affect
our businesses.
as discussed above under
regulation, the research areas of investment banks have been and
remain the subject of increased regulatory scrutiny which has led
to increased restrictions on
table of contents
the interaction between equity research analysts and investment banking personnel at securities
firms. various non-u.s.jurisdictions have also changed or
proposed changing their requirements with respect to research
matters. in addition, several leading securities firms in the
united states, including goldman, sachs& co., reached a global
settlement in 2003 with certain federal and state securities
regulators and self-regulatory organizations to resolve
investigations into equity research analysts alleged conflicts of
interest pursuant to which the firms have been subject to certain
restrictions and undertakings. certain of these requirements and
restrictions have imposed additional costs and limitations on the
conduct of our businesses. current or future civil lawsuits
implicating investment research analysts conflicts of interest
were not settled as part of the global settlement. goldman sachs
total potential liability in respect of such civil cases cannot be
reasonably estimated but could be material to results of operations
in a given period. the global settlement also did not resolve
potential charges involving individual employees, including
supervisors, and regulatory investigations are continuing.
in addition, the sec and other
federal and state regulators have increased their scrutiny of
complex, structured finance transactions and have brought
enforcement actions against a number of financial institutions in
connection with such transactions. in some of the enforcement
actions, clients of the financial institutions allegedly engaged in
accounting, disclosure or other violations of the securities laws,
and the financial institutions allegedly facilitated these
improprieties by entering into transactions with the clients. we
seek to create innovative solutions to address our clients needs,
and we have entered into, and continue to enter into, structured
transactions with clients. while we have policies and procedures in
place that are intended to ensure that the structured transactions
we enter into are appropriately reviewed and comply with applicable
laws and regulations, it is possible that certain of these
transactions could give rise to litigation or enforcement actions.
it is possible that the heightened regulatory scrutiny of, and
litigation in connection with, structured finance transactions will
make our clients less willing to enter into these transactions, and
will adversely affect our business in this area.
recently, there have been
industry-wide and other investigations by federal and state
authorities concerning market timing, late trading and other
activities involving mutual funds and investment advisors. federal
and state authorities have made informational requests regarding
trading practices broadly across all of the major fund companies
and broker-dealers. goldman sachs has received requests for
information and has been fully cooperating with those authorities.
while we believe that we have in place reasonable measures to
detect and deter disruptive and abusive trading practices and
comply with applicable legal and regulatory requirements, we cannot
predict the course that the existing inquiries and areas of focus
may take or the impact that any new laws or regulations governing
mutual funds may have on our business.
the nyse and the sec have also been
conducting investigations into certain trading practices of nyse
specialist firms, including our specialist unit. in march2004,
certain of these nyse specialist firms, including our specialist
unit, agreed to a global settlement with the sec and the nyse to
resolve charges that the firms violated certain federal securities
laws and nyse rules in connection with their activities as nyse
specialists during the years 1999 through 2003. the global
settlement involves, among others, restitution and penalties, a
censure, cease and desist order and certain undertakings with
respect to our specialist units systems and procedures. the
settlement did not resolve the related civil actions discussed
under legal proceedings specialist matters in parti,
item3 of the annual report on form10-k, or potential
regulatory charges against individuals. this global settlement,
including the restrictions imposed on the activities of our
specialist unit, or new laws or regulations governing specialists
may have an adverse impact on our specialist businesses. as a
result of this global settlement and any related developments, our
specialist businesses may be adversely affected and the value of
our goodwill and identifiable intangible assets related to these
businesses may be impaired.
there have been a number of highly
publicized cases involving fraud or other misconduct by employees
in the financial services industry in recent years, and we run the
risk that employee
table of contents
misconduct could occur. it is not always possible to deter or prevent employee misconduct and the
precautions we take to prevent and detect this activity may not be
effective in all cases.
regulatory impact on capital markets
financial scandals in recent years
have led to insecurity and uncertainty in the financial markets and
contributed to declines in capital markets. in response to these
scandals, the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 and the rules of the sec,
the nyse and nasdaq have necessitated significant changes to
corporate governance and public disclosure. these provisions
generally apply to companies with securities listed on u.s.securities
exchanges, and some provisions apply to non-u.s.issuers
with securities traded on u.s.securities exchanges. to
the extent that private companies, in order to avoid becoming
subject to these new requirements, decide to forgo initial public
offerings, our equity underwriting business may be adversely
affected and our ability to successfully exit some of our merchant
banking investments may be adversely affected. similarly, the
imposition of those provisions on non-u.s.issuers has made
these issuers less likely to list their securities in the united
states or undertake merger or acquisition transactions that would
result in their securities being listed in the united states. these
measures may result in less activity by non-u.s.issuers in the
united states and, as a result, the u.s.capital markets and
our investment banking business may be adversely affected.
the provisions of the sarbanes-oxley
act of 2002 and the nyse and nasdaq corporate governance rules have
diverted many companies attention away from capital market
transactions, including securities offerings and acquisition and
disposition transactions. in particular, companies that are or are
planning to be public are incurring significant expenses in
complying with the sec and accounting standards relating to
internal control over financial reporting, and companies that
disclose material weaknesses in such controls under the new
standards may have some difficulty accessing the capital markets.
these factors, in addition to adopted or proposed accounting and
disclosure changes, including those relating to off-balance-sheet
entities, may have an adverse effect on our investment banking
business.
competition and conflicts of interest
the financial services industry
and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we
expect them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number of
factors, including transaction execution, our products and
services, innovation, reputation and price. we believe that we may
experience pricing pressures in the future as some of our
competitors seek to increase market share by reducing prices. over
time, there has been substantial consolidation and convergence
among companies in the financial services industry. u.s.federal
legislation, which significantly expanded the activities
permissible for firms affiliated with a u.s.bank, may
accelerate this consolidation and further increase competition.
this trend toward consolidation and convergence has significantly
increased the capital base and geographic reach of our competitors.
this trend has also hastened the globalization of the securities
and other financial services markets. as a result, we have had to
commit capital to support our international operations and to
execute large global transactions.
our reputation is one of our most
important assets. as we have expanded the scope of our business and
our client base, we increasingly have to address conflicts of
interest. we have extensive procedures and controls that are
designed to address these issues. however, appropriately dealing
with conflicts of interest is complex and difficult and our
reputation could be damaged if we fail, or appear to fail, to deal
appropriately with conflicts of interest.
in addition, the sec and other
federal and state regulators have increased their scrutiny of
potential conflicts of interest. while we have policies and
procedures in place that are intended to ensure that any potential
conflicts of interest are appropriately addressed, it is possible
that potential or perceived conflicts could give rise to litigation
or enforcement actions. it is possible that the heightened
regulatory scrutiny of, and litigation in connection with,
conflicts of interest will make our
table of contents
clients less willing to enter into transactions in which such a conflict may occur, and will
adversely affect our business.
technology is fundamental to our overall business strategy. the growth of electronic trading and the
introduction of new technologies is changing our business and
presenting us with new challenges. securities, futures and options
transactions are increasingly occurring electronically and through
other alternative trading systems and it appears that the trend
toward alternative trading systems will continue and probably
accelerate. some of these alternative trading systems compete with
our trading businesses, including our specialist businesses, and
goldman sachs may experience continued competitive pressures in
these and other areas.
recruiting and employee retention
our performance is largely dependent
on the talents and efforts of highly skilled individuals.
competition in the financial services industry for qualified
employees is intense. in addition, competition with businesses
outside the financial services industry, such as hedge funds,
private equity funds and venture capital funds, for the most highly
skilled individuals has been intense. our continued ability to
compete effectively in our businesses depends on our ability to
attract new employees and to retain and motivate our existing
employees. changes in the business environment may cause us to move
employees from one business to another or to reduce the number of
employees in certain businesses; this may cause temporary
disruptions as our employees adapt to new roles and may reduce our
ability to take advantage of improvements in the business
environment. in addition, current and future laws (including laws
relating to immigration and outsourcing) may restrict our ability
to move responsibilities or personnel from one jurisdiction to
another. this may impact our ability to take advantage of business
opportunities or potential efficiencies.
acquisitions and joint ventures
we expect the growth of our core
businesses to come through both internal expansion and through
acquisitions and joint ventures. we have undertaken joint ventures
in australia and china and may enter into additional joint ventures
from time to time. to the extent we make acquisitions or enter into
combinations or joint ventures, we face numerous risks and
uncertainties combining or integrating the relevant businesses and
systems, including the need to combine accounting and data
processing systems and management controls and to integrate
relationships with customers and business partners. in the case of
joint ventures, we are subject to additional risks and
uncertainties in that we may be dependent upon, and subject to
liability, losses or reputational damage relating to, systems,
controls and personnel that are not under our control. in addition,
conflicts or disagreements between us and our joint venture
partners may negatively impact our businesses.
investments in the power generation industry
we own equity interests in companies
engaged in electric power generation, principally cogentrix energy,
inc. and east coast power l.l.c., and have acquired interests in power plants and related businesses from
national energy& gas transmission, inc. as a result of these
interests and future investments that we may make in the power
generation industry, we face numerous risks and uncertainties.
we are a relatively new entrant to
the power generation business. as a result, we have less expertise
and experience in owning and managing power generation businesses
than many of our competitors and we may not be successful in owning
and managing our power generation facilities. in particular, in the
future we may be unable to attract and retain qualified independent
contractors and employees.
the operation of power generation
facilities may be disrupted. the continued operation of power
generation facilities involves many risks, including the breakdown
or failure of power
table of contents
generation equipment, transmission lines or other equipment or processes, and performance below expected levels
of output or efficiency. although our facilities contain various
redundancies and backup mechanisms, a breakdown or failure may
prevent the affected facilities from performing under applicable
power sales agreements or otherwise operating as planned.
the power plants in which we own
interests are dependent on the availability of raw materials, such
as coal and natural gas, and the market for and availability of
these raw materials may be adversely affected by numerous factors
beyond our control. for example, during 2004 we faced difficulties
in obtaining and retaining adequate coal inventories at many plants
due to supply constraints on coal and a rationing of services by
railroads. any inability to obtain coal or other raw materials in
sufficient amounts could lead to lost revenues, reputational damage
and defaults under our long-term contracts with energy purchasers,
which contracts with respect to coal-fired plants generally contain
standards regarding inventory levels of coal.
we are subject to extensive and
evolving energy, environmental and other governmental laws and
regulations. in the past several years, intensified scrutiny of the
energy market by federal, state and local authorities and the
public has resulted in increased regulatory and legal proceedings
involving energy companies, including those engaged in power
generation. we may incur substantial costs in complying with
current or future laws and regulations relating to power
generation, and our overall businesses and reputation may be
adversely affected by legal and regulatory proceedings arising out
of our power generation business. in particular, our power
generation operations are subject to extensive federal, state and
local environmental laws and regulations relating to, among others,
air quality, water quality, waste management, natural resources,
site remediation, and health and safety. compliance with these
environmental laws and regulations may require us to commit
significant capital toward environmental monitoring, installation
of pollution control equipment, payment of emission fees, and
application for, and holding of, permits and licenses at our
facilities. our failure to comply with environmental laws or
regulations or the associated requirements and provisions of the
permits and licenses may result in the assessment of severe civil
or criminal liabilities against us and the need to expend
substantial additional capital for compliance or remediation.
insurance covering some of these environmental risks with respect
to our power generation facilities may not be available, and the
proceeds from insurance recovery, if any, may not be adequate to
cover our liabilities in a particular incident. as a result, our
financial condition and results of operations may be adversely
affected by an environmental or a health and safety problem at one
of our facilities.
we are subject to the risk of
unforeseen or catastrophic events, including terrorist attacks and
other hostile or catastrophic events. we may not have insurance
against these risks, and, in cases in which we do have insurance,
the insurance proceeds may be inadequate to cover our losses.
international operations
in conducting our businesses and
maintaining and supporting our operations around the world, we are
subject to political, economic, legal, operational and other risks
that are inherent in operating in many countries, including risks
of possible nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital
controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental
actions, as well as the outbreak of hostilities. in many countries,
the laws and regulations applicable to the securities and financial
services industries are uncertain and evolving, and it may be
difficult for us to determine the exact requirements of local laws
in every market. our inability to remain in compliance with local
laws in a particular foreign market could have a significant and
negative effect not only on our businesses in that market but also
on our reputation generally. we are also subject to the enhanced
risk that transactions we structure might not be legally
enforceable in all cases.
in the last several years, various
emerging market countries have experienced severe economic and
financial disruptions, including significant devaluations of their
currencies, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or
negative growth rates in their economies. the possible effects of
table of contents
these conditions include an adverse impact on our businesses and
increased volatility in financial markets generally.
cautionary statement pursuant to the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by
reference in the annual report on form10-k, and from time to
time our management may make, statements that may constitute
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor
provisions of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995.
forward-looking statements are not historical facts but instead
represent only our belief regarding future events, many of which,
by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside of our
control. these statements include statements other than historical
information or statements of current condition and may relate to
our future plans and objectives and results, among other things,
and may also include our belief regarding the effect of various
legal proceedings, as set forth under legal proceedings in parti,
item3 of the annual report on form10-k, as well
as statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our
liquidity policies, statements about trends in our businesses and
statements about our investment banking transaction backlog, in partii,
item7 of the annual report on form10-k. it is
possible that our actual results may differ, possibly materially,
from the anticipated results indicated in these forward-looking
statements. important factors that could cause actual results to
differ from those in the forward-looking statements include, among
others, those discussed below and under certain factors that
may affect our business and managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations in partii,
item7 of the annual report on form10-k.
in the case of statements about our
investment banking transaction backlog, such statements are subject
to the risk that the terms of these transactions may be modified or
that they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net revenues
that we expect to earn from these transactions may differ, possibly
materially, from those currently expected. important factors that
could result in a modification of the terms of a transaction or a
transaction not being completed include, in the case of
underwriting transactions, a decline in general economic
conditions, outbreak of hostilities, volatility in the securities
markets generally or an adverse development with respect to the
issuer of the securities and, in the case of financial advisory
transactions, a decline in the securities markets, an adverse
development with respect to a party to the transaction or a failure
to obtain a required regulatory approval.
item2.
properties
our principal executive offices are
located at 85 broad street, new york, new york, and comprise
approximately 1million square feet of leased space, pursuant
to a lease agreement expiring in june2008 (with options to renew
for up to 20additional years). we also occupy over 680,000square
feet at one new york plaza under lease agreements expiring
primarily in 2009 (with options to renew for up to five additional
years), and we lease space at various other locations in the new
york metropolitan area. in total, we lease over 4.2million
square feet in the new york metropolitan area.
in september2004, we completed the
construction of a new office building at 30hudson street in
jersey city, new jersey. this building, which includes
approximately 1.3million square feet of office space, was
constructed to complement our offices in lower manhattan. the
building is being occupied in phases.
we have additional offices in the
united states and elsewhere in the americas. together, these
offices comprise approximately 2.3million square feet of
leased space.
we also have offices in europe, asia
and africa. in europe, we have offices that total approximately 2.0million
square feet, which includes approximately 55,000square
feet in frankfurt that we expect to exit by 2006. our
european headquarters is located in london at peterborough
table of contents
court, pursuant to a lease expiring in 2016. in total, we lease
approximately 1.6million square feet in london through various
leases, relating to various properties.
in asia, we have offices that total
approximately 900,000square feet. our headquarters in this
region are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in hong
kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently lease
290,910square feet through a lease that expires in 2018 and
96,959square feet through a lease that expires in march2005
at the roppongi hills mori tower. in hong kong, we currently lease
approximately 270,000square feet under lease agreements, the
majority of which expire in fiscal 2012. we currently lease
approximately 28,000square feet of office space in a temporary
facility in bangalore, india, with a plan to occupy a total of
approximately 150,000square feet of office space by july2005.
our occupancy expenses include costs
associated with office space held in excess of our current
requirements. this excess space, the cost of which is charged to
earnings as incurred, is being held for potential growth or to
replace currently occupied space that we may exit in the future. we
continually evaluate our current and future space capacity in
relation to current and projected future staffing levels. in 2004,
we reduced our global office space and incurred exit costs of $41million
(included in occupancy and depreciation and
amortization expenses). we may incur additional exit costs in 2005
and thereafter to the extent we (i)further reduce our capacity
or (ii)commit to new properties in the locations in which we
operate and, consequently, dispose of existing space that had been
held for potential growth. such exit costs may be material to our
results of operations in a given period.
item3.
legal proceedings
we are involved in a number of
judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings (including those
described below) concerning matters arising in connection with the
conduct of our businesses. we believe, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial
condition, but might be material to our operating results for any
particular period, depending, in part, upon the operating results
for such period.
ipo process matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and
goldman, sachs& co. are among the numerous financial services
companies that have been named as defendants in a variety of
lawsuits alleging improprieties in the process by which those
companies participated in the underwriting of public offerings in
recent years.
certain purported class actions have
been brought in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york, beginning on november3, 1998 by
purchasers of securities in public offerings as well as certain
purported issuers of such offerings, that allege that the
defendants have conspired to fix at 7% the discount that
underwriting syndicates receive from issuers of shares in certain
offerings in violation of federal antitrust laws. on march15,
1999, the purchaser plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended
complaint seeking treble damages as well as injunctive relief. the
defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint on
april29, 1999. on february9, 2001, the federal district
court granted with prejudice the defendants motion to dismiss the
claims asserted by the purchasers of securities on the ground that
they lacked antitrust standing. the plaintiffs in those actions
appealed, and by a decision dated december13, 2002, the u.s.court
of appeals for the second circuit vacated the dismissal
on the ground that the lower court had engaged in improper
fact-finding on the motion and remanded for consideration of other
potential bases for dismissal. on september28, 2001, the
defendants moved to dismiss the complaints filed by the issuer
plaintiffs on statute of limitations grounds. on september25,
2002, the federal district court denied the underwriter defendants
motion to dismiss. on march26, 2003, defendants moved to
dismiss the claims asserted by both the issuers and the purchasers
of securities on preemption grounds, but the
table of contents
motion was denied on june27, 2003. on june24, 2003, defendants filed a motion
to dismiss the claims asserted by the purchasers of securities on
standing grounds, and on february24, 2004, the district court
granted the motion to dismiss as to the purchasers damages claims.
goldman, sachs& co. is one of
numerous financial services firms that have been named as
defendants in purported class actions filed beginning on march9,
2001 in the u.s.district court for the southern district of
new york by purchasers of securities in public offerings, who claim
that the defendants engaged in a conspiracy to tie allocations in
certain offerings to higher customer brokerage commission rates as
well as purchase orders in the aftermarket, in violation of federal
antitrust laws. the plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended
complaint on january2, 2002 seeking treble damages as well as
injunctive relief. the defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated
amended complaint on may24, 2002, the motion was granted by a
decision dated november3,2003, and the plaintiffs have
moved for reconsideration and also appealed. goldman, sachs&
co. has also, together with other underwriters in certain offerings
as well as the issuers and certain of their officers and directors,
been named as a defendant in a number of related lawsuits alleging,
among other things, that the prospectuses for the offerings
violated the federal securities laws by failing to disclose the
existence of the alleged tying arrangements. on july1,2002,
the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss those complaints.
by an opinion and order dated february19, 2003, the federal
district court denied the motion to dismiss in all material
respects relating to the underwriter defendants. by a decision
dated october13, 2004, the federal district court granted
plaintiffs motion for class certification, and the underwriter
defendants have petitioned the u.s.court of appeals for the
second circuit to review that certification decision on an
interlocutory basis. on june10,2004, plaintiffs entered
into a definitive settlement agreement with respect to their claims
against the issuer defendants and the issuers present or former
officers and directors named in the lawsuits. on june14, 2004,
those parties jointly moved for approval of the proposed settlement.
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in an action commenced on may15,2002
in new york supreme court, new york county, by an official
committee of unsecured creditors on behalf of etoys, inc., alleging
that the firm intentionally underpriced etoys, inc.s initial
public offering. the action seeks, among other things,
consequential damages resulting from the alleged lower amount of
offering proceeds. on august1, 2002, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the complaint. on may2, 2003, the court
granted goldman, sachs& co.s motion to dismiss as to five of
the claims; plaintiff appealed from the dismissal of the five
claims, and goldman, sachs& co. appealed from the denial of
its motion as to the remaining claim. by a decision dated may20,
2004, the new york appellate division, first department
affirmed in part and reversed in part the lower courts ruling on
the firms motion to dismiss, permitting all claims to proceed
except the claim for fraud, as to which the appellate court granted
leave to replead. on june18, 2004, goldman, sachs& co.
moved for reargument or leave to appeal to the new york court of
appeals, and by an order dated october12, 2004, the appellate
division granted leave to appeal.
the goldman sachs group, inc. has
also been named as a defendant in a purported shareholder
derivative action commenced in delaware court of chancery on october23,
2002 alleging that certain officers and directors of ebay,
inc. (who are also defendants), aided and abetted by the goldman
sachs group, inc., breached their fiduciary duties and usurped
corporate opportunities by receiving allocations of initial public
offerings as customers of goldman sachs. defendants
moved to dismiss the complaint on december23, 2002, but the
motions were denied by a decision dated january23, 2004.
the goldman sachs group, inc. has,
together with other underwriters in certain offerings, received
subpoenas and requests for documents and information from various
governmental agencies and the u.s.house of representatives
committee on financial services in connection with investigations
relating to the public offering process. goldman sachs is
cooperating with the investigations. on january25, 2005, in
connection with an investigation by the sec of certain
table of contents
allocation practices employed by goldman, sachs& co. and other firms, the
sec announced a settlement pursuant to which goldman, sachs&
co., without admitting or denying the allegations, (i)consented
to the entry of an order permanently enjoining goldman,
sachs& co. from violating rule101 of regulationm of
the securities exchange act of 1934, by inducing or attempting to
induce customers receiving ipo allocations to buy additional shares
in the aftermarket; and (ii)agreed to pay a penalty of $40million.
in connection with effectuation of the settlement, the sec
filed a civil action against goldman, sachs& co. in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york on january25,
2005.
stock options litigation
hull trading co. l.l.c. and spear,
leeds& kellogg, l.p. (now known as goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p.), affiliates of the goldman sachs group, inc., are
among the numerous market makers in listed equity options which
have been named as defendants, together with five national
securities exchanges, in a purported class action brought in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york on
behalf of persons who purchased or sold listed equity options. the
consolidated class action complaint, filed on october4, 1999
(which consolidated certain previously pending actions and added
hull trading co. l.l.c. and other market makers as defendants),
generally alleges that the defendants engaged in a conspiracy to
preclude the multiple listing of certain equity options on the
exchanges and seeks treble damages under the antitrust laws as well
as injunctive relief. certain of the parties, including hull
trading co. l.l.c. and spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p., have
entered into a stipulation of settlement, subject to court
approval, pursuant to which hull trading co. l.l.c. will be
required to pay an aggregate of $2.48million and spear, leeds&
kellogg, l.p. an aggregate of $19.59million. on february14,
2001, the federal district court granted the motion of
certain non-settling defendants for summary judgment. by a decision
dated april24, 2001, the district court ruled that in light of
that order granting summary judgment, the court lacked jurisdiction
to entertain the proposed settlement. plaintiffs appealed, and by a
decision dated january9, 2003, the u.s.court of appeals
for the second circuit affirmed the grant of summary judgment, but
held that the decision did not divest the lower court of
jurisdiction to entertain the proposed settlement, and remanded for
further proceedings. by an order dated march17, 2003, the u.s.court
of appeals denied plaintiffs motion for rehearing or
rehearing enbanc of the courts january9, 2003 decision.
iridium securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in two purported class action lawsuits
commenced, beginning on may26, 1999, in the u.s.district
court for the district of columbia brought on behalf of purchasers
of classa common stock of iridium world communications, ltd.
in a january1999 underwritten secondary offering of 7,500,000shares
of classa common stock at a price of $33.50per
share, as well as in the secondary market. the defendants in the
actions include iridium, certain of its officers and directors,
motorola, inc. (an investor in iridium) and the lead underwriters
in the offering, including goldman, sachs& co. on may13,
2002, plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended complaint alleging
substantively identical claims as the original complaints. on july15,
2002, the defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated
amended complaint, and by a decision dated august31, 2004, the
motion was denied. the complaints in both actions allege violations
of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and
seek compensatory and/or rescissory damages. goldman, sachs&
co. underwrote996,500shares of common stock and goldman
sachs international underwrote320,625shares of common
stock for a total offering price of approximately $44million.
on august13, 1999, iridium world
communications, ltd. filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy
laws.
table of contents
world online litigation
several lawsuits have been commenced
in the netherlands courts based on alleged misstatements and
omissions relating to the initial public offering of world online
in march2000. goldman sachs and abn amro rothschild served as
joint global coordinators of the approximately
2.9billion offering. goldman sachs international
underwrote 20,268,846shares and goldman, sachs& co.
underwrote 6,756,282shares for a total offering price of
approximately 1.16billion.
on september11, 2000, several
dutch world online shareholders as well as a dutch entity
purporting to represent the interests of certain world online
shareholders commenced a proceeding in amsterdam district court
against abn amro bank n.v., also acting under the name of abn amro
rothschild, alleging misrepresentations and omissions relating to
the initial public offering of world online. the lawsuit seeks,
among other things, the return of the purchase price of the shares
purchased by the plaintiffs or unspecified damages. by a decision
dated may7, 2003, the court held that the claims failed and
dismissed the complaint. the plaintiffs appealed, and by a decision
dated october7, 2004, the amsterdam court of appeal affirmed
dismissal of the complaint.
in march2001, a dutch shareholders
association initiated legal proceedings in amsterdam district court
in connection with the world online offering. goldman sachs
international is named as a defendant in the writ served on its
dutch attorneys on march14, 2001. the amount of damages sought
is not specified in the writ. goldman sachs international filed its
statement of defense on january16, 2002 and a rejoinder on
january14, 2003. by a decision dated december17, 2003,
the court rejected the claims against goldman sachs international,
but found world online liable in an amount to be determined. on
march12, 2004, the dutch shareholders association appealed
from the dismissal of their claims against goldman sachs
international.
owens corning bondholder litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in a purported class action filed on april27,
2001 in the u.s.district court for the district of
massachusetts arising from a 1998 offering by owens corning of two
series of its notes. the defendants include certain of owens
cornings officers and directors and the underwriters for the
offering (including goldman, sachs& co., which was the lead
manager in the offering). the offering included a total of $550million
principal amount of notes, of which goldman, sachs&
co. underwrote $275million.
the lawsuit, brought by certain
institutional purchasers of the notes, alleges that the prospectus
issued in connection with the offering was false and misleading in
violation of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities
laws. the plaintiffs are seeking, among other things, unspecified
damages. the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss the complaint
on november14,2001. by a decision dated august26,
2002, the federal district court denied the underwriter defendants
motion to dismiss, and by a decision dated march9, 2004 granted
plaintiffs motion for class certification. on october5, 2000, owens corning
filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
research independence matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and its
affiliates, together with other financial services firms, have
received requests for information from various governmental
agencies in connection with their review of research independence
issues, including the new york state attorney general, the utah
attorney general, the nyse (which has issued a joint inquiry
together with the sec and nasd), the u.s.attorneys office for
the southern district of new york, and the u.s.house of
representatives committee on financial services. goldman sachs is
cooperating with the requests.
on april28, 2003, a final global
settlement relating to investment research analysts alleged
conflicts of interest and involving various of the leading
securities firms operating in the united states, including the
goldman sachs group, inc.s u.s.broker-dealer subsidiary
goldman, sachs&
table of contents
co., was announced. in that connection, without admitting or denying the allegations, findings or
conclusions by various federal and state regulators, goldman sachs
entered into consents, agreements and other definitive
documentation with the sec, the nyse, the nasd and the utah
division of securities, to resolve their investigations of goldman,
sachs& co. relating to those matters. pursuant to the final
arrangements, goldman, sachs& co. agreed, among other things,
to (i)pay an aggregate of $25million as penalties, (ii)pay
an aggregate of $25million as disgorgement of
commissions and other monies, (iii)contribute an aggregate of
$50million over five years to provide independent third-party
research to clients, (iv)contribute an aggregate of $10million
over five years for investor education, (v)adopt
various additional policies, systems, procedures and other
safeguards to ensure further the integrity of goldman, sachs&
co. investment research and (vi)be permanently restrained and
enjoined from violating certain rules of the nyse and the nasd
relating to investment research activities. in connection with the
global settlement, goldman, sachs& co. also subscribed to a
voluntary initiative imposing restrictions on the allocation of
shares in initial public offerings to executives and directors of
public companies. in connection with effectuation of the global
settlement, in a civil action brought by the sec in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york against the
settling firms, including goldman, sachs& co., on october31,2003,
the court entered a final judgment imposing the
permanent restraint and injunction. in addition, goldman, sachs&
co. has entered into settlement stipulations with all 50states
and certain u.s.territories in connection with the
global settlement. current or future civil lawsuits implicating
investment research analysts conflicts of interest were not
settled as part of the global settlement. the global settlement
also did not resolve potential charges involving individual
employees, including supervisors, and regulatory investigations are
continuing.
goldman, sachs& co. is one of
several investment firms that have been named as defendants in
substantively identical purported class actions filed in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york alleging
violations of the federal securities laws in connection with
research coverage of certain issuers and seeking compensatory
damages. in one such action, relating to coverage of rsl
communications, inc. commenced on july5, 2003, goldman, sachs&
co. moved to dismiss the complaint on january13, 2004,
and the motion was denied by a decision dated may21, 2004.
on november9, 2004, plaintiffs moved for class certification. goldman, sachs& co. is also a defendant in several actions
relating to coverage of exodus communications, inc. that commenced
beginning in may2003. the actions were consolidated, and on march15,
2004, goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss.
a purported shareholder derivative
action was filed in new york supreme court, new york county on june13,
2003 against the goldman sachs group, inc. and its board
of directors, which, as amended, alleges that the directors
breached their fiduciary duties in connection with the firms
research as well as the firms ipo allocations practices. an
amended complaint was filed on march3, 2004.
the goldman sachs group, inc.,
goldman, sachs& co. and henry m. paulson,jr. have been
named as defendants in a purported class action filed on july18,
2003 and now pending in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york
on behalf of purchasers of the goldman sachs group, inc. stock from
july1,1999 through may7, 2002. the complaint
alleges that defendants breached their fiduciary duties and
violated the federal securities laws in connection with the firms
research activities. the complaint seeks, among other things,
unspecified compensatory damages and/or rescission. defendants moved to dismiss the amended
complaint on august30, 2004.
on june23, 2003, the west
virginia attorney general filed an action against all of the
settling securities firms in west virginia circuit court, marshall
county, alleging violations of the west virginia consumer credit
and protection act in connection with their research activities and
seeking monetary penalties. on august25, 2003, defendants
moved to dismiss the complaint and to disqualify the private law
firms retained by the attorney general in connection with the
action. on may6, 2004, the circuit court denied the motion to
disqualify the private law firms. on july23, 2004,
table of contents
the circuit court denied defendants motion to dismiss but certified the matter
to the west virginia supreme court to resolve the issue of whether
the west virginia consumer credit and protection act applies to the
alleged activities. the west virginia supreme court accepted the
appeal by order dated january19, 2005.
enron litigation matters
goldman sachs affiliates are
defendants in certain actions arising relating to enron corp.,
which filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on
december2, 2001.
goldman, sachs& co. and
co-managing underwriters have been named as defendants in certain
purported securities class and individual actions commenced
beginning on december14,2001 in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of texas and california superior
court brought by purchasers of $222,500,000 of exchangeable notes
of enron corp. in august1999. the notes were mandatorily
exchangeable in 2002 into shares of enron oil& gas company
held by enron corp. or their cash equivalent. the complaints also
name as defendants certain past and present officers and directors
of enron corp. and the companys outside accounting firm. the
complaints generally allege violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws and/or state law, and
seek compensatory damages. goldman, sachs& co. underwrote
$111,250,000 principal amount of the notes. goldman, sachs&
co. moved to dismiss the class action complaint in the texas
federal court on march15, 2004.
several funds which allegedly
sustained investment losses of approximately $125million in
connection with secondary market purchases of the exchangeable
notes as well as zero coupon convertible notes of enron corp.
commenced an action in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york on january16, 2002. as amended, the
lawsuit names as defendants the underwriters of the august1999
offering, the companys outside accounting firm, various former
officers and directors of enron corp., as well as other financial
services firms, and alleges violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws, fraud and
misrepresentation. by an order dated june24, 2002, the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation entered an order
transferring that action to the texas federal district court for
purposes of coordinated or consolidated pretrial proceedings with
other matters relating to enron corp. on march20, 2002,
goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the complaint. by a
decision dated december10, 2003, the motion was granted in
part and denied in part; goldman, sachs& co. has sought
clarification and reconsideration of the decision.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and
goldman, sachs& co. have been named as defendants in two
substantively identical purported class actions filed on june5,
2003 in oregon circuit court, multnomah county, on behalf of
former shareholders of portland general corporation. the complaints
generally allege that defendants breached their fiduciary duties in
connection with portland generals 1997 merger with enron corp., in
respect of which goldman, sachs& co. acted as financial
advisor to portland general. the defendants also include arthur
andersen, llp, andersen-u.s., and certain former officers and
directors of portland general. the complaints seek unspecified
compensatory damages. in july2003, defendants removed the actions
to the u.s.district court for the district of oregon, and the
actions have been transferred by the judicial panel on
multidistrict litigation to the u.s.district court for the
southern district of texas for coordinated proceedings with other
actions relating to enron corp. on february25, 2004, the
goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co. moved to
dismiss the action, and on august5, 2004, the federal district
court granted the motion to dismiss and denied plaintiffs motion
to remand the actions to state court. on october14, 2004,
plaintiffs moved for reconsideration, and on november10, 2004,
the motion was denied.
on september26, 2003, enron
north america corp. commenced an adversary proceeding in the u.s.bankruptcy
court for the southern district of new york against
goldman sachs capital markets, l.p., the goldman sachs group, inc.
and its predecessor, the goldman sachs group,
table of contents
l.p., seeking to recover approximately $45million and other unspecified damages
in connection with the early termination in late 2001 of an
agreement for the trading of over-the-counter derivatives between
enron north america corp. and goldman sachs capital markets, l.p.,
whose obligations under the agreement were allegedly guaranteed by
the goldman sachs group, inc. and the goldman sachs group, l.p. in
addition, on november26, 2003, enron corp. filed an adversary
proceeding in the u.s.district court for the southern district
of new york against j. aron& company seeking to avoid certain
guarantees issued by enron corp. in favor of j. aron& company
allegedly guaranteeing obligations of enron north america corp. to
j. aron& company. an agreement in principle has been reached
to resolve both of these adversary proceedings.
goldman, sachs& co. is among
numerous defendants in two substantively identical actions filed in
the u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york
beginning in november2003 seeking to recover as fraudulent
transfers and/or preferences payments made by enron corp. in
repurchasing its commercial paper shortly before its bankruptcy
filing. goldman, sachs& co., which had acted as a commercial
paper dealer for enron corp., resold to enron corp. approximately
$30million of commercial paper as principal, and as an agent
facilitated enron corp.s repurchase of additional commercial paper
from various customers who have also been named as defendants.
goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the complaints on february19,
2004.
exodus securities litigation
by an amended complaint dated july11,
2002, goldman, sachs& co. and the other lead
underwriters for the february2001 offering of 13,000,000shares
of common stock and $575,000,000 of 5 1/4%convertible
subordinated notes of exodus communications, inc. were added as
defendants in a purported class action pending in the u.s.district
court for the northern district of california. the
complaint, which also names as defendants certain officers and
directors of exodus communications, inc., alleges violations of the
disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and seeks
compensatory damages. on october23, 2002, the underwriter
defendants moved to dismiss the complaint. by a decision dated
august19, 2003, the district court granted the defendants
motion to dismiss with leave to replead, and the plaintiffs filed a
third amended complaint on january15, 2004. on march12,
2004, the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss the third amended
complaint. goldman, sachs& co. underwrote5,200,000shares
of common stock for a total offering price of approximately
$96,200,000, and $230,000,000 principal amount of the notes.
on september26, 2001, exodus
communications, inc. filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy
laws.
montana power shareholders litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and the
goldman sachs group, inc. have been named as defendants in a
purported class action commenced originally on october1, 2001
in montana district court, second judicial district on behalf of
shareholders of montana power company. the complaint generally
alleges that montana power company violated montana law by failing
to procure shareholder approval of certain corporate strategies and
transactions, that the companys board breached its fiduciary
duties in pursuing those strategies and transactions, and that
goldman, sachs& co. aided and abetted the boards breaches and
rendered negligent advice in its role as financial advisor to the
company. the complaint seeks, among other things, compensatory
damages. in addition to goldman, sachs& co. and the goldman
sachs group, inc., the defendants include montana power company,
certain of its officers and directors, an outside law firm for the
montana power company, and certain companies that purchased assets
from montana power company and its affiliates. the montana state
court denied motions to dismiss by a decision dated august1,
2002. on july18, 2003, following the bankruptcies of certain
defendants in the action, defendants removed the action to federal
court, the u.s.district court for the district of montana,
butte division.
table of contents
on october26, 2004, a creditors
committee of touch america holdings, inc. brought an action against
goldman, sachs& co., the goldman sachs group, inc., and a
former outside law firm for montana power company in montana
district court, second judicial district. the complaint asserts
that touch america holdings, inc. is the successor to montana power
corporation and alleges substantially the same claims as in the
purported class action. defendants removed the action to the federal
district court on november19, 2004. on january14, 2005, defendants
moved to dismiss the complaint.
worldcom bondholders litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and other
underwriters of worldcom, inc. bonds have been named as defendants
in certain purported securities class and individual actions
commenced beginning in june 2002 alleging that the offering
materials issued in connection with certain securities offerings
were false and misleading. certain of the lawsuits (some of which
were originally filed in various state courts and removed to
federal court) have been transferred by order of the judicial panel
on multidistrict litigation to the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york, and similar requests for transfer
are pending in other actions. goldman, sachs& co. underwrote
$75,000,000 principal amount out of a total principal amount of
$5,000,000,000 of notes in a may24,
2000 offering. among the defendants in these actions in addition to
the underwriters are worldcom, inc., certain of worldcom, inc.s
present or former officers and/or directors, and/or worldcom,
inc.s outside accounting firm. each of these actions seeks, among
other things, compensatory damages. the district court denied the
underwriter defendants motion to dismiss by a decision dated may19,
2003 and granted plaintiffs motion for class
certification by an order dated october24, 2003. on august20,
2004, the underwriter defendants moved for summary judgment and
plaintiffs cross-moved for partial summary judgment as to
liability. by a decision dated december15, 2004, the district
court granted in part and denied in part the motions.
on may10, 2004, plaintiffs
entered into a definitive settlement agreement with citicorp, inc.
and certain related parties, including as to claims asserted
against such parties in respect of the 2000 offering in which
goldman, sachs& co. participated as a member of the syndicate.
the settlement, pursuant to which the settling defendants have
agreed to pay $2.65billion (subsequently reduced to $2.575
billion), was approved by a decision dated
november12, 2004. the settlement does not resolve claims
against the balance of the syndicate, including goldman, sachs& co.
on july21, 2002, worldcom, inc.
filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
global crossing and asia global crossing securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in a consolidated class action lawsuit in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
relating to various securities offerings by global crossing, ltd.
and asia global crossing ltd. in which goldman, sachs& co.
acted as an underwriter. the claims had originally been asserted in
separate actions, reflected in an amended complaint filed on january28,
2003 as to global crossing, ltd. and in a complaint filed
on november8, 2002 as to asia global crossing ltd., but the
claims were consolidated into a single amended complaint on august11,
2003, which was further amended on march22, 2004
(including to drop the goldman sachs group, inc. as a defendant).
the consolidated action includes claims relating to global
crossing, ltd.s concurrent april2000 offerings of 43million
shares of common stock at $33per share and 4.6million
shares (including the overallotment) of 6 3/4% cumulative preferred
stock at $250per share, as well as asia global crossing ltd.s
october2000 initial public offering of 68,500,000shares
(including the overallotment) of common stock at a price of $7per
share. goldman, sachs& co. acted as a co-lead underwriter
of both global crossing, ltd. offerings, underwriting 12.9million
shares of common stock and 1,840,000shares of
convertible preferred stock. goldman, sachs& co. underwrote20,670,000shares
of common stock in the asia global
crossing ltd. offering for a total offering price of approximately
$145million. the claims assert
table of contents
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws as to such offerings
and seek compensatory and/or rescissory damages. the defendants as
to such claims include certain officers and directors of global
crossing, ltd. and asia global crossing ltd. (who have since
settled the claims against them), the lead and other underwriters
in the offerings, and the companys former outside auditors. on
april21, 2003, the underwriter defendants as to the global
crossing, ltd. offerings moved to dismiss the claims relating to
such offerings; the motion was denied in significant part by a
decision dated december18, 2003. on july23, 2004, the
underwriter defendants as to the asia global crossing ltd. offering
moved to dismiss the claims relating to that offering.
global crossing, ltd. filed for
protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on january28,
2002, and asia global crossing ltd. filed for such protection on
november17, 2002.
adelphia communications fraudulent conveyance litigations
goldman, sachs& co. is among
numerous entities named as defendants in two adversary proceedings
commenced in the u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern
district of new york, one on july6, 2003 by a creditors
committee, and the second on or about july31, 2003 by an
equity committee of adelphia communications, inc. the nearly
identical complaints seek, among other things, to recover, as
fraudulent conveyances, payments made allegedly by adelphia
communications, inc. and its affiliates to certain brokerage firms,
including approximately $62.9million allegedly paid to
goldman, sachs& co., in respect of margin calls made in the
ordinary course of business on accounts owned by members of the
family that formerly controlled adelphia communications, inc.
specialist matters
spear, leeds& kellogg
specialists llc (slks)and certain affiliates have received
requests for information from the sec, the nyse and the u.s.attorneys
office for the southern district of new york as part of
an industry-wide investigation relating to activities of nyse floor
specialists in recent years. goldman sachs is cooperating with the
requests.
on march30, 2004, a final global
settlement with the sec and the nyse was announced covering certain
activities during the years 1999 through 2003 of certain specialist
firms on the nyse, including slks. without admitting or denying the
allegations, slks and the other specialist firms entered into
settlements to resolve these sec and nyse investigations of the
firms with respect to those activities. the slks settlement
involves, among other things, (i)findings by the sec and the
nyse that slks violated certain federal securities laws and nyse
rules, and in some cases failed to supervise certain individual
specialists, in connection with trades that allegedly disadvantaged
customer orders, (ii)a cease and desist order against slks,
(iii)a censure of slks, (iv)slks agreement to pay an
aggregate of $45.3million in disgorgement and a penalty to be
used to compensate customers, (v)certain undertakings with
respect to slks systems and procedures, and (vi)slks
retention of an independent consultant to review and evaluate
certain of slks compliance systems, policies and procedures.
comparable findings were made and sanctions imposed in the
settlements with other specialist firms. the settlement did not
resolve the related private civil actions against slks and other
firms or regulatory investigations involving individuals.
slks, spear, leeds& kellogg,
l.p. and the goldman sachs group, inc. are among numerous
defendants named in purported class actions brought on behalf of
investors beginning in october2003 in the u.s.district court
for the southern district of new york alleging violations of the
federal securities laws and state common law in connection with
nyse floor specialist activities. the actions seek unspecified
compensatory damages, restitution and disgorgement on behalf of
purchasers and sellers of unspecified securities between october17,
1998 and october15, 2003. plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint on september16, 2004, and on
november16,2004, defendants moved to dismiss the amended
complaint.
table of contents
treasury matters
on september4, 2003, the sec
announced that goldman, sachs& co. had settled an
administrative proceeding arising from certain trading in u.s.treasury
bonds over an approximately eight-minute period after
goldman, sachs& co. received an october31, 2001 telephone
call from a washington,d.c.-based political consultant
concerning a forthcoming treasury refunding announcement. the
administrative complaint alleged that goldman, sachs& co. (i)violated
section15(c)(1) and rule15c1-2 of the
securities exchange act of 1934 as a result of the trading; and (ii)violated
section 15(f) of the securities exchange act of
1934 by failing to maintain policies and procedures specifically
addressed to the possible misuse of information obtained by
consultants from confidential government sources. without admitting
or denying the allegations, goldman, sachs& co. consented to
the entry of an order that, among other things, (i)censured
goldman, sachs& co.; (ii)directed goldman, sachs&
co. to cease and desist from committing or causing any violations
of section15(c)(1)(a)& (c)and 15(f) of, and rule15c1-2
under, the securities exchange act of 1934; (iii)ordered
goldman, sachs& co. to pay disgorgement and
prejudgment interest in the amount of $1,742,642, and a civil
monetary penalty of $5million; and (iv)directed goldman,
sachs& co. to conduct a review of its policies and procedures
and adopt, implement and maintain policies and procedures
consistent with the order and that review. goldman, sachs& co.
also undertook to pay $2,562,740 in disgorgement and interest
relating to certain trading in u.s.treasury bond futures
during the same eight-minute period.
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in a purported class action filed on march10,
2004 in the u.s.district court for the northern district
of illinois on behalf of holders of short positions in 30-year u.s.treasury
futures and options on the morning of october31,
2001. the complaint alleges that the firm purchased 30-year bonds
and futures prior to the treasurys refunding announcement that
morning based on non-public information about that announcement,
and that such purchases increased the costs of covering such short
positions. the complaint also names as defendants the washington,d.c.-based
political consultant who allegedly was the source
of the information, a former goldman, sachs& co. economist who
allegedly received the information, and another company and one of
its employees who also allegedly received and traded on the
information prior to its public announcement. the complaint alleges
violations of the federal commodities and antitrust laws, as well
as illinois statutory and common law, and seeks, among other
things, unspecified damages including treble damages under the
antitrust laws. on june28,2004, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the complaint.
mutual fundmatters
goldman, sachs& co. and certain
mutual fund affiliates have received subpoenas and requests for
information from various regulators including the sec as part of
the industry-wide investigation relating to the practices of mutual
funds and their customers. goldman, sachs& co. and its
affiliates are cooperating with such requests.
the goldman sachs group, inc.,
goldman, sachs& co. and various asset management affiliates
and employees have been named as defendants in several putative
consolidated class and derivative actions commenced in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york beginning in
april2004 by purported shareholders of certain goldman sachs
mutual funds. the consolidated complaint also names as nominal
defendants certain of the goldman sachs family of mutual funds. the
cases are brought on behalf of all persons or entities which held
shares in these mutual funds between april2, 1999 and january9,
2004, and allege violations of the investment company act
of 1940, the investment advisers act of 1940 and common law
breaches of fiduciary duty. the complaint alleges, among other
things, that goldman sachs charged the mutual funds improper rule12b-1
fees, paid excessive brokerage commissions and made
other undisclosed payments to brokers in exchange for selling
shares of the mutual funds, and made untrue statements of material
fact in registration statements and reports filed pursuant to the
investment company act. the complaint further alleges that the
funds trustees, officers and directors breached
table of contents
their fiduciary duties by, among other things, failing to prevent such violations.
the complaint seeks compensatory and punitive damages; rescission
of the funds investment advisory agreements with goldman sachs and
recovery of fees paid; an accounting of all fund-related fees,
commissions and other payments; restitution of all unlawfully or
discriminatorily-obtained fees and charges; and costs and expenses
incurred in connection with these lawsuits.
item4.
submission of matters to
a vote of security holders
there were no matters submitted to a
vote of security holders during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year ended november26, 2004.
table of contents
executive officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
set forth below are the name, age,
present title, principal occupation and certain biographical
information for our executive officers as of february1, 2005,
all of whom have been appointed by and serve at the pleasure of our
board of directors.
henry m. paulson,jr., 58
mr.paulson has been our chairman
and chief executive officer since may1999, and a director since
august1998. he was co-chairman and chief executive officer or
co-chief executive officer of the goldman sachs group, l.p., our
predecessor, from june1998 to may1999, and served as chief
operating officer from december1994 to june1998. mr.paulson
is not on the board of any public company other than goldman sachs.
he is affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including
as a member of the board of directors of catalyst. he also serves
on the advisory board of the j.l. kellogg graduate school of
management at northwestern university and is a member of the board
of the deans advisors of the harvard business school. mr.paulson
is a member of the advisory board of the tsinghua
university school of economics and management and a member of the
governing board of the indian school of business. he is also
chairman of the board of governors of the nature conservancy,
co-chairman of the asia/pacific council of the nature conservancy
and chairman emeritus of the peregrine fund, inc.
lloyd c. blankfein, 50
mr.blankfein has been our
president and chief operating officer since january2004, and a
director since april2003. prior to that, from april2002 until
january2004, he was a vice chairman of goldman sachs, with
management responsibility for the ficc division and the equities
division. prior to becoming a vice chairman, he had been co-head of
ficc since its formation in 1997. from 1994 until then, he headed
or co-headed the j. aron currency and commodities division. mr.blankfein
is not on the board of any public company other than
goldman sachs. he is affiliated with certain non-profit
organizations, including as chairman of the harvard university
financial aid task force and as a member of the executive committee
of the harvard university committee on university resources, the
board of trustees of the new york historical society, the board of
overseers of the weill medical college of cornell university and
the board of directors of the partnership for new york city and the
robin hood foundation.
alan m. cohen, 54
mr.cohen has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our global head of compliance
since february2004. from 1991 until january2004, he was a partner
in the law firm of omelveny& myers llp. mr.cohen is also
affiliated with the chelsea piers scholarship fund, a non-profit
organization.
edward c. forst, 44
mr.forst has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our chief administrative
officer since february2004. prior to that, he was our chief of
staff for ficc from november2003 to february2004 (after having
served in that position earlier from july2000 to march2002), our
chief of staff for the equities division from august2003 to
february2004, and co-head of global credit markets in ficc from
march2002 to august2003. prior to july2000, mr.forst served
as co-head of our global bank debt business. mr.forst serves
as vice chairman of the board of directors of the bond market
association and is currently its chairman-elect, with his term as
chairman beginning as of july1, 2005. he also serves as a
corporation member of the woods hole oceanographic institution, a
non-profit organization.
table of contents
robert s. kaplan, 47
mr.kaplan has been a vice
chairman of goldman sachs since april2002. he served as global
co-head of the investment banking division from 1999 through april
2002 and was co-chief operating officer of global investment
banking from 1998 to 1999. he became head of the americas corporate
finance department in 1994. previously, he had been head of
asia-pacific investment banking from 1990 through 1993. mr.kaplan
is a director of bed bath& beyond inc., which is a
public company. in addition, he is affiliated with certain
non-profit organizations, including as co-chairman of the board of
the teak fellowship, co-chairman of the board of project a.l.s. and
a director of the harvard medical school, the harvard center for
neurodegeneration and repair, the jewish theological seminary and
the jewish museum.
kevin w. kennedy, 56
mr.kennedy has been our
executive vice president human capital management since
december2001. from 1999 until 2001, he served as a member of the
executive office. from 1994 to 1999, he served as head of the
americas group, in the investment banking division, and, from 1988
to 1994, as head of corporate finance. mr.kennedy is a life
trustee and a former chairman of the board of hamilton college, a
managing director and secretary and treasurer of the board of the
metropolitan opera, a trustee of the new york public library, a
member of the board of directors of the wallace foundation and an
honorary trustee of the chewonki foundation.
suzanne m. nora johnson, 47
ms.nora johnson has been a vice
chairman of goldman sachs since november2004. she has served as
chairman of the global market institute since april2004 and has
headed our global investment research division since february2002.
ms.nora johnson served as head of our global healthcare
business in the investment banking division from 1994 to 2002. she
also serves on the boards of the goldman sachs foundation, the carnegie institution of
washington, the university of southern california, rand health,
technoserve, children now and womens world banking, and is on an
advisory council of harvard medical school.
gregory k. palm, 56
mr.palm has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs since may1999, and our general
counsel and head or co-head of the legal department since may1992.
esta e. stecher, 47
ms.stecher has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our general counsel and co-head
of the legal department since december2000. from 1994 to 2000, she
was head of the firms tax department, over which she continues to
have senior oversight responsibility. she is also a trustee of
columbia university and a member of the board of directors of the
securities industry association.
david a. viniar, 49
mr.viniar has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our chief financial officer
since may1999. he has been the head of operations, technology and
finance division since december2002. he was head of the finance
division and co-head of credit risk management and advisory and
firmwide risk from december2001 to december2002. mr.viniar
was co-head of operations, finance and resources from march1999 to
december2001. he was chief financial officer of the goldman sachs
group, l.p. from march1999 to may1999. from july1998 until
march1999, he was deputy chief financial officer and from 1994
until july1998, he was head of finance, with responsibility for
controllers and treasury. from 1992 to 1994, he was head of
treasury and prior to that was in the structured finance department
of investment banking. he also serves on the board of trustees of
union college.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related
stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market on which our
common stock is traded is the nyse. information relating to the
high and low sales prices per share of our common stock, as
reported by the consolidated tape association, for each full
quarterly period during fiscal 2003 and 2004 is set forth under the
caption supplemental financial information common stock
price range in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
as of january28, 2005, there were 5,660holders
of record of our common stock.
during fiscal 2003 and 2004,
dividends of $0.12per share of common stock were declared on
december18, 2002 and march19, 2003, and dividends of $0.25per
share of common stock were declared on june24, 2003,
september22, 2003, december17, 2003, march22, 2004,
june21,2004 and september20, 2004. the holders of
our common stock share proportionately on a per share basis in all
dividends and other distributions declared by our board of
directors.
the declaration of dividends by
goldman sachs is subject to the discretion of our board of
directors. our board of directors will take into account such
matters as general business conditions, our financial results,
capital requirements, contractual, legal and regulatory
restrictions on the payment of dividends by us to our shareholders
or by our subsidiaries to us, the effect on our debt ratings and
such other factors as our board of directors may deem relevant. see
business regulation in parti, item1 of the annual
report on form10-k for a discussion of potential regulatory
limitations on our receipt of funds from our regulated subsidiaries.
table of contents
the table below sets forth the
information with respect to purchases made by or on behalf of the
goldman sachs group, inc. or any affiliated purchaser (as defined
in rule10b-18(a)(3) under the securities exchange act of 1934)
of our common stock during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year
ended november26, 2004.
total number of
maximum number
average
shares purchased
of shares that may
total number
price
as part of publicly
yet be purchased
of shares
paid per
announced plans
under the plans or
period
purchased(2)
share
or programs(3)
programs(3)
month#1
299,000
$
93.32
299,000
11,678,094
(august28, 2004 to
september24, 2004)
month#2
3,086,300
$
94.43
3,086,300
8,591,794
(september25, 2004 to
october29, 2004)
month#3
2,199,200
$
100.18
2,199,200
6,392,594
(october30, 2004 to
november26, 2004)
total(1)
5,584,500
$
96.63
5,584,500
(1)
as a matter of policy, goldman sachs did not
repurchase shares of its common stock as part of the
repurchase program during the last 11 business days of
the fourth quarter due to a standard self-imposed
black-out period prior to the release of its quarterly
earnings.
(2)
no shares were purchased other than through our
publicly announced repurchase program during the fourth
quarter of our fiscal year ended november26, 2004.
(3)
on march21, 2000, we announced that our
board of directors had approved a repurchase program,
pursuant to which up to 15million shares of our
common stock may be repurchased. this repurchase program
was increased by an aggregate of 100million shares
by resolutions of our board of directors adopted on june18,
2001, march18,2002, november20,
2002, january30, 2004 and january25, 2005. the
repurchase program is intended to substantially offset
increases in share count over time resulting from
employee equity-based compensation and to help maintain
our shareholders equity at appropriate levels. the
repurchase program is being effected from time to time,
depending on market conditions and other factors, through
open market purchases and privately negotiated
transactions. taking into account the increased
authorization, the total remaining authorization under
the repurchase program was 40,012,422 shares as of january28,
2005; the repurchase program has no set
expiration or termination date.
information relating to compensation
plans under which equity securities of the registrant are
authorized for issuance is set forth in partiii, item12
of the annual report on form10-k.
item6.
selected financial data
the selected financial data table is
set forth in partii, item8 of the annual report on form
10-k.
table of contents
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and
results of operations
index
page
no.
introduction
executive overview
business environment
certain factors that may affect our business
critical accounting policies
fair value
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
use of estimates
results of operations
financial overview
segment operating results
geographic data
off-balance-sheet arrangements
capital and funding
capital
short-term borrowings
credit ratings
contractual obligations and contingent commitments
regulated subsidiaries
risk management
risk management structure
market risk
credit risk
derivatives
liquidity risk
operational risk
recent accounting developments
table of contents
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global
investment banking, securities and investment management firm that
provides a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals.
our activities are divided into three
segments:
investment banking. we provide a broad range of investment banking services to a
diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals.
trading and principal investments. we facilitate customer transactions with a
diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals
and take proprietary positions through market making in, and trading of, fixed
income and equity products, currencies, commodities and derivatives on such
products. in addition, we engage in floor-based and electronic market making as a
specialist on u.s.equities and options exchanges and we clear customer
transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection
with our merchant banking and other investment activities, we make principal
investments directly and through funds that we raise and manage.
asset management and securities services. we offer a broad array of investment
strategies, advice and planning across all major asset classes to a diverse group of
institutions and individuals worldwide, and provide prime brokerage, financing
services and securities lending services to mutual funds, pension funds, hedge
funds, foundations and high-net-worth individuals worldwide.
unless specifically stated otherwise,
all references to 2004, 2003 and 2002 refer to our fiscal years
ended, or the dates, as the context requires, november26,
2004, november28, 2003 and november29, 2002, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman
sachs, we, us and our, we mean the goldman sachs group, inc.
(group inc.), a delaware corporation, and its consolidated
subsidiaries. references herein to the annual report on form10-k
are to our annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year
ended november26, 2004.
in this discussion, we have included
statements that may constitute forward-looking statements within
the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995. these forward-looking statements are
not historical facts but instead represent only our beliefs
regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are
inherently uncertain and beyond our control. these statements
relate to our future plans and objectives, among other things. by
identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are
alerting you to the possibility that our actual results may differ,
possibly materially, from the results indicated in these
forward-looking statements. important factors, among others, that
could cause our results to differ, possibly materially, from those
indicated in the forward-looking statements are discussed below
under certain factors that may affect our business as well
as business certain factors that may affect our business in
parti, item1 of the annual report on form10-k.
executive overview
our diluted earnings per share were
$8.92 for 2004, a 52% increase compared with 2003. return on
average tangible shareholders equity was 25.2%(1) and
return on average shareholders equity was 19.8%. our results in
2004 reflected strong growth in trading and principal investments,
asset management and securities services, and investment banking.
the increase in trading and
(1)
return on average tangible shareholders equity is computed by dividing net earnings by average monthly tangible
shareholders equity. see  results of operations included below for further information regarding our calculation of
return on average tangible shareholders equity.
table of contents
principal investments reflected
significantly higher net revenues in fixed income, currency and
commodities (ficc), as all major businesses and regions performed
well in a generally favorable environment. net revenues in our
principal investments business also increased significantly, due to
an unrealized gain on our investment in the convertible preferred
stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg), as well as
gains from other corporate principal investments. in addition,
equities net revenues improved, primarily reflecting higher
customer-driven activity and favorable market conditions early in
2004, but results remained below the peak levels achieved in 2001
and 2000. equities operated in a less favorable environment after
our first fiscal quarter of 2004, as volatility levels continued to
decline and markets generally lacked direction before moving higher
in the last several weeks of our fiscal year. asset management and
securities services generated strong net revenue growth, primarily
reflecting higher average assets under management, increased
incentive fees and significantly higher customer balances in
securities services. in investment banking, net revenues increased
for the first time in three years, highlighted by strong growth in
our financial advisory and equity underwriting businesses,
primarily reflecting an increase in industry-wide corporate
activity. our investment banking backlog at the end of 2004 was
higher than at the end of 2003.(2)
our operating results in 2004
reflected improvement in the economic environment as well as a
number of trends that have emerged in recent years. we continued to
see increased trading and investing opportunities for our clients
and ourselves in 2004 and, consequently, we increased our market
risk during the year to capitalize on these opportunities. our
investment banking results reflected our best performance in three
years as corporate activity began to recover, although competitive
pressures remained. in our equities business, although our results
were higher compared with 2003 as customer-driven activity
improved, commission rates continued to decline and demands for us
to commit capital remained significant. in the regulatory
environment, financial services firms continued to be under intense
scrutiny, with the scope of such scrutiny unabated in the last
year. consequently, the volume and amount of claims against
financial institutions and other related costs remained significant
in 2004. given the range of litigation and investigations presently
under way, our litigation expenses can be expected to remain high.
though our operating results were
strong in 2004, our business, by its nature, does not produce
predictable earnings. our results in any given period can be
materially affected by conditions in global financial markets and
economic conditions generally. for a further discussion of these
trends and other factors affecting our businesses, see certain
factors that may affect our business included below as
well as business certain factors that may affect our
business in parti, item1 of the annual report on form
10-k.
business environment
as an investment banking, securities
and investment management firm, our businesses are materially
affected by conditions in the financial markets and economic
conditions generally, both in the united states and elsewhere
around the world. a favorable business environment is generally
characterized by low inflation, low and declining interest rates,
and strong equity markets. over the business cycle, these factors
provide a positive climate for our investment banking activities,
for many of our trading businesses and for wealth creation, which
contributes to growth in our asset management business. although
geopolitical uncertainty continued and inflation was slightly
higher, interest rates, although rising, remained low, merger
activity improved, and global equity prices, although spending much
of the year in a fairly narrow range, generally increased. for a
further discussion of how market conditions can affect our
businesses, see certain factors that may affect our
business included below as well as business certain factors
that may affect our
(2)
our investment banking backlog represents an estimate of our future net revenues from investment banking transactions where
we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than not.
table of contents
business in parti, item1 of the
annual report on form10-k. a further discussion of the
business environment in 2004 is set forth below.
global. after improving during the
second half of 2003, growth in the global economy continued to
improve during 2004, with worldwide real gross domestic product in
the calendar year growing at one of its highest rates in the last
twenty years. the pace of growth was particularly strong in the
first half of 2004, but slowed throughout the remainder of the
year. the japanese economy grew very strongly early in 2004 but
slowed significantly after the first quarter. after rising early in
our fiscal year, global equity markets spent much of the year in a
fairly narrow range, but many of the major markets rallied
beginning in late october, leading to solid gains over the year.
although the u.s.federal reserve began to raise its federal
funds rate target in june2004, fixed income markets generally
performed well, as long-term bond yields ended the year close to,
or below the levels at the beginning of the year, and corporate
credit spreads remained tight. in the currency markets, the u.s.dollar
weakened further against the major currencies, though
the weakening was generally smaller than in 2003 and occurred
largely at the end of our fiscal year. corporate activity, as
measured by industry-wide completed and announced mergers and
acquisitions as well as equity underwriting volumes, increased
significantly during the year, reflecting the continued economic
recovery and strengthening equity markets. in addition,
industry-wide debt origination volumes remained strong.
united states. the u.s.economy
grew at a strong pace during the year. real gross domestic product
in the 2004 calendar year rose by approximately 4.4%. although
quarterly growth fell from the very high level seen in the third
quarter of 2003, it remained strong throughout the year. a brief
softening in consumer spending led to a decline in quarterly real
gross domestic product growth during the second calendar quarter,
but the pace of economic growth appears to have accelerated again
in subsequent quarters. strong economic and productivity growth
contributed to strong corporate profit growth during the year.
inflation increased throughout the year. in response to the
improving environment and rising inflation, the u.s.federal
reserve raised the federal funds rate target by 25basis points
in june, and subsequently raised rates a further 75basis
points by the end of our fiscal year to 2.0%. despite rising
short-term interest rates, long-term yields moved higher only
briefly, for several months around midyear, and ended the year
close to levels at the beginning of the year. with the u.s.dollar
weakening further, financial conditions remained supportive
of economic activity. the dow jones industrial average, the s&p500
index and the nasdaq composite index increased 8%, 12% and 7%,
respectively, during our fiscal year.
europe. economic conditions improved
in europe during 2004. real gross domestic product growth in the
eurozone economies rose to approximately 1.8% in the 2004 calendar
year, a significant improvement from the previous two years, as
domestic demand rose and export performance improved. growth in the
eurozone economies appears to have been stronger in the first half
of the year than the second half of the year, as consumer spending
slowed from the strong first quarter, and the strengthening euro,
in part, restrained economic activity later in the year. the
european central bank left interest rates unchanged through the
year, but long-term bond yields fell significantly in response to
signs of softer economic activity and the sharp rise in the euro in
late 2004. the u.k. economy recorded strong growth in 2004, though
real gross domestic product growth slowed significantly during the
third quarter. after starting to raise interest rates in november
2003, the bank of england raised interest rates during 2004 by 100basis
points. the ftse 100 index increased 9% during our
fiscal year.
asia. japans economy grew very
strongly in early 2004, though the pace of growth slowed
significantly after the first calendar quarter, as investment
spending and export growth slowed. despite slowing after the first
quarter, consumer spending growth remained strong through much of
2004 and corporate profitability continued to improve. the bank of
japan continued to provide substantial liquidity to the market and
continued to hold short-term interest rates at zero percent through
the year. the ministry of finance ceased intervention to support
the japanese yen in march2004 and the yen remained generally
strong. bond yields rose significantly in the middle of
table of contents
the year but subsequently declined in line with global trends, while the
nikkei 225 index increased 7% during our fiscal year.
growth in other asian economies
remained very strong in 2004, reflecting strong global demand
growth, though the pace of economic growth appears to have peaked
in many economies around the middle of the year. chinas growth
generally remained firm, though the pace of growth slowed in the
middle of the year, as administrative measures to slow certain
parts of the economy had a dampening effect on investment spending.
inflation generally rose throughout the year and, in october, the
central bank of china increased interest rates for the first time
since july1995, raising its benchmark lending rate by 27basis
points.
certain factors that may affect our business
we face a variety of risks that are
substantial and inherent in our businesses, including market,
credit, liquidity, operational, legal and regulatory risks. for a
discussion of how management seeks to manage some of these risks,
see risk management included below. a summary of some of
the important factors that could affect our business follows below.
for a further discussion of these and other important factors that
could affect our business, see business certain factors that
may affect our business in parti, item1 of the annual
report on form10-k.
market conditions and market risk.
our businesses are materially affected by conditions in the global
financial markets and economic conditions generally. business
conditions continued to improve in 2004, after improving somewhat
during the second half of 2003: the number and size of equity
underwritings and completed mergers and acquisitions transactions
increased significantly in 2004, after declining for three straight
years, and fixed income origination levels remained strong; fixed
income market conditions remained generally favorable, as interest
rates, although rising, remained low by historical standards, and
corporate credit spreads remained narrow; and in the global equity
markets, although volatility levels and commission rates continued
to decline, price levels and volumes were generally stronger.
adverse or uncertain economic and
market conditions have in the past adversely affected, and may in
the future adversely affect, our business and profitability in many
ways, including the following:
we have been operating in a low interest rate market for the past several years.
increasing or high interest rates and/or widening credit spreads, especially if such
changes are rapid, may create a less favorable environment for certain of our
businesses.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of our businesses
and generally maintain large trading, specialist and investment positions. market
fluctuations and volatility may adversely affect the value of those positions or may
reduce our willingness to enter into new transactions. conversely, our trading
businesses depend on market volatility to provide trading and arbitrage
opportunities, and decreases in volatility may reduce these opportunities and
adversely affect the results of these businesses.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings and mergers and
acquisitions and increased price competition may have an adverse effect on our
revenues and, because we may be unable to reduce expenses correspondingly, our
profit margins. in particular, because a significant portion of our investment
banking revenues are derived from our participation in large transactions, a
decrease in the number of large transactions due to uncertain or unfavorable market
conditions may adversely affect our investment banking business.
reductions in the level of the equity markets also tend to reduce the value of our
clients portfolios, which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for managing assets.
even in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or market conditions,
investment performance by our asset management business below the performance of
benchmarks or competitors
table of contents
could result in a decline in assets under management and,
therefore, in the incentive and management fees we receive.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, proprietary trading, block trading, merchant banking, underwriting
and lending businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand our
proprietary trading businesses or commit capital to facilitate primarily client-driven business. for example, large blocks of stock are increasingly being sold in
block trades rather than on a marketed basis, which increases the risk goldman sachs
may be unable to resell the purchased securities at favorable prices. moreover,
because of concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic and market
conditions are generally favorable for others in the industry. we also regularly
enter into large transactions as part of our trading businesses. the number and size
of such transactions may affect our results of operations in a given period.
the volume of transactions that we execute for our customers and as a specialist
may decline, which would reduce the revenues we receive from commissions and
spreads. in our specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock exchange rules to
maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing shares in a declining market.
this may result in trading losses and an increased need for liquidity. weakness in
global equity markets and the trading of securities in multiple markets and on
multiple exchanges could adversely impact our trading businesses and impair the
value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. for a further discussion
of our goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, see critical accounting
policies goodwill and identifiable intangible assets included below.
if any of the variety of instruments, processes and strategies we utilize to
manage our exposure to various types of risk are not effective, we may incur losses.
our risk management strategies and techniques may not be fully effective in
mitigating our risk exposure in all market environments or against all types of risk.
credit risk. we are exposed to the
risk that third parties that owe us money, securities or other
assets will not perform their obligations. these parties may
default on their obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of
liquidity, operational failure or other reasons. we are also
subject to the risk that our rights against third parties may not
be enforceable in all circumstances. the amount and duration of our
credit exposures have been increasing over the past several years,
as has the breadth of the entities to which we have credit
exposure. as a clearing member firm, we finance our customer
positions and we could be held responsible for the defaults or
misconduct of our customers. in addition, we have experienced, due
to competitive factors, pressure to extend credit and price more
aggressively the credit risks we take. in particular, corporate
clients sometimes seek to require credit commitments from us in
connection with investment banking and other assignments. although
we regularly review credit exposures to specific clients and
counterparties and to specific industries, countries and regions
that we believe may present credit concerns, default risk may arise
from events or circumstances that are difficult to detect or
foresee. in addition, concerns about, or a default by, one
institution could lead to significant liquidity problems, losses or
defaults by other institutions, which in turn could adversely
affect goldman sachs.
liquidity risk. liquidity is
essential to our businesses. our liquidity could be impaired by an
inability to access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an
inability to access funds from our subsidiaries or an inability to
sell assets. this situation may arise due to circumstances that we
may be unable to control, such as a general market disruption or an
operational problem that affects third parties or us. further, our
ability to sell assets may be impaired if other market participants
are seeking to sell similar assets at the same time.
our credit ratings are important to
our liquidity. a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely
affect our liquidity and competitive position, increase our
borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or trigger
our obligations under certain bilateral provisions in some of our
trading and collateralized financing contracts. under such
provisions, counterparties could be permitted to
table of contents
terminate contracts with goldman sachs or require us to post additional
collateral. termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our liquidity
by requiring us to find other sources of financing or to make
significant cash payments or securities movements. for a discussion
of the potential impact on goldman sachs of a reduction in our
credit ratings, see capital and funding credit
ratings included below.
operational risk. our businesses are
highly dependent on our ability to process, on a daily basis, a
large number of transactions across numerous and diverse markets in
many currencies, and the transactions we process have become
increasingly complex. shortcomings or failures in our internal
processes, people or systems could lead to, among other
consequences, financial loss and reputational damage. in addition,
despite the contingency plans we have in place, our ability to
conduct business may be adversely impacted by a disruption in the
infrastructure that supports our businesses and the communities in
which we are located. this may include a disruption involving
electrical, communications, transportation or other services used
by goldman sachs or third parties with which we conduct business.
legal and regulatory risk.
substantial legal liability or a significant regulatory action
against goldman sachs could have material adverse financial effects
or cause significant reputational harm to goldman sachs, which in
turn could seriously harm our business prospects. firms in the
financial services industry have been operating in a difficult
regulatory environment. we face significant legal risks in our
businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of damages and
penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory proceedings against
financial institutions have been increasing. for a discussion of how we
account for our legal and regulatory exposures, see use of estimates included below.
critical accounting policies
fair value
total financial instruments owned,
at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value in the consolidated statements of
financial condition consist of financial instruments carried at
fair value or amounts that approximate fair value, with related
unrealized gains or losses recognized in our results of operations.
the use of fair value to measure these financial instruments, with
related unrealized gains and losses recognized immediately in our
results of operations, is fundamental to our financial statements
and is our most critical accounting policy. the fair value of a
financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be
exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other
than in a forced or liquidation sale.
table of contents
in determining fair value, we
separate our financial instruments into three categories cash
(i.e., nonderivative) trading instruments, derivative contracts and
principal investments, as set forth in the following table:
financial instruments by category
(in millions)
as of november
financial
financial
financial
instruments sold,
financial
instruments sold,
instruments
but not yet
instruments
but not yet
owned, at
purchased, at
owned, at
purchased, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
cash trading instruments
$
143,376
$
68,096
$
110,157
$
60,813
derivative contracts
62,495
64,001
45,733
41,886
principal investments
4,654
(1)
3,755
(1)
total
$
210,525
$
132,097
$
159,645
$
102,699
(1)
excludes assets of $1.28billion and $1.07billion
in consolidated employee-owned merchant
banking funds as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
cash trading instruments. fair values
of our cash trading instruments are generally obtained from quoted
market prices in active markets, broker or dealer price quotations,
or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price
transparency. the types of instruments valued in this manner
include u.s.government and agency securities, other sovereign
government obligations, liquid mortgage products, investment-grade
corporate bonds, listed equities, money market securities, state,
municipal and provincial obligations, and physical commodities.
certain cash trading instruments
trade infrequently and, therefore, have little or no price
transparency. such instruments may include certain high-yield debt,
corporate bank loans, mortgage whole loans and distressed debt. we
value these instruments using methodologies such as the present
value of known or estimated cash flows and generally do not adjust
underlying valuation assumptions unless there is substantive
evidence supporting a change in the value of the underlying
instrument or valuation assumptions (such as similar market
transactions, changes in financial ratios and changes in credit
ratings of the underlying companies).
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
valuation of our cash trading instruments by level of price
transparency:
cash trading instruments by price transparency
(in millions)
as of november
financial
financial
financial
instruments sold,
financial
instruments sold,
instruments
but not yet
instruments
but not yet
owned, at
purchased, at
owned, at
purchased, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
quoted prices or alternative pricing sources with reasonable price
transparency
$
130,908
$
67,948
$
102,306
$
60,673
little or no price transparency
12,468
7,851
total
$
143,376
$
68,096
$
110,157
$
60,813
cash trading instruments we own (long
positions) are marked to bid prices and instruments we have sold
but not yet purchased (short positions) are marked to offer prices.
if liquidating a position is reasonably expected to affect its
prevailing market price, our valuation is adjusted generally based
on market evidence or predetermined policies. in certain
circumstances, such as for highly illiquid positions, managements
estimates are used to determine this adjustment.
derivative contracts. derivative
contracts consist of exchange-traded and over-the-counter (otc)derivatives.
the following table sets forth the fair value of our
exchange-traded and otc derivative assets and liabilities:
derivative assets and liabilities
(in millions)
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
exchange-traded derivatives
$
5,464
$
5,905
$
5,182
$
6,339
otc derivatives
57,031
58,096
40,551
35,547
total(1)
$
62,495
$
64,001
$
45,733
$
41,886
(1)
the fair values of our derivative assets and liabilities include cash we have paid and received (for
example, option premiums or cash paid or received
pursuant to credit support agreements) and may change
significantly from period to period based on, among other
factors, changes in our trading positions and market
movements.
table of contents
fair values of our exchange-traded
derivatives are generally determined from quoted market prices. otc
derivatives are valued using valuation models. we use a variety of
valuation models including the present value of known or estimated
cash flows, option-pricing models and option-adjusted spread
models. the valuation models that we use to derive the fair values
of our otc derivatives require inputs including contractual terms,
market prices, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility,
prepayment rates and correlations of such inputs. the selection of
a model to value an otc derivative depends upon the contractual
terms of, and specific risks inherent in, the instrument as well as
the availability of pricing information in the market. we generally
use similar models to value similar instruments. where possible, we
verify the values produced by our pricing models to market
transactions. for otc derivatives that trade in liquid markets,
such as generic forwards, swaps and options, model selection does
not involve significant judgment because market prices are readily
available. for otc derivatives that trade in less liquid markets,
model selection requires more judgment because such instruments
tend to be more complex and pricing information is less available
in the market. as markets continue to develop and more pricing
information becomes available, we continue to review and refine the
models that we use.
at the inception of an otc derivative
contract (day one), we value the contract at the model value if we
can verify all of the significant model inputs to observable market
data and verify the model to market transactions. when appropriate,
valuations are adjusted to reflect various factors such as
liquidity, bid/offer and credit considerations. these adjustments
are generally based on market evidence or predetermined policies.
in certain circumstances, such as for highly illiquid positions,
managements estimates are used to determine these adjustments.
where we cannot verify all of the
significant model inputs to observable market data and verify the
model to market transactions, we value the contract at the
transaction price at inception and, consequently, record no day one
gain or loss in accordance with emerging issues task force (eitf)issue
no.02-3, issues involved in accounting for
derivative contracts held for trading purposes and contracts
involved in energy trading and risk management activities.
following day one, we adjust the
inputs to our valuation models only to the extent that changes in
such inputs can be verified by similar market transactions,
third-party pricing services and/or broker quotes or can be derived
from other substantive evidence such as empirical market data. in
circumstances where we cannot verify the model to market
transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model could
produce a materially different estimate of fair value.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the
fair values of our otc derivative assets and liabilities by product
and by remaining contractual maturity:
otc derivatives
(in millions)
as of november 2004
assets
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
1,475
$
$
5,682
$
4,250
$
12,743
$
24,601
currencies
9,570
1,499
3,670
2,320
1,198
18,257
commodities
2,943
1,164
5,581
1,108
10,956
equities
1,311
3,217
total
$
15,299
$
3,927
$
15,390
$
8,312
$
14,103
$
57,031
liabilities
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
1,854
$
$
7,366
$
7,136
$
5,658
$
22,803
currencies
9,577
1,580
4,456
2,755
1,184
19,552
commodities
3,791
1,425
4,522
10,659
equities
1,409
1,304
1,114
1,084
5,082
total
$
16,631
$
5,098
$
17,458
$
11,789
$
7,120
$
58,096
as of november 2003
assets
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
1,470
$
$
4,017
$
4,332
$
9,541
$
19,520
currencies
5,486
1,230
4,069
1,842
13,524
commodities
1,538
1,648
4,463
equities
1,276
3,044
total
$
9,770
$
2,672
$
10,409
$
6,976
$
10,724
$
40,551
liabilities
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
2,026
$
$
3,896
$
2,894
$
2,475
$
11,672
currencies
5,993
1,121
2,951
2,949
13,842
commodities
2,059
1,461
4,856
equities
3,267
1,027
5,177
total
$
13,345
$
3,092
$
9,335
$
6,257
$
3,518
$
35,547
we enter into certain otc option
transactions that provide us or our counterparties with the right
to extend the maturity of the underlying contract. the fair value
of these option contracts is not material to the aggregate fair
value of our otc derivative portfolio. in the tables above, for
option contracts that require settlement by delivery of an
underlying derivative instrument, the classification of the
remaining contractual maturity is generally based upon the maturity
date of the underlying derivative instrument. in those instances
when the underlying instrument does not have a maturity date or
either counterparty has the right to settle in cash, the remaining
contractual maturity date is generally based upon the option
expiration date.
table of contents
price transparency for otc derivative
model inputs varies depending on, among other factors, product
type, maturity and the complexity of the contract. price
transparency for interest rate and currency contracts varies by the
underlying currencies, with the currencies of the leading
industrialized nations having the most price transparency. price
transparency for commodity contracts varies by type of underlying
commodity. price transparency for equity contracts varies by
market, with the equity markets of the leading industrialized
nations having the most price transparency. price transparency is
inherently more limited for more complex structures because they
often combine one or more product types, requiring additional
inputs such as correlations and volatilities.
principal investments. in valuing our
corporate and real estate principal investments, we separate our
portfolio into investments in private companies, investments in
public companies (excluding our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg) and our investment in smfg.
the following table sets forth the
carrying value of our principal investments portfolio:
principal investments
(in millions)
as of november
corporate
real estate
total
corporate
real estate
total
private
$
$
$
1,704
$
1,054
$
$
1,811
public
subtotal
1,278
2,098
1,273
2,072
smfg convertible
preferred stock(1)
2,556
2,556
1,683
1,683
total(2)
$
3,834
$
$
4,654
$
2,956
$
$
3,755
(1)
the fair value of our japanese yen-denominated
investment in smfg convertible preferred stock includes
the effect of foreign exchange revaluation. we hedge our
economic exposure to exchange rate movements on our
investment in smfg by borrowing japanese yen. foreign
exchange revaluation on the investment and the related
borrowing are generally equal and offsetting. for
example, if the japanese yen appreciates against the u.s.dollar,
the u.s.dollar carrying value of our
smfg investment will increase and the u.s.dollar
carrying value of the related borrowing will also
increase by an amount that is generally equal and
offsetting.
(2)
excludes assets of $1.28billion and $1.07billion
in consolidated employee-owned merchant
banking funds as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
our private principal investments, by
their nature, have little or no price transparency. such
investments are initially carried at cost as an approximation of
fair value. adjustments to carrying value are made if there are
third-party transactions evidencing a change in value. downward
adjustments are also made, in the absence of third-party
transactions, if we determine that the expected realizable value of
the investment is less than the carrying value. in reaching that
determination, we consider many factors including, but not limited
to, the operating cash flows and financial performance of the
companies or properties relative to budgets or projections, trends
within sectors and/or regions, underlying business models, expected
exit timing and strategy, and any specific rights or terms
associated with the investment, such as conversion features and
liquidation preferences.
our public principal investments,
which tend to be large, concentrated holdings that result from
initial public offerings or other corporate transactions, are
valued using quoted market prices discounted for restrictions on
sale. if liquidating a position is reasonably expected to affect
market prices, valuations are adjusted accordingly based on
predetermined written policies.
table of contents
our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg is carried at fair value, which is derived
from a model that incorporates smfgs common stock price and credit
spreads, the impact of nontransferability and illiquidity and the
downside protection on the conversion strike price. the fair value
of our investment is particularly sensitive to movements in the
smfg common stock price. as a result of transfer restrictions and
the downside protection on the conversion strike price, the
relationship between changes in the fair value of our investment
and changes in smfgs common stock price is nonlinear. during the
fiscal year, the fair value of our investment increased 42%
(expressed in japanese yen), primarily due to an increase in the
smfg common stock price and the passage of time in respect of the
transfer restrictions on the underlying common stock.
goldman sachs has the right to
convert our preferred stock investment in smfg into shares of smfg
common stock beginning on february8, 2005. the current
conversion price is 322,300, but this price is subject to downward
adjustment if the price of smfg common stock at the time of
conversion is less than the conversion price (subject to a floor of
106,300). our convertible preferred investment is generally
nontransferable. one-third of the underlying shares of smfg common
stock will become transferable on february8, 2005, with the
remaining shares of common stock becoming transferable in equal
installments on february7, 2006 and february7, 2007. in
addition, restrictions on our ability to hedge the underlying
common stock will lapse in three equal annual installments
beginning on february7, 2005.
controls over valuation of financial
instruments. proper controls, independent of the trading and
principal investing functions, are fundamental to ensuring that our
financial instruments are appropriately and consistently valued and
that fair value measurements are reliable. this is particularly
important in valuing instruments with lower levels of price
transparency.
we employ an oversight structure that
includes appropriate segregation of duties. senior management,
independent of the trading functions, is responsible for the
oversight of control and valuation policies and procedures and
reporting the results of such work to the audit committee. we seek
to maintain the necessary resources, with the appropriate
experience and training, to ensure that control and independent
price verification functions are performed to the highest
standards. in addition, we employ procedures for the approval of
new transaction types and markets, independent price verification,
review of daily profit and loss, and review of valuation models by
personnel with appropriate technical knowledge of relevant products
and markets. for a further discussion of how we manage the risks
inherent in our trading and principal investing businesses, see risk
management included below.
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
as a result of our business
combinations, principally with slk llc (slk)in fiscal 2000, we
have acquired goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. goodwill
is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of
net assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the
acquisition date.
goodwill. we test the goodwill in
each of our operating segments for impairment at least annually in
accordance with statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)no.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets, by
comparing the estimated fair value of each operating segment with
its estimated net book value. we derive the fair value of each of
our operating segments primarily based on price-earnings multiples.
we derive the net book value of our operating segments by
estimating the amount of shareholders equity required to support
the assets of each operating segment. our last annual impairment
test was performed during our fiscal 2004 fourth quarter and no
impairment was identified.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
carrying value of our goodwill by operating segment:
goodwill by operating segment
(in millions)
as of november
investment banking
financial advisory
$
$
underwriting
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities(1)
2,382
2,384
principal investments
asset management and securities services
asset management(2)
securities services
total
$
3,182
$
3,162
(1)
primarily related to our combinations with slk and the hull group.
(2)
primarily related to our combination with the ayco company, l.p. (ayco).
identifiable intangible assets. we
amortize our identifiable intangible assets over their estimated
useful lives in accordance with sfasno.142, and test for
potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying value may not be
fully recoverable in accordance with sfasno.144,
accounting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets.
an impairment loss, calculated as the difference between the
estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset or asset
group, is recognized if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash
flows relating to the asset or asset group is less than the
corresponding carrying value.
during the fiscal fourth quarter of
2003, the american stock exchange, the chicago board options
exchange and the philadelphia stock exchange all announced proposed
restructuring plans and continued to experience loss of market
share to the international securities exchange, which became the
leading u.s.options exchange during 2003. consequently, we
tested our related option specialist rights for impairment during
the fourth quarter of 2003, and recognized an impairment charge of
$133million. the estimated fair value of the option specialist
rights was derived from estimated discounted cash flows. we also
surrendered certain option specialist rights in earlier quarters of
2003, recognizing total charges of $20million. there were no
intangible asset impairments in fiscal 2004.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
carrying value and range of remaining useful lives of our
identifiable intangible assets by major asset class:
identifiable intangible assets by asset class
($ in millions)
as of november
range of remaining
carrying
useful lives
carrying
value
(in years)
value
customer lists(1)
$
$
new york stock exchange (nyse)
specialist rights
exchange-traded fund (etf)and option
specialist rights
other(2)
total
$
1,689
$
1,820
(1)
primarily includes our clearance and execution
and nasdaq customer lists acquired in our combination
with slk and financial counseling customer lists acquired
in our combination with ayco.
(2)
primarily includes technology-related assets
acquired in our combination with slk.
a prolonged period of weakness in
global equity markets and the trading of securities in multiple
markets and on multiple exchanges could adversely impact our
businesses and impair the value of our goodwill and/or identifiable
intangible assets. in addition, an announced restructuring by the
nyse or any other exchange on which we hold specialist rights or an
adverse action or assessment by a regulator could indicate a
potential impairment of the associated identifiable intangible
assets.
use of estimates
the use of generally accepted
accounting principles requires management to make certain
estimates. in addition to the estimates we make in connection with
fair value measurements and the accounting for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, the use of estimates is also
important in determining provisions for potential losses that may
arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings and tax audits. we
estimate and provide for potential losses that may arise out of
litigation and regulatory proceedings and tax audits to the extent
that such losses are probable and can be estimated, in accordance
with sfasno.5, accounting for contingencies.
significant judgment is required in making these estimates and our
final liabilities may ultimately be materially different.
our total liability in respect of
litigation and regulatory proceedings is determined on a
case-by-case basis and represents an estimate of probable losses
after considering, among other factors, the progress of each case,
our experience and the experience of others in similar cases, and
the opinions and views of legal counsel. given the inherent
difficulty of predicting the outcome of our litigation matters,
particularly in cases in which claimants seek substantial or
indeterminate damages, we cannot estimate losses or ranges of
losses for cases where there is only a reasonable possibility that
a loss may have been incurred. see legal proceedings in parti,
item3 of the annual report on form10-k for information
on our judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings.
results of operations
the composition of our net revenues
has varied over time as financial markets and the scope of our
operations have changed. the composition of net revenues can also
vary over the shorter
table of contents
term due to fluctuations in u.s. and global
economic and market conditions. for a further discussion of the
impact of economic and market conditions on our results of
operations, see business environment and certain
factors that may affect our business included above, and business
certain factors that may affect our business in parti,
item1 of the annual report on form10-k.
financial overview
the following table sets forth an
overview of our financial results:
financial overview
($ in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended november
net revenues
$
20,550
$
16,012
$
13,986
pre-tax earnings
6,676
4,445
3,253
net earnings
4,553
3,005
2,114
diluted earnings per share
8.92
5.87
4.03
return on average shareholders equity(1)
19.8
%
15.0
%
11.3
%
return on average tangible shareholders equity(2)
25.2
%
19.9
%
15.3
%
(1)
return on average shareholders equity is computed by dividing net earnings by average
monthly shareholders equity.
(2)
tangible shareholders equity equals total shareholders equity less goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets. we believe that return on average tangible shareholders
equity is a meaningful measure of performance because it excludes the portion of our
shareholders equity attributable to goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. as a
result, this calculation measures corporate performance in a manner that treats underlying
businesses consistently, whether they were acquired or developed internally. return on
average tangible shareholders equity is computed by dividing net earnings by average
monthly tangible shareholders equity.
the following table sets forth the reconciliation of average
shareholders equity to average tangible shareholders equity:
year ended november
(in millions)
average shareholders equity
$
22,975
$
20,031
$
18,659
deduct: average goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(4,918
)
(4,932
)
(4,837
)
average tangible shareholders equity
$
18,057
$
15,099
$
13,822
net revenues
2004 versus 2003. our net revenues
were $20.55billion in 2004, an increase of 28% compared with
2003, reflecting strong growth in trading and principal
investments, asset management and securities services, and
investment banking. the increase in trading and principal
investments reflected significantly higher net revenues in ficc, as
all major businesses and regions performed well in a generally
favorable environment. net revenues in our principal investments
business also increased significantly, due to an unrealized gain on
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg, as well
as gains from other corporate principal investments. in addition,
equities net revenues improved, primarily reflecting higher
customer-driven activity and favorable market conditions early in
2004. equities operated in a less favorable environment after our
first fiscal quarter of 2004, as volatility levels continued to
decline and markets generally lacked direction before moving higher
in the last several weeks of our fiscal year. asset management and
securities services generated strong revenue growth, primarily
reflecting higher average assets
table of contents
under management, increased incentive fees and significantly higher customer balances in
securities services. in investment banking, net revenues also
increased, highlighted by strong growth in both our financial
advisory and equity underwriting businesses, primarily reflecting
an increase in industry-wide corporate activity.
2003 versus 2002. our net revenues
were $16.01billion in 2003, an increase of 14% compared with
2002, primarily reflecting higher net revenues in trading and
principal investments. the increase in trading and principal
investments net revenues was primarily driven by ficc, which
operated in a generally favorable environment throughout 2003, and
by principal investments, which included an unrealized gain on our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg. net revenues
in asset management and securities services increased 14% compared
with 2002, primarily reflecting higher average assets under
management and higher customer balances in securities services. net
revenues in investment banking declined 4% compared with 2002, due
to generally lower levels of corporate activity.
operating expenses
our operating expenses are primarily
influenced by compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity. a substantial portion of our compensation expense
represents discretionary bonuses, with our overall compensation and
benefits expenses generally targeted at 50% (plus or minus a few
percentage points) of consolidated net revenues. in addition to the
level of net revenues, our compensation expense in any given year
is also influenced by, among other factors, prevailing labor
markets, business mix and the structure of our equity-based
compensation programs.
the following table sets forth our
operating expenses and number of employees:
operating expenses and employees
($ in millions)
year ended november
compensation and benefits
$
9,591
$
7,393
$
6,744
amortization of employee initial public offering and acquisition awards
non-compensation expenses
4,222
4,052
3,696
total operating expenses
$
13,874
$
11,567
$
10,733
employees at year end(1)
20,722
19,476
19,739
(1)
excludes 1,206, 1,228
and 876 employees as of
november2004, november2003
and november2002,
respectively, of goldman
sachs consolidated property
management and loan
servicing subsidiaries.
compensation and benefits
includes $164million,
$134million and $140million
for the years
ended november2004, november2003
and november
2002, respectively,
attributable to these
subsidiaries, the majority
of which is reimbursed to
goldman sachs by the
investment funds for which
these companies manage
properties and perform loan
servicing. such
reimbursements are recorded
in net revenues. all three
years exclude employees of
certain consolidated
entities that are held for
investment purposes only.
2004 versus 2003. operating expenses
were $13.87billion for 2004, 20% above 2003. compensation and
benefits expenses of $9.59billion increased 30% compared with
2003, due to higher discretionary compensation, reflecting higher
net revenues, and increased employment levels. the ratio of
compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2004 was 46.7%
compared with 46.2% for 2003. employment levels increased 6%
compared with november2003. the adoption of the recognition
provisions of sfasno.123, accounting for stock-based
compensation, as amended by sfasno.148, accounting for
stock-based compensation transition and disclosure, in fiscal2003
did not have a material effect on our results of
operations in 2004 or 2003, because
table of contents
substantially all of the employee equity-based compensation granted for each year was in the
form of restricted stock units. see note2 and note12 to
the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on form10-k for further information
regarding our stock-based compensation.
non-compensation-related expenses of
$4.22billion for 2004 increased 4% compared with 2003. other
expenses included net provisions for litigation and regulatory
proceedings of $103million for 2004 compared with $159million
for 2003. excluding these provisions, other expenses
increased $258million, primarily due to the acquisition of
consolidated entities held for investment purposes, increased
levels of business activity and higher charitable contributions.
brokerage, clearing and exchange fees increased, reflecting higher
transaction volumes in certain of our businesses, and
market
development expenses were higher, primarily
reflecting $62million in connection with our establishment of
goldman sachs gao hua securities company limited in china, as well
as higher levels of business activity. in addition, professional fees
were higher, primarily due to higher legal and consulting fees. these increases were
partially offset by decreased amortization of identifiable
intangible assets (2003 included impairment charges of $188million,
primarily in respect of option specialist rights) as well
as lower occupancy and depreciation and amortization expenses.
total exit costs associated with reductions in our global office
space, which were included in occupancy and depreciation and
amortization expenses, were $41million for 2004 compared with
$153million for 2003. see critical accounting policies
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets included above
for a discussion of our impairment charges in respect of option
specialist rights and capital and funding contractual
obligations and contingent commitments, included below, for a
discussion of our excess office space.
2003 versus 2002. operating expenses
were $11.57billion for 2003, 8% above 2002. compensation and
benefits expenses of $7.39billion increased 10% compared with
2002, with higher discretionary compensation more than offsetting
lower levels of employment. the ratio of compensation and benefits
to net revenues for 2003 was 46.2%, down from 48.2% for 2002, in
part reflecting lower employment levels in 2003, which decreased 1%
compared with november2002. excluding employees associated with
our combination with ayco, employment levels were down 7% from
november2002. effective for fiscal 2003, we began to account for
stock-based compensation in accordance with the fair-value method
prescribed by sfasno.123, using the prospective adoption
method. the adoption of the recognition provisions of sfasno.123
did not have a material effect on our results of
operations because substantially all of the employee equity-based
compensation granted for 2003 was in the form of restricted stock
units. see note2 and note12 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding our stock-based
compensation.
non-compensation-related expenses of
$4.05billion for 2003 increased 10% compared with 2002. this
increase was primarily due to (i)higher other expenses, which
included net provisions of $159 million for a number of litigation and
regulatory proceedings; (ii)increased amortization of
identifiable intangible assets, reflecting impairment charges of
$188million, primarily in respect of option specialist rights;
and
(iii)exit costs of $153million associated with reductions
in our global office space. these exit costs were primarily
reflected in occupancy expenses, with the balance in depreciation
and amortization expenses. excluding the aggregate
charges of $500million described above, our 2003
non-compensation expenses declined slightly compared with 2002,
reflecting lower depreciation and amortization, communications and
technology, and market development expenses, and brokerage,
clearing and exchange fees, partially offset by higher professional
fees, primarily reflecting increased legal fees. the expense
declines were primarily due to the impact of reduced employment
levels, lower levels of business activity and continued
cost-containment discipline.
table of contents
provision for taxes
the effective income tax rate for
2004 was 31.8%, down from 32.4% for 2003. the change in the
effective income tax rate for 2004 compared with 2003 reflected a
decrease in state and local taxes and the effect of audit
settlements. the effective income tax rate for 2003 of 32.4% was
down from 35.0% in 2002. the decline in the effective income tax
rate for 2003 compared with 2002 was primarily due to an increase
in tax credits and a decrease in state and local taxes.
our effective income tax rate can
vary from period to period depending on, among other factors, the
geographic and business mix of our earnings, the level of our tax
credits and the effect of tax audits. certain of these and other
factors, including our history of pre-tax earnings, are taken into
account in assessing our ability to realize our net deferred tax
assets. see note13 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k for
further information regarding our provision for taxes.
segment operating results
the following table sets forth the
net revenues, operating expenses and pre-tax earnings of our
segments:
segment operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking
net revenues
$
3,374
$
2,711
$
2,830
operating expenses
2,973
2,504
2,454
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
trading and principal
net revenues
$
13,327
$
10,443
$
8,647
investments
operating expenses
8,287
6,938
6,505
pre-tax earnings
$
5,040
$
3,505
$
2,142
asset management and
net revenues
$
3,849
$
2,858
$
2,509
securities services
operating expenses
2,430
1,890
1,562
pre-tax earnings
$
1,419
$
$
total
net revenues
$
20,550
$
16,012
$
13,986
operating expenses(1)
13,874
11,567
10,733
pre-tax earnings
$
6,676
$
4,445
$
3,253
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to our segments: (i)the amortization
of employee initial public offering awards, net of
forfeitures, of $19million, $80million and $212million
for the years ended november2004,
november2003 and november2002, respectively; (ii)net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory
proceedings of $103million and $155million for
the years ended november2004 and november2003,
respectively, and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of goldman sachs gao
hua securities company limited, an investment banking and
securities venture in china, for the year ended november
2004.
net revenues in our segments include
allocations of interest income and interest expense to specific
securities, commodities and other positions in relation to the cash
generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying
positions. see note15 to the consolidated financial statements
in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding our segments.
table of contents
the cost drivers of goldman sachs
taken as a whole compensation, headcount and levels of
business activity are broadly similar in each of our business
segments. compensation expenses within our segments reflect, among
other factors, the overall performance of goldman sachs as well as
the performance of individual business units. consequently, pre-tax
margins in one segment of our business may be significantly
affected by the performance of our other business segments. a
discussion of segment operating results follows.
investment banking
our investment banking segment is
divided into two components:
financial advisory. financial advisory includes advisory assignments with respect
to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities,
restructurings and spin-offs.
underwriting. underwriting includes public offerings and private placements of
equity, equity-related and debt instruments.
the following table sets forth the
operating results of our investment banking segment:
investment banking operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
financial advisory
$
1,737
$
1,202
$
1,499
equity underwriting
debt underwriting
total underwriting
1,637
1,509
1,331
total net revenues
3,374
2,711
2,830
operating expenses
2,973
2,504
2,454
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
the following table sets forth our
financial advisory and underwriting transaction volumes:
goldman sachs global investment banking volumes(1)
(in billions)
year ended november
announced mergers and acquisitions
$
$
$
completed mergers and acquisitions
equity and equity-related offerings(2)
debt offerings(3)
(1)
source: thomson financial. announced and
completed mergers and acquisitions volumes are based on
full credit to each of the advisors in a transaction.
equity and equity-related offerings and debt offerings
volumes are based on full credit for single book managers
and equal credit for joint book managers. transaction
volumes may not be indicative of net revenues in a given
period.
(2)
includes public common stock offerings and convertible offerings.
(3)
includes non-convertible preferred stock,
mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and
taxable municipal debt. includes publicly registered and
rule144a issues.
table of contents
2004 versus 2003. net revenues in
investment banking of $3.37billion for 2004 increased 24%
compared with 2003. net revenues in financial advisory of $1.74billion
increased 45% compared with 2003, primarily reflecting a
significant increase in industry-wide completed mergers and
acquisitions. net revenues in our underwriting business of $1.64billion
increased 8% compared with 2003, reflecting a
significant increase in industry-wide public common stock offerings
and industry-wide initial public offerings. the increase in
investment banking net revenues primarily reflects higher levels of
activity in the industrial and consumer sectors. our investment
banking backlog at the end of 2004 was higher than the end of 2003. (1)
operating expenses were $2.97billion
in 2004, 19% higher than 2003, primarily due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment. these increases were partially offset by lower occupancy expenses,
primarily reflecting lower exit costs associated with reductions in our global office space, and
reduced amortization of identifiable intangible assets, as 2003 included impairment charges in
respect of certain distribution rights. depreciation and amortization expenses were also lower.
pre-tax earnings of $401million in 2004 increased 94% compared with 2003.
2003 versus 2002. net revenues in
investment banking of $2.71billion for 2003 decreased 4%
compared with 2002. net revenues in financial advisory of $1.20billion
decreased 20% compared with 2002, primarily reflecting a
decline in industry-wide completed mergers and acquisitions. net
revenues in our underwriting business of $1.51billion
increased 13% compared with 2002, primarily reflecting an increase
in industry-wide debt new issuance activity. equity underwriting
net revenues decreased compared with 2002, primarily reflecting a
decline in industry-wide total equity underwriting volume,
including initial public offerings, partially offset by higher net
revenues from convertible issuances. the reduction in investment
banking net revenues reflects lower levels of activity in the
industrial and financial institutions sectors, partially offset by
increased activity in the healthcare and natural resources sectors.
our investment banking backlog at the end of 2003 was slightly
higher than at the end of 2002.(1)
operating expenses were $2.50billion
in 2003, 2% higher than 2002, primarily due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses, with higher discretionary
compensation more than offsetting the impact of lower levels of
employment. the increase in discretionary compensation in
investment banking reflected, among other factors, the overall
performance of goldman sachs, continued strong relative performance
in the business (as evidenced by our high rankings and market
share), as well as the somewhat improved business environment at
the end of 2003. operating expenses also increased due to
intangible asset impairment charges in respect of certain
distribution rights, higher professional fees, reflecting increased
legal fees, and increased occupancy expenses, primarily related to
exit costs associated with reductions in our global office space.
these expense increases were partially offset by lower other
expenses, market development expenses and communications and
technology expenses, reflecting the impact of reduced employment
levels, lower levels of business activity and continued
cost-containment discipline. pre-tax earnings of $207million
in 2003 decreased 45% compared with 2002.
trading and principal investments
our trading and principal investments
segment is divided into three components:
ficc. we make markets in and trade interest rate and credit products,
mortgage-backed securities and loans, currencies and commodities, structure and
enter into a wide variety of derivative transactions, and engage in proprietary
trading.
equities. we make markets in, act as a specialist for, and trade equities and
equity-related products, structure and enter into equity derivative transactions,
and engage in proprietary
(1)
our investment banking backlog represents an estimate of our future net revenues from investment banking
transactions where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than not.
table of contents
trading. we also execute and clear customer transactions
on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide.
principal investments. principal investments primarily represents net revenues
from our merchant banking investments, including the increased share of the income
and gains derived from our merchant banking funds when the return on a funds
investments exceeds certain threshold returns (merchant banking overrides), as well
as unrealized gains or losses from our investment in the convertible preferred stock
of smfg.
substantially all of our inventory is
marked-to-market daily and, therefore, its value and our net
revenues are subject to fluctuations based on market movements. in
addition, net revenues derived from our principal investments in
privately held concerns and in real estate may fluctuate
significantly depending on the revaluation or sale of these
investments in any given period. we also regularly enter into large
transactions as part of our trading businesses. the number and size
of such transactions may affect our results of operations in a
given period.
net revenues from principal
investments do not include management fees generated from our
merchant banking funds. these management fees are included in the
net revenues of the asset management and securities services
segment.
the following table sets forth the
operating results of our trading and principal investments segment:
trading and principal investments operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
ficc
$
7,322
$
5,596
$
4,680
equities trading
1,969
1,738
1,008
equities commissions
2,704
2,543
2,994
total equities
4,673
4,281
4,002
smfg
gross gains
gross losses
(399
)
(437
)
(801
)
net other corporate and real estate investments
(229
)
overrides
total principal investments
1,332
(35
)
total net revenues
13,327
10,443
8,647
operating expenses
8,287
6,938
6,505
pre-tax earnings
$
5,040
$
3,505
$
2,142
2004 versus 2003. net revenues in
trading and principal investments of $13.33billion for 2004
increased 28% compared with 2003. net revenues in ficc of $7.32billion
increased 31% compared with 2003, primarily due to
significantly higher net revenues in credit products and
commodities, as well as improved performances in currencies and
mortgages. in addition, net revenues in interest rate products were
strong, but were lower compared with 2003. during 2004, ficc
operated in an environment generally characterized by strong
customer-driven activity, rising energy prices, narrow corporate
credit spreads and low, although rising, interest rates. the yield
curve remained steep in 2004, but flattened in the second half of
the year. net revenues in equities of $4.67billion increased
9% compared with 2003, reflecting higher net revenues in our global
table of contents
equities products group, primarily due to increased activity in
shares and derivatives. in addition, net revenues were higher in
our principal strategies business. during 2004, equities operated
in an environment characterized by improved customer-driven
activity, particularly early in the year, and generally higher
equity prices. however, volatility levels continued to decline
during 2004. principal investments recorded net revenues of $1.33billion,
primarily due to an unrealized gain related to our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg of $771million
(net of unrealized foreign exchange losses on the japanese
yen-denominated borrowing funding this investment), as well as
gains and overrides from other corporate principal investments.
operating expenses were $8.29billion
in 2004, 19% higher than 2003, primarily due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment.
other expenses also increased, principally due to the acquisition
of consolidated entities held for investment purposes and increased
levels of business activity. in addition, brokerage, clearing and
exchange fees were higher, reflecting higher transaction volumes in
certain of our businesses, professional fees increased, primarily
due to higher consulting and legal fees, and market development
expenses increased, primarily due to higher levels of business
activity. these increases were partially offset by lower
amortization of identifiable intangible assets, as 2003 included
impairment charges in respect of option specialist rights. in
addition, occupancy expenses decreased, primarily reflecting lower
exit costs associated with reductions in our global office space,
and depreciation and amortization expenses were lower. pre-tax
earnings of $5.04billion in 2004 increased 44% compared with
2003.
2003 versus 2002. net revenues in
trading and principal investments of $10.44billion for 2003
increased 21% compared with 2002. ficc net revenues of $5.60billion
increased 20% compared with 2002, primarily due to higher
net revenues in credit products, as well as improved performances
in interest rate products and commodities, partially offset by
lower net revenues in currencies, which performed particularly well
in 2002. during 2003, ficc operated in a generally favorable
environment characterized by tightening corporate credit spreads,
low interest rates, a steep yield curve and strong customer demand.
equities net revenues of $4.28billion increased 7% compared
with 2002, primarily due to higher net revenues in principal
strategies. this increase was partially offset by lower net
revenues in our global equities products group, primarily
reflecting lower commission volumes and clearance and execution
fees in our u.s.shares business. principal investments
recorded net revenues of $566million, which included an
unrealized gain related to our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg of $293million (net of unrealized
foreign exchange losses on the japanese yen-denominated borrowing
funding this investment), and gains and overrides from real estate
and other corporate principal investments.
operating expenses were $6.94billion
in 2003, 7% higher than 2002, primarily due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses, with higher discretionary
compensation (reflecting increased net revenues) more than
offsetting the impact of lower levels of employment. operating
expenses also increased due to intangible asset impairment charges
in respect of option specialist rights, higher other expenses, and
increased occupancy expenses, primarily related to exit costs
associated with reductions in our global office space. these
expense increases were partially offset by lower communications and
technology expenses, depreciation and amortization expenses,
brokerage, clearing and exchange fees, and market development
expenses, reflecting the impact of reduced employment levels, lower
levels of business activity and continued cost-containment
discipline. pre-tax earnings of $3.51billion in 2003 increased
64% compared with 2002.
table of contents
asset management and securities services
our asset management and securities
services segment is divided into two components:
asset management. asset management provides investment advisory and financial
planning services to a diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
primarily generates revenues in the form of management and incentive fees.
securities services. securities services provides prime brokerage, financing
services and securities lending services to mutual funds, pension funds, hedge
funds, foundations and high-net-worth individuals worldwide, and generates revenues
primarily in the form of interest rate spreads or fees.
the following table sets forth the
operating results of our asset management and securities services
segment:
asset management and securities services operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
asset management
$
2,553
$
1,853
$
1,653
securities services
1,296
1,005
total net revenues
3,849
2,858
2,509
operating expenses
2,430
1,890
1,562
pre-tax earnings
$
1,419
$
$
assets under management typically
generate fees as a percentage of asset value or based on investment
performance. assets under management include our mutual funds,
alternative investment funds, separately managed accounts for
institutional and individual investors and our merchant banking
funds. substantially all assets under management are valued as of
calendar month end.
the following table sets forth our
assets under management by asset class:
assets under management by asset class
(in billions)
as of november30
2003(3)
money markets
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity(1)
alternative investments(2)
total
$
$
$
(1)
includes both our fundamental equity and
quantitative equity strategies.
(2)
includes other quantitative and/or
non-traditional investment strategies (e.g., hedge
funds), merchant banking funds and vehicles where we
contract with subadvisors for our clients.
(3)
includes $4billion in non-money market
assets acquired in our combination with ayco.
table of contents
the following table sets forth a
summary of the changes in our assets under management:
changes in assets under management
(in billions)
year ended november30
2003(1)(2)
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
net asset inflows/(outflows)
money markets
(19
)
(13
)
fixed income and currency
equity
(1
)
alternative investments
(2
)
total net asset inflows/(outflows)
(4
)
net market appreciation/(depreciation)
(12
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
(1)
includes $4billion in non-money market
assets acquired in our combination with ayco.
(2)
includes $16billion in non-money market net
asset outflows resulting from british coal pension
schemes planned program of diversification among its
asset managers.
2004 versus 2003. net revenues in
asset management and securities services of $3.85billion for
2004 increased 35% compared with 2003. asset management net
revenues of $2.55billion increased 38% compared with 2003,
primarily due to higher average assets under management,
significantly higher incentive fees and a full year contribution
from ayco. during 2004, assets under management increased 21% to
$452billion, reflecting net asset inflows of $52billion,
across all asset classes, as well as market appreciation of $27billion,
primarily in equity and fixed income assets. securities
services net revenues of $1.30billion increased 29% compared
with 2003, primarily due to significantly higher customer balances
in securities lending and margin lending.
operating expenses were $2.43billion,
29% higher than 2003, primarily due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment. in
addition, other expenses increased, principally due to higher
levels of business activity, including increased asset management
distribution costs. professional fees were also higher, primarily
reflecting increased legal and consulting fees. these increases
were partially offset by lower depreciation and amortization and
occupancy expenses, primarily reflecting lower exit costs
associated with reductions in our global office space. pre-tax
earnings of $1.42billion increased 47% compared with 2003.
2003 versus 2002. net revenues in
asset management and securities services of $2.86billion for
2003 increased 14% compared with 2002. asset management net
revenues of $1.85billion increased 12% compared with 2002,
primarily reflecting an increase in average assets under
management, the contribution from ayco and increased incentive
income. during 2003, assets under management increased 7% to $373billion,
reflecting market appreciation of $29billion in
equity, fixed income and alternative investment assets. net asset
outflows for 2003 were $4billion, primarily reflecting net
outflows in money market assets, partially offset by net inflows in
fixed income and alternative investment assets. net asset outflows
for 2003 included $16billion in net outflows related to
british coal pension schemes planned program of diversification
among its asset managers and $4billion in inflows acquired
from ayco. securities services net revenues of
table of contents
$1.01billion for 2003 increased 17% compared with 2002, primarily reflecting
higher customer balances in securities lending and margin lending.
operating expenses were $1.89billion
in 2003, 21% higher than 2002, primarily due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation. operating expenses also increased as a
result of our combination with ayco and higher occupancy expenses,
primarily related to exit costs associated with reductions in our
global office space. in addition, other expenses were higher,
principally due to increased asset management distribution costs,
and professional fees increased, primarily reflecting higher legal
fees. pre-tax earnings of $968million in 2003 increased 2%
compared with 2002.
geographic data
for a summary of the net revenues,
pre-tax earnings and identifiable assets of goldman sachs by
geographic region, see note15 in partii, item8 of
the annual report on form10-k to the consolidated financial
statements.
off-balance-sheet arrangements
we have various types of
off-balance-sheet arrangements that we enter into in the ordinary
course of business. our involvement in these arrangements can take
many different forms, including purchasing or retaining residual
and other interests in mortgage-backed and asset-backed
securitization vehicles; holding senior and subordinated debt,
limited and general partnership interests, and preferred and common
stock in other nonconsolidated vehicles; entering into interest
rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit derivatives;
entering into operating leases; and providing guarantees,
indemnifications, loan commitments, letters of credit,
representations and warranties.
we enter into these arrangements for
a variety of business purposes, primarily related to the
securitization of commercial and residential mortgages and home
equity loans, government and corporate bonds, and other types of
financial assets. other reasons for entering into these
arrangements include underwriting client securitization
transactions; providing secondary market liquidity; making
investments in performing and nonperforming debt, real estate and
other assets; providing investors with credit-linked and
asset-repackaged notes; and receiving or providing letters of
credit to satisfy margin requirements and to facilitate the
clearance and settlement process.
variable interest entities (vies) and
qualifying special-purpose entities (qspes) are critical to the
functioning of several significant investor markets, including the
mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities markets, since they
provide market liquidity to financial assets by offering investors
access to specific cash flows and risks created through the
securitization process. our financial interests in, and derivative
transactions with, nonconsolidated entities are accounted for at
fair value, in the same manner as our other financial instruments,
except in cases where we exert significant influence over an entity
and apply the equity method of accounting.
table of contents
the following table sets forth where
a discussion of these and other off-balance-sheet arrangements may
be found in partii, items7 and 8 of the annual report on
form10-k:
type of off-balance-sheet arrangement
disclosure in annual report on form10-k
retained interests or contingent interests in assets transferred by
us to nonconsolidated entities
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
other obligations, including contingent obligations, arising out of
variable interests we have in nonconsolidated entities
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
derivative contracts
see critical accounting policies included above and
risk management included below and note3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual report
on form10-k.
nonderivative guarantees
see note6 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
leases, letters of credit, and loans and other commitments
see capital and funding included below and note6 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k.
in addition, see note2 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k for a discussion of our
consolidation policies.
capital and funding
capital
the amount of capital we hold is
principally determined by subsidiary capital requirements,
regulatory and rating agency guidelines, and our overall risk
profile, which is largely driven by the size and composition of our
trading and investment positions. goldman sachs total capital
(shareholders equity and long-term borrowings) increased 34% to
$105.78billion as of november2004 compared with $79.11billion
as of november2003. see risk management
liquidity risk cash flows included below, for a discussion
of how we deployed capital raised as part of our financing
activities.
the increase in total capital
resulted primarily from an increase in long-term borrowings to
$80.70billion as of november2004 from $57.48billion as
of november2003. the weighted average maturity of our long-term
borrowings as of november2004 was approximately 7years. we
swap a substantial portion of our long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar
obligations with short-term floating interest rates in
order to minimize our exposure to interest rates and foreign
exchange movements. see note5 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding our long-term
borrowings.
over the past several years, our
ratio of long-term borrowings to shareholders equity has been
increasing. the growth in our long-term borrowings has been driven
primarily by (i)the need to increase total capital in response
to opportunities in our trading and investing businesses and (ii)in
light of the favorable debt financing environment, our
ability to replace a portion of our short-term borrowings with
long-term borrowings and pre-fund near-term refinancing
requirements.
table of contents
shareholders equity increased by 16%
to $25.08billion as of november2004 from $21.63billion
as of november2003. during 2004, we repurchased 18.7million
shares of our common stock. in addition, to satisfy minimum
statutory employee tax withholding requirements related to the
delivery of shares underlying restricted stock units, we cancelled
9.1million restricted stock units at an average price of $95.20per
unit in 2004.
our repurchase program is intended to
substantially offset increases in share count over time resulting
from employee equity-based compensation and to help maintain our
shareholders equity at appropriate levels. the repurchase program
has been effected primarily through regular open-market purchases,
the sizes of which have been and will continue to be influenced by,
among other factors, prevailing prices and market conditions. the
average price paid per share for repurchased shares was $96.29 and
$76.83 for the years ended november2004 and november2003,
respectively. as of november2004, we were authorized to repurchase
up to 6.4million additional shares of stock pursuant to our
repurchase program. on january25, 2005, the board of directors
of goldman sachs authorized the repurchase of an additional 40.0million
shares of common stock. for additional information on
our repurchase program, see market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities in partii, item5 of the annual report on
form 10-k.
the following table sets forth
information on our assets, shareholders equity, leverage ratios
and book value per share:
as of november
($ in millions, except per
share amounts)
total assets
$
531,379
$
403,799
adjusted assets(1)
347,082
273,941
shareholders equity
25,079
21,632
tangible shareholders equity(2)
20,208
16,650
tangible equity capital(2)
22,958
16,650
leverage ratio(3)
21.2
x
18.7
x
adjusted leverage ratio(4)
15.1
x
16.5
x
debt to equity ratio(5)
3.2
x
2.7
x
book value per share(6)
$
50.77
$
43.60
tangible book value per share(7)
40.91
33.56
(1)
adjusted assets excludes (i)low-risk
collateralized assets generally associated with our
matched book and securities lending businesses (which we
calculate by adding our securities purchased under
agreements to resell and securities borrowed, and then
subtracting our nonderivative short positions), (ii)cash
and securities we segregate in compliance with
regulations and (iii)goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets.
table of contents
the following
table sets forth a reconciliation of total assets to adjusted
assets:
as of november
(in millions)
total assets
$
531,379
$
403,799
deduct:
securities purchased under agreements to resell
(44,257
)
(26,856
)
securities borrowed
(155,086
)
(129,118
)
add:
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
132,097
102,699
less derivatives
(64,001
)
(41,886
)
subtotal
68,096
60,813
deduct:
cash and securities segregated in compliance with u.s.federal
and
other regulations
(48,179
)
(29,715
)
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(4,871
)
(4,982
)
adjusted assets
$
347,082
$
273,941
(2)
tangible shareholders equity equals total
shareholders equity less goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets. tangible equity capital includes
tangible shareholders equity and junior subordinated
debt issued to a trust. we consider junior subordinated
debt issued to a trust to be a component of our tangible
equity capital base due to the inherent characteristics
of these securities, including the long-term nature of
the securities, our ability to defer coupon interest for
up to ten consecutive semiannual periods and the
subordinated nature of the obligations in our capital structure.
the following table sets forth a reconciliation of shareholders equity to tangible
shareholders equity and tangible equity capital:
as of november
(in millions)
shareholders equity
$
25,079
$
21,632
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(4,871
)
(4,982
)
tangible shareholders equity
$
20,208
$
16,650
add:
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust
2,750
tangible equity capital
$
22,958
$
16,650
(3)
leverage ratio equals total assets divided by
shareholders equity.
(4)
adjusted leverage ratio equals adjusted assets
divided by tangible equity capital. we believe that the
adjusted leverage ratio is a more meaningful measure of
our capital adequacy because it excludes certain low-risk
collateralized assets that are generally supported with
little or no capital and reflects the tangible equity
capital deployed in our businesses.
(5)
debt to equity ratio equals long-term borrowings
divided by shareholders equity.
(6)
book value per share is based on common shares
outstanding, including restricted stock units granted to
employees with no future service requirements, of 494.0million
as of november2004 and 496.1million
as of november2003.
(7)
tangible book value per share is computed by
dividing tangible shareholders equity by the number of
common shares outstanding, including restricted stock
units granted to employees with no future service
requirements.
short-term borrowings
goldman sachs obtains secured and
unsecured short-term borrowings primarily through issuance of
promissory notes, commercial paper and bank loans. short-term
borrowings also include the portion of long-term borrowings
maturing within one year and certain long-term borrowings that may
be redeemable within one year at the option of the holder.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our
short-term borrowings by product:
short-term borrowings
(in millions)
as of november
promissory notes
$
19,513
$
24,119
commercial paper
4,355
4,767
bank loans and other
13,474
8,183
current portion of long-term borrowings
17,617
7,133
total
$
54,959
$
44,202
our liquidity depends to an important
degree on our ability to refinance these borrowings on a continuous
basis. investors who hold our outstanding promissory notes
(short-term unsecured debt that is nontransferable and in which
goldman sachs does not make a market) and commercial paper have no
obligation to purchase new instruments when the outstanding
instruments mature.
the following table sets forth our
secured and unsecured short-term borrowings:
as of november
(in millions)
secured short-term borrowings
$
8,558
$
3,321
unsecured short-term borrowings
46,401
40,881
total short-term borrowings
$
54,959
$
44,202
our secured short-term borrowings
provide goldman sachs with a more stable source of liquidity, as
these borrowings are less sensitive to changes in our credit
ratings than our unsecured short-term borrowings, due to the
underlying collateral. see risk management liquidity
risk included below for a discussion of the principal liquidity
policies we have in place to manage the liquidity risk associated
with our short-term borrowings. for a discussion of factors that
could impair our ability to access these and other markets, see certain
factors that may affect our business included above.
see note4 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k for further
information regarding our short-term borrowings.
credit ratings
we rely upon the short-term and
long-term debt capital markets to fund a significant portion of our
day-to-day operations. the cost and availability of debt financing
is influenced by our credit ratings. credit ratings are important
when we are competing in certain markets and when we seek to engage
in longer term transactions, including otc derivatives. we believe
our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit rating
agencies assessment of our liquidity, market and credit risk
management practices, the level and variability of our earnings,
our franchise, reputation and management, our capital base, our
corporate governance and the external operating environment. see certain
factors that may affect our business included above
for a discussion of the risks associated with a reduction in our
credit ratings.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our
unsecured credit ratings as of november2004:
short-term debt
long-term debt
dominion bond rating service limited
r-1 (middle)
a (high)
fitch, inc.
f1+
aa-
moodys investors service
p-1
aa3
standard& poors
a-1
a+
as of november2004, collateral or
termination payments pursuant to bilateral agreements with certain
counterparties of approximately $379million could have been
required in the event of a one-level reduction in our long-term
credit ratings. in evaluating our liquidity requirements, we
consider additional collateral or termination payments that could
be required in the event of further reductions in our long-term
credit ratings, as well as collateral that has not been called by
counterparties, but is available to them. for a further discussion
of our excess liquidity policies, see risk management
liquidity risk excess liquidity maintenance of a pool
of highly liquid securities included below.
contractual obligations and contingent commitments
goldman sachs has contractual
obligations to make future payments under long-term debt and
long-term noncancelable lease agreements and has contingent
commitments under a variety of commercial arrangements.
the following table sets forth our
contractual obligations as of november2004:
contractual obligations
(in millions)
2006-
2008-
2010-
thereafter
total
long-term borrowings by contract maturity(1)(2)
$
$
21,371
$
20,982
$
38,343
$
80,696
minimum rental payments
1,884
3,519
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year and
certain long-term borrowings that may be redeemable
within one year at the option of the holder are included
as short-term borrowings in the consolidated statements
of financial condition.
(2)
long-term borrowings repayable at the option of
goldman sachs are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. certain long-term borrowings that may be
redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holder
are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our
quarterly long-term borrowings maturity profile through fiscal year
2010:
long-term borrowings maturity profile
fiscal years 2006 through 2010
($ in millions)
as of november2004, our long-term
borrowings were $80.70billion and consisted principally of
senior borrowings with maturities extending to 2034. these
long-term borrowings consisted of $12.09billion in secured
long-term borrowings and $68.61billion in unsecured long-term
borrowings. as of november2004, long-term borrowings included
nonrecourse debt of $12.05billion, consisting of $5.14billion
issued by william street funding corporation (a wholly
owned subsidiary of group inc. formed to raise funding to support
loan commitments to investment-grade clients made by another wholly
owned william street entity), $978million issued by our
consolidated power plant operations and $5.93billion issued by
other consolidated entities. nonrecourse debt is debt that group
inc. is not directly or indirectly obligated to repay. see note3
and note5 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k for
further information regarding vies and our long-term borrowings,
respectively.
as of november2004, our future
minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals, under
noncancelable leases were $3.52billion. these lease
commitments, principally for office space, expire on various dates
through 2029. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation
provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges.
our occupancy expenses include costs
associated with office space held in excess of our current
requirements. this excess space, the cost of which is charged to
earnings as incurred, is being held for potential growth or to
replace currently occupied space that we may exit in the future. we
continually evaluate our current and future space capacity in
relation to current and projected staffing levels. in 2004, we
reduced our global office space and incurred exit costs of $41million
(included in occupancy and depreciation and amortization
expenses). we may incur additional exit costs in 2005 and
thereafter to the extent we (i)further reduce our capacity or
(ii)commit to new properties in the locations in which we
operate and, consequently, dispose of existing space that had been
held for potential growth. such exit costs may be material to our
results of operations in a given period.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our
contingent commitments as of november2004:
contingent commitments
(in millions)
commitment amount by period of expiration
2006-
2008-
2010-
thereafter
total
commitments to extend credit
$
10,746
$
5,245
$
7,845
$
3,880
$
27,716
commitments under letters of credit issued by banks to counterparties
11,102
11,151
other commercial commitments(1)
1,387
total
$
22,402
$
5,680
$
7,851
$
4,321
$
40,254
(1)
includes our corporate and real estate investment
fund commitments, construction-related obligations and
other purchase commitments.
our commitments to extend credit are
agreements to lend to counterparties that have fixed termination
dates and are contingent on all conditions to borrowing set forth
in the contract having been met. since these commitments may expire
unused, the total commitment amount does not necessarily reflect
the actual future cash flow requirements. as of november2004, $9.40billion
of our outstanding commitments to extend credit have
been issued through the william street credit extension program.
substantially all of the credit risk associated with these
commitments has been covered by credit loss protection provided by
smfg. we have also hedged the credit risk of certain non-william
street commitments using a variety of other financial instruments.
as of november2004, we had
commitments to enter into forward secured financing transactions,
including certain repurchase and resale agreements and secured
borrowing and lending arrangements, of $48.32billion.
see note6 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k for further information regarding our
commitments, contingencies and guarantees.
regulated subsidiaries
many of our principal subsidiaries
are subject to extensive regulation in the united states and
elsewhere. goldman, sachs& co. and goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p.(1) are registered u.s.broker-dealers
and futures commissions merchants, and their primary
regulators include the securities and exchange commission (sec),
the commodity futures trading commission, the chicago board of
trade, the nyse, the national association of securities dealers,
inc. and the national futures association. goldman sachs
international, a registered u.k. broker-dealer, is subject to
regulation primarily by the financial services authority. goldman
sachs (japan) ltd., a tokyo-based broker-dealer, is subject to
regulation by the financial services agency, the tokyo stock
exchange, the osaka securities exchange, the tokyo international
financial futures exchange and the japan securities dealers
association. several other subsidiaries of goldman sachs are
regulated by securities, investment advisory, banking, and other
regulators and authorities around the world, such as the federal
financial supervisory authority (bafin) and the bundesbank in
germany, the autorit des marchs financiers and banque de france
in france, banca ditalia and the commissione nazionale per le
societ e la borsa (consob)in italy, the swiss federal banking
commission, the securities and futures commission in hong kong and
the monetary authority of singapore. see note14 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k for further information regarding
our regulated subsidiaries. for a
(1)
group inc. renamed spear, leeds & kellogg, l.p., goldman sachs execution & clearing, l.p., effective january14, 2005.
table of contents
discussion of our potential inability to access funds from our regulated entities, see risk
management liquidity risk intercompany funding
included below.
the financial groups directive
(directive 2002/87/ec of the european parliament and of the
council) introduced certain changes to the way in which financial
conglomerates and other financial services organizations operating
in europe will be regulated, with the changes to be implemented by
member states for fiscal years beginning in 2005. these changes
will cause activities that are currently conducted in unregulated
entities to become subject to certain forms of regulation,
including consolidated supervision and capital adequacy
requirements. our efforts to comply with the directive involve
applying to be subject to the consolidated supervised entity rules
described below.
the sec has adopted rule amendments
that establish alternative net capital requirements for
broker-dealers that are part of a consolidated supervised entity.
as a condition to its use of the alternative method, a
broker-dealers ultimate holding company and affiliates (referred
to collectively as a consolidated supervised entity or cse) must
consent to group-wide supervision and examination by the sec.
goldman, sachs& co. anticipates applying for permission to use
this alternative method. we expect that doing so will enable us to
comply with the requirements of the financial groups directive
described above. on becoming subject to the secs group-wide
supervision, goldman sachs will be required to report to the sec
computations of our capital adequacy.
risk management
management believes that effective
risk management is of primary importance to the success of goldman
sachs. accordingly, we have a comprehensive risk management process
to monitor, evaluate and manage the principal risks we assume in
conducting our activities. these risks include market, credit,
liquidity, operational, legal and reputational exposures.
risk management structure
goldman sachs seeks to monitor and
control its risk exposure through a variety of separate but
complementary financial, credit, operational and legal reporting
systems. in addition, a number of committees are responsible for
monitoring risk exposures and for general oversight of our risk
management process. these committees, whose responsibilities are
described below, meet regularly and consist of senior members of
both our revenue-producing units and departments that are
independent of our revenue-producing units.
management committee. all risk
control functions ultimately report to our management committee.
through both direct and delegated authority, the management
committee approves all of our operating activities, trading risk
parameters and customer review guidelines.
risk committees. the firmwide risk
committee reviews the activities of existing businesses, approves
new businesses and products, approves firmwide and divisional
market risk limits, reviews business unit market risk limits,
approves market risk limits for selected emerging markets and
business units, approves sovereign credit risk limits and credit
risk limits by ratings group, and reviews scenario analyses based
on abnormal or catastrophic market movements.
the divisional risk committee sets
market risk limits, subject to overall firmwide risk limits, for
both ficc and equities based on a number of measures, including
value-at-risk (var) and scenario analyses. in our asset management
business, the control oversight committee, the investment policy
group and the valuation committee oversee various operational,
credit, valuation and business practice issues.
business practices committee. the
business practices committee assists senior management in its
oversight of compliance and operational risks and related
reputational concerns. the committee also reviews the firms
policies, practices and procedures for consistency with our
table of contents
business principles. the committee makes recommendations for
improvements in these areas so as to mitigate potential risks and
to assist in enhancing adherence to our business principles.
capital committee. the capital
committee reviews and approves transactions involving commitments
of our capital. such capital commitments include extensions of
credit, alternative liquidity commitments, certain bond
underwritings, certain distressed debt and principal finance
activities and certain equity-linked structured products. the
capital committee is also responsible for ensuring that business
and reputational standards for capital commitments are maintained
on a global basis.
commitments committee. the
commitments committee reviews and approves underwriting and
distribution activities and sets and maintains policies and
procedures designed to ensure that legal, reputational, regulatory
and business standards are maintained in conjunction with these
activities. in addition to reviewing specific transactions, the
commitments committee periodically conducts strategic reviews of
industry sectors and products and establishes policies in
connection with transaction practices.
credit policy committee. the credit
policy committee establishes and reviews broad credit policies and
parameters that are implemented by the credit department.
finance committee. the finance
committee establishes and ensures compliance with our liquidity
policies, sets certain inventory position limits and has oversight
responsibility for liquidity risk, the size and composition of our
balance sheet, our capital base and our credit ratings. the finance
committee regularly reviews our funding position and capitalization
and makes adjustments in light of current events, risks and
exposures.
operational risk committee. the
operational risk committee provides oversight of the ongoing
development and implementation of our operational risk policies,
framework and methodologies, and monitors the effectiveness of
operational risk management.
structured products committee. the
structured products committee reviews and approves structured
product transactions with our clients that raise legal, regulatory,
tax or accounting issues or present reputational risk to goldman
sachs.
segregation of duties and management
oversight are fundamental elements of our risk management process.
in addition to the committees described above, departments that are
independent of the revenue-producing units, such as compliance,
finance, legal, management controls (internal audit) and
operations, in part perform risk management functions, which
include monitoring, analyzing and evaluating risk.
business unit risk limits are
established by the various risk committees and may be further
allocated by the business unit managers to individual trading
desks. trading desk managers have the first line of responsibility
for managing risk within prescribed limits. these managers have
in-depth knowledge of the primary sources of risk in their
individual markets and the instruments available to hedge their
exposures.
market risk limits are monitored on a
daily basis by the finance division, and are reviewed regularly by
the appropriate risk committee. limit violations are reported to
the appropriate risk committee and the appropriate business unit
managers. selected business unit inventory position limits are also
monitored by the finance division and position limit violations are
reported to the appropriate business unit managers and the finance
committee.
market risk
the potential for changes in the
market value of our trading and investing positions is referred to
as market risk. such positions result from market-making,
specialist and proprietary trading, investing and underwriting
activities.
table of contents
categories of market risk include
exposures to interest rates, equity prices, currency rates and
commodity prices. a description of each market risk category is set
forth below:
interest rate risks primarily result from exposures to changes in the level, slope
and curvature of the yield curve, the volatility of interest rates, mortgage
prepayment speeds and credit spreads.
equity price risks result from exposures to changes in prices and volatilities of
individual equities, equity baskets and equity indices.
currency rate risks result from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward
prices and volatilities of currency rates.
commodity price risks result from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward
prices and volatilities of commodities, such as electricity, natural gas, crude oil,
petroleum products, and precious and base metals.
we seek to manage these risks through
diversifying exposures, controlling position sizes and establishing
hedges in related securities or derivatives. for example, we may
hedge a portfolio of common stocks by taking an offsetting position
in a related equity-index futures contract. the ability to manage
an exposure may, however, be limited by adverse changes in the
liquidity of the security or the related hedge instrument and in
the correlation of price movements between the security and related
hedge instrument.
in addition to applying business
judgment, senior management uses a number of quantitative tools to
manage our exposure to market risk. these tools include:
risk limits based on a summary measure of market risk exposure referred to as var;
scenario analyses, stress tests and other analytical tools that measure the
potential effects on our trading net revenues of various market events, including,
but not limited to, a large widening of credit spreads, a substantial decline in
equity markets and significant moves in selected emerging markets;and
inventory position limits for selected business units.
var
var is the potential loss in value of
goldman sachs trading positions due to adverse market movements
over a defined time horizon with a specified confidence level.
for the var numbers reported below, a
one-day time horizon and a 95% confidence level were used. this
means that there is a 1 in 20 chance that daily trading net
revenues will fall below the expected daily trading net revenues by
an amount at least as large as the reported var. thus, shortfalls
from expected trading net revenues on a single trading day greater
than the reported var would be anticipated to occur, on average,
about once a month. shortfalls on a single day can exceed reported
var by significant amounts. shortfalls can also accumulate over a
longer time horizon such as a number of consecutive trading days.
the var numbers below are shown
separately for interest rate, equity, currency and commodity
products, as well as for our overall trading positions. the var
numbers in each risk category include the underlying product
positions and related hedges that may include positions in other
product areas. for example, the hedge of a foreign exchange forward
may include an interest rate futures position, and the hedge of a
long corporate bond position may include a short position in the
related equity.
the modeling of the risk
characteristics of our trading positions involves a number of
assumptions and approximations. while management believes that
these assumptions and
table of contents
approximations are reasonable, there is no
uniform industry methodology for estimating var, and different
assumptions and/or approximations could produce materially
different var estimates.
we use historical data to estimate
our var and, to better reflect current asset volatilities, we
generally weight historical data to give greater importance to more
recent observations. given its reliance on historical data, var is
most effective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which
there are no sudden fundamental changes or shifts in market
conditions. an inherent limitation of var is that the distribution
of past changes in market risk factors may not produce accurate
predictions of future market risk. different var methodologies and
distributional assumptions could produce a materially different
var. moreover, var calculated for a one-day time horizon does not
fully capture the market risk of positions that cannot be
liquidated or offset with hedges within one day. changes in var
between reporting periods are generally due to changes in levels of
exposure, volatilities and/or correlations among asset classes.
the following tables set forth the
daily trading var:
average daily var(1)(2)
(in millions)
year ended november
risk categories
interest rates
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect(3)
(41
)
(43
)
(38
)
firmwide
$
$
$
(1)
during the fourth quarter of 2003, we made
certain changes to our model for calculating var. the
effect of these changes was not material and, accordingly,
prior periods have not been adjusted.
(2)
during the second quarter of 2004, we began to
exclude from our calculation distressed asset portfolios
in ficc that cannot be properly measured in var. the
effect of excluding these portfolios was not material to
prior periods and, accordingly, such periods have not been
adjusted. for a further discussion of the market risk
associated with these portfolios, see distressed
asset portfolios below.
(3)
equals the difference between firmwide var and
the sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this
effect arises because the four market risk categories are
not perfectly correlated.
our average daily var increased to $67million
in 2004 from $58million in 2003. the increase was
primarily due to higher levels of exposure to equity prices,
currency rates and commodity prices, partially offset by reduced
exposures to interest rates, as well as reduced volatilities,
particularly in interest rate and equity assets. the increase in
average daily var to $58million in 2003 from $46million
in 2002 was due to higher levels of exposure in all product
categories, partially offset by reduced volatilities, particularly
in equity assets.
table of contents
daily var(1)
(in millions)
yearended
asofnovember
november2004
risk categories
high
low
interest rates
$
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect(2)
(40
)
(40
)
firmwide
$
$
(1)
during the second quarter of 2004, we began to
exclude from our calculation distressed asset portfolios
in ficc that cannot be properly measured in var. the
effect of excluding these portfolios was not material to
prior periods and, accordingly, such periods have not been
adjusted. for a further discussion of the market risk
associated with these portfolios, see distressed
asset portfolios below.
(2)
equals the difference between firmwide var and
the sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this
effect arises because the four market risk categories are
not perfectly correlated.
our daily var increased to $66million
as of november2004 from $63million as of november2003.
the increase was primarily due to higher levels of exposure
to commodity prices, partially offset by reduced exposure to
currency rates and equity prices, as well as reduced volatilities,
particularly in interest rate and equity assets.
the following chart presents our
daily trading var during 2004:
daily var
($ in millions)
table of contents
trading net revenues distribution
substantially all of our inventory
positions are marked-to-market on a daily basis and changes are
recorded in net revenues. the following chart sets forth the
frequency distribution of our daily trading net revenues for
substantially all inventory positions included in var for the year
ended november2004:
daily trading net revenues
($ in millions)
as part of our overall risk control
process, daily trading net revenues are compared with var
calculated as of the end of the prior business day. trading losses
incurred on a single day exceeded our 95% one-day var on one
occasion during 2004.
distressed asset portfolios
the market risk associated with
distressed asset portfolios in ficc that cannot be properly
measured in var (primarily due to inadequate historical data on the
underlying assets in the aggregate) is measured based on a
potential 10% decline in the asset value of such portfolios. the
market values of the underlying distressed asset positions are
sensitive to changes in a number of factors, including discount
rates and the projected timing and amount of future cash flows. as
of november2004, the potential impact of a 10% decline in the
asset value of these portfolios was $416million compared with
$228million as of november2003.
nontrading risk
smfg. the market risk of our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg is measured
using a sensitivity analysis that estimates the potential reduction
in our net revenues associated with a 10% decline in the smfg
common stock price. as of november2004, the sensitivity of our
investment to a 10% decline in the smfg common stock price was $236million
compared with $75million as of november2003. the
change is primarily due to an increase in the smfg common stock
price and the passage of time in respect of the transfer
restrictions on the underlying common stock. this sensitivity
should not be extrapolated to other movements in the smfg common
stock price, as the relationship between the fair value of our
investment and the smfg common stock price is nonlinear.
table of contents
other principal investments. the
market risk for financial instruments in our nontrading portfolio,
including our merchant banking investments but excluding our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg, is measured
using a sensitivity analysis that estimates the potential reduction
in our net revenues associated with a 10% decline in equity
markets. this sensitivity analysis is based on certain assumptions
regarding the relationship between changes in stock price indices
and changes in the fair value of the individual financial
instruments in our nontrading portfolio. different assumptions
could produce materially different risk estimates. as of november2004,
the sensitivity of our nontrading portfolio (excluding
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg) to a 10%
equity market decline was $118million compared with $104million
as of november2003, primarily reflecting an increase in
the carrying value of our public principal investments.
credit risk
credit risk represents the loss that
we would incur if a counterparty or an issuer of securities or
other instruments we hold fails to perform under its contractual
obligations to us. to reduce our credit exposures, we seek to enter
into netting agreements with counterparties that permit us to
offset receivables and payables with such counterparties. in
addition, we attempt to further reduce credit risk with certain
counterparties by entering into agreements that enable us to obtain
collateral from a counterparty or to terminate or reset the terms
of transactions after specified time periods or upon the occurrence
of credit-related events, by seeking third-party guarantees of the
counterpartys obligations, and through the use of credit
derivatives and other structures and techniques.
for most businesses, counterparty
credit limits are established by the credit department, which is
independent of the revenue-producing departments, based on
guidelines set by the firmwide risk committee and the credit policy
committee. for most products, we measure and limit credit exposures
by reference to both current and potential exposure. we typically
measure potential exposure based on projected worst-case market
movements over the life of a transaction within a 95% confidence
interval. for collateralized transactions, we also evaluate
potential exposure over a shorter collection period, and give
effect to the value of collateral received. we further seek to
measure credit exposure through the use of scenario analyses,
stress tests and other quantitative tools. our global credit
management systems monitor current and potential credit exposure to
individual counterparties and on an aggregate basis to
counterparties and their affiliates. the systems also provide
management, including the firmwide risk and credit policy
committees, with information regarding overall credit risk by
product, industry sector, country and region.
as of both november2004 and november
2003, we held u.s.government and federal agency obligations
that represented 5% and 6% of our total assets, respectively. in
addition, most of our securities purchased under agreements to
resell are collateralized by u.s.government, federal agency
and other sovereign obligations. as of november2004 and november
2003, we did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty
that exceeded 5% of our total assets. however, over the past
several years, the amount and duration of our credit exposures have
been increasing, due to, among other factors, the growth of our
lending and otc derivatives activities. a further discussion of our
derivative activities follows below.
derivatives
derivative contracts are instruments,
such as futures, forwards, swaps or option contracts, which derive
their value from underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a
combination of these factors. derivative instruments may be
privately negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
substantially all of our derivative
transactions are entered into for trading purposes, in order to
facilitate customer transactions, to take proprietary positions or
as a means of risk management. in addition to derivative
transactions entered into for trading purposes, we enter into derivative contracts
table of contents
to hedge our net investment in non-u.s.operations and to manage the interest rate and currency exposure on
our long-term borrowings and certain short-term borrowings.
derivatives are used in many of our
businesses, and we believe that the associated market risk can only
be understood relative to the underlying assets or risks being
hedged, or as part of a broader trading strategy. accordingly, the
market risk of derivative positions is managed with all of our
other nonderivative market risk.
fair values of our derivative
contracts reflect cash paid or received pursuant to credit support
agreements and are reported on a net-by-counterparty basis in our
consolidated statements of financial condition when management
believes a legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable
netting agreement. for an otc derivative, our credit exposure is
directly with our counterparty and continues until the maturity or
termination of such contract.
the following table sets forth the
distribution, by credit rating, of substantially all of our
exposure with respect to otc derivatives as of november2004, after
taking into consideration the effect of netting agreements. the
categories shown reflect our internally determined public rating
agency equivalents.
over-the-counter derivative credit exposure
($ in millions)
exposure
percentage of
collateral
net of
total exposure
credit rating equivalent
exposure(1)
held
collateral
net of collateral
aaa/aaa
$
4,700
$
$
4,564
%
aa/aa2
13,553
1,467
12,086
a/a2
19,133
2,000
17,133
bbb/baa2
10,362
2,257
8,105
bb/ba2 or lower
8,464
2,640
5,824
unrated
total
$
57,031
$
8,975
$
48,056
%
(1)
reflects cash received pursuant to credit support agreements.
table of contents
the following tables set forth our
otc derivative credit exposure, net of collateral, by remaining
contractual maturity:
exposure net of collateral
(in millions)
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10years
credit rating equivalent
months
months
years
years
or greater
total(1)
aaa/aaa
$
1,458
$
$
1,309
$
$
$
4,564
aa/aa2
3,365
3,587
2,324
1,959
12,086
a/a2
4,348
2,533
1,091
8,302
17,133
bbb/baa2
1,782
3,020
1,552
8,105
bb/ba2 or lower
2,151
2,027
5,824
unrated
total
$
13,316
$
3,340
$
12,487
$
6,607
$
12,306
$
48,056
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total(1)
interest rates
$
1,296
$
$
4,166
$
3,582
$
11,626
$
21,030
currencies
8,260
1,364
3,273
2,094
15,585
commodities
2,628
1,033
4,688
9,259
equities
1,132
2,182
total
$
13,316
$
3,340
$
12,487
$
6,607
$
12,306
$
48,056
(1)
where we have obtained collateral from a
counterparty under a master trading agreement that covers
multiple products and transactions, we have allocated the
collateral ratably based on exposure before giving effect
to such collateral.
derivative transactions may also
involve legal risks including, among other risks, that they are not
authorized or appropriate for a counterparty, that documentation
has not been properly executed or that executed agreements may not
be enforceable against the counterparty. we attempt to minimize
these risks by obtaining advice of counsel on the enforceability of
agreements as well as on the authority of a counterparty to effect
the derivative transaction.
liquidity risk
liquidity is of critical importance
to companies in the financial services sector. most failures of
financial institutions have occurred in large part due to
insufficient liquidity resulting from adverse circumstances.
accordingly, goldman sachs has in place a comprehensive set of
liquidity and funding policies that are intended to maintain
significant flexibility to address both firm-specific and broader
industry or market liquidity events. our principal objective is to
be able to fund goldman sachs and to enable our core businesses to
continue to generate revenue even under adverse circumstances.
management has implemented a number
of policies according to the following liquidity risk management
framework:
excess liquidity maintain substantial excess liquidity to meet a broad range
of potential cash outflows in a stressed environment including financing obligations.
asset-liability management ensure we fund our assets with the appropriate
financing.
intercompany funding maintain parent company liquidity and manage the
distribution of liquidity across the group structure.
crisis planning ensure all funding and liquidity management is based on
stress-scenario planning and feeds into our liquidity crisis plan.
table of contents
excess liquidity
maintenance of a pool of highly
liquid securities. our most important liquidity policy is to
pre-fund what we estimate will be our likely cash needs during a
liquidity crisis and hold such excess liquidity in the form of
unencumbered, highly liquid securities that may be sold or pledged
to provide same-day liquidity. this global core excess liquidity
is intended to allow us to meet immediate obligations without
needing to sell other assets or depend on additional funding from
credit-sensitive markets. we believe that this pre-funded pool of
excess liquidity provides us with a resilient source of funds and
gives us significant flexibility in managing through a difficult
funding environment. our global core excess reflects the following
principles:
focus must be maintained on all potential cash outflows, not just disruptions to
financing flows. goldman sachs businesses are diverse, and its cash needs are
driven by many factors, including market movements, collateral requirements and
client commitments, all of which can change dramatically in a difficult funding
environment.
during a liquidity crisis, credit-sensitive funding, including unsecured debt and
some types of secured financing agreements, may be unavailable and the terms or
availability of other types of secured financing may change.
as a result of our policy to pre-fund liquidity that we estimate may be needed in
a crisis, we hold more unencumbered securities and larger unsecured debt balances
than our businesses would otherwise require. we believe that the firms liquidity is
stronger with greater balances of highly liquid unencumbered securities, even though
it increases our unsecured liabilities.
the first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most critical to a companys
survival.
the loan value (the estimated amount
of cash that would be advanced by counterparties against these
securities) of our global core excess averaged $41.99billion
in 2004 and $38.46billion in 2003.
the following table sets forth the
average loan value of our global core excess:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.dollar-denominated
$
33,858
$
32,223
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
8,135
6,234
total global core excess
$
41,993
$
38,457
the u.s.dollar-denominated
excess includes only overnight cash deposits and unencumbered u.s.government
and agency securities and highly liquid mortgage
securities, all of which are federal reserve repo-eligible. our
non-u.s.dollar-denominated excess includes only unencumbered
french, german, united kingdom and japanese government bonds and
non-u.s.dollar overnight cash deposits. we strictly limit our
global core excess to this narrowly defined list of securities and
cash which we believe are highly liquid, even in a difficult
funding environment.
the majority of our global core
excess is structured such that it is available to meet the
liquidity requirements of our parent company, group inc., and all
of its subsidiaries. the remainder is held in our principal non-u.s.operating
entities, primarily to better match the currency and
timing requirements for those entities potential liquidity
obligations.
the size of our global core excess is
determined by an internal liquidity model together with a
qualitative assessment of the condition of the financial markets
and of goldman sachs. our liquidity
table of contents
model identifies and estimates cash and collateral outflows over a short-term horizon in a
liquidity crisis, including, but not limited to:
upcoming maturities of unsecured debt;
potential buybacks of a portion of our outstanding negotiable unsecured debt;
adverse changes in the terms or availability of secured funding;
derivatives and other margin and collateral outflows due to market moves or
increased requirements;
additional collateral that could be called in the event of a downgrade in our
credit ratings;
draws on our unfunded commitments not supported by william street funding
corporation(1);and
upcoming cash outflows, such as tax and other large payments.
other unencumbered assets. in
addition to our global core excess described above, we have a
significant amount of other unencumbered securities as a result of
our business activities. these assets, which are located in the
united states, europe and asia, include other government bonds,
high-grade money market securities, corporate bonds and marginable
equities. we do not include these securities in our global core
excess.
we maintain global core excess and
other unencumbered assets in an amount that, if pledged or sold,
would provide the funds necessary to replace at least 110% of our
unsecured obligations that are scheduled to mature (or where
holders have the option to redeem) within the next twelve months.
this implies that we could fund our positions on a secured basis
for one year in the event we were unable to issue new unsecured
debt or liquidate assets. we assume conservative loan values that
are based on stress-scenario borrowing capacity and we review these
assumptions asset-by-asset at least annually. the estimated
aggregate loan value of our global core excess and our other
unencumbered assets averaged $100.51billion in 2004 and $76.42billion
in 2003.
asset-liability management
asset quality and balance sheet
composition. we seek to maintain a highly liquid balance sheet and
substantially all of our inventory is marked-to-market daily. our
balance sheet fluctuates significantly between financial statement
dates and is lower at fiscal period end than would be observed on
an average basis. we require certain of our businesses to reduce
balance sheet usage on a quarterly basis to demonstrate compliance
with limits set by management, thereby providing a disincentive to
committing our capital over longer periods of time. these balance
sheet reductions are generally achieved during the last several
weeks of each fiscal quarter through ordinary-course, open-market
transactions in the most liquid portions of our balance sheet,
principally u.s.government and agency securities, securities
of foreign sovereigns, and mortgage and money market instruments,
as well as through the roll-off of repurchase agreements and
certain collateralized financing arrangements. accordingly, over
the last six quarters, our total assets and adjusted assets at
quarter end have been, on average, 17% lower and 16% lower,
respectively, than amounts that would have been observed, based on
a weekly average, over that period. these differences, however,
have not resulted in material changes to our credit risk, market
risk or liquidity position because they are generally in highly
liquid assets that are typically financed on a secured basis.
certain financial instruments may be
more difficult to fund on a secured basis during times of market
stress and, accordingly, we generally hold higher levels of capital
for these assets than more liquid types of financial instruments.
(1)
the global core excess excludes liquid assets held separately to support the william street credit extension program.
table of contents
the table below sets forth our
aggregate holdings in these categories of financial instruments:
as of november
(in millions)
mortgage whole loans and collateralized debt obligations (1)
$
18,346
$
11,768
bank loans(2)
8,900
6,706
high-yield securities
6,057
4,817
emerging market debt securities
1,653
1,247
smfg convertible preferred stock
2,556
1,683
other corporate principal investments(3)
1,278
1,273
real estate principal investments(3)
(1)
includes certain retained interests held
in qspes. see note3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of
the annual report on form10-k for further
information regarding our securitization
activities.
(2)
includes both funded commitments and inventory
held in connection with our trading and lending
activities.
(3)
excludes assets of $1.28billion and $1.07billion
in consolidated employee-owned merchant
banking funds as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
a large proportion of these assets
are continually funded on a secured basis through normal secured
funding markets and nonrecourse funding. we focus on developing
capacity for funding these assets on a term secured basis in order
to ensure that these assets maintain a certain amount of loan value
in periods of market stress.
see note3 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k for further information regarding
the financial instruments we hold.
appropriate financing of asset base.
we seek to manage the maturity profile of our funding base such
that we should be able to liquidate our assets prior to our
liabilities coming due, even in times of prolonged or severe
liquidity stress. we generally do not rely on immediate sales of
assets (other than our global core excess) to maintain liquidity in
a distressed environment. however, we recognize that orderly asset
sales may be prudent and necessary in a persistent liquidity crisis.
in order to avoid reliance on asset
sales, we ensure that we have sufficient total capital (long-term
borrowings plus shareholders equity) to fund our balance sheet for
at least one year. we therefore seek to maintain total capital in
excess of the aggregate of the following long-term financing
requirements:
the portion of financial instruments owned that we believe could not be funded on
a secured basis in periods of market stress, assuming conservative loan values;
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, property, leasehold improvements and
equipment, and other illiquid assets;
derivatives and other margin and collateral requirements;
anticipated draws on our unfunded commitments;and
capital or other forms of financing in our regulated subsidiaries that is in
excess of their long-term financing requirements. see intercompany funding
included below for further discussion on how we fund our subsidiaries.
our total capital of $105.78billion
and $79.11billion as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively, exceeded the aggregate of these requirements.
table of contents
conservative liability structure. we
structure our liabilities conservatively to minimize refinancing
and buy-back risk. for example, we emphasize the use of promissory
notes over commercial paper in order to improve the stability of
our short-term unsecured financing base. we have also created
internal guidelines regarding the principal amount of debt maturing
on any one day or during any single week or year and have average
maturity targets for our unsecured debt programs.
we seek to maintain broad and
diversified funding sources globally for both secured and unsecured
funding. we have imposed various internal guidelines, including the
amount of our commercial paper that can be owned and letters of
credit that can be issued by any single investor or group of
investors. we benefit from distributing our debt issuances through
our own sales force to a large, diverse global creditor base and we
believe that our relationships with our creditors are critical to
our liquidity.
we access funding in a variety of
markets in the united states, europe and asia. we issue debt
through syndicated u.s.registered offerings, u.s.registered
and 144a medium-term notes programs, offshore
medium-term notes offerings and other bond offerings, u.s. and
non-u.s. commercial paper and promissory note issuances, and other
methods. we make extensive use of the repurchase agreement and
securities lending markets and arrange for letters of credit to be
issued on our behalf.
additionally, senior unsecured debt
issued by group inc. does not contain provisions that would, based
solely upon an adverse change in our credit ratings, financial
ratios, earnings, cash flows or our stock price, trigger a
requirement for an early payment, collateral support, changes in
terms, acceleration of maturity or the creation of an additional
financial obligation.
intercompany funding
subsidiary funding policies.
substantially all of our unsecured funding is raised by our parent
company, group inc. the parent company then lends the necessary
funds to its subsidiaries, some of which are regulated, to meet
their asset financing and capital requirements. in addition, the
parent company provides its regulated subsidiaries the necessary
capital to meet their regulatory requirements. the benefits of this
strategy include enhanced control and greater flexibility to meet
the funding requirements of our subsidiaries.
our intercompany funding policies are
predicated on our assumption that, unless legally provided for,
funds or securities are not freely available from a subsidiary to
its parent company or other subsidiaries. as such, we assume that
capital or other financing provided to our regulated subsidiaries
is not available to our parent company or other subsidiaries. in
addition, we assume that the global core excess held in our
principal non-u.s.operating entities will not be available to
our parent company or other subsidiaries and therefore is available
only to meet the potential liquidity requirements of those entities.
in particular, many of our
subsidiaries are subject to laws that authorize regulatory bodies
to block or reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to
group inc. regulatory action of that kind could impede access to
funds that group inc. needs to make payments on obligations,
including debt obligations. group inc. has provided substantial
amounts of equity and subordinated indebtedness, directly or
indirectly, to its regulated subsidiaries; for example, as of
november2004, group inc. had $16.21billion of such equity and
subordinated indebtedness invested in goldman, sachs& co., its
principal u.s.regulated broker-dealer, $12.14billion
invested in goldman sachs international, a registered u.k.
broker-dealer, $2.55billion invested in goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p.(1), a u.s.regulated
broker-dealer, and $2.07billion invested in goldman sachs
(japan) ltd., a tokyo-based broker-dealer. group inc. also had
$46.84billion of unsubordinated loans to these entities as of
november2004, as well as significant amounts of capital invested
in and loans to its other regulated subsidiaries.
(1)
group inc. renamed spear, leeds & kellogg, l.p., goldman sachs execution & clearing, l.p., effective january14, 2005.
table of contents
we also manage our intercompany
exposure by requiring senior and subordinated intercompany loans to
have maturities equal to or shorter than the maturities of the
aggregate borrowings of the parent company. this policy ensures
that the subsidiaries obligations to the parent company will
generally mature in advance of the parent companys third-party
borrowings. in addition, many of our subsidiaries and affiliates
pledge collateral at loan value to the parent company to cover
their intercompany borrowings (other than subordinated debt) in
order to mitigate parent company liquidity risk. equity investments
in subsidiaries are generally funded with parent company equity
capital. as of november2004, group inc.s equity investment in
subsidiaries was $23.67billion compared with its shareholders
equity of $25.08billion.
subsidiary foreign exchange policies.
our capital invested in non-u.s.subsidiaries is generally
exposed to foreign exchange risk, substantially all of which is
hedged. currency translation adjustment, net of tax in the
consolidated statements of comprehensive income decreased to $5million
for 2004 compared with $128million for 2003, primarily
due to an expansion of our policy for hedging our net investment in
non-u.s.subsidiaries. in addition, we generally hedge the
nontrading exposure to foreign exchange risk that arises from
transactions denominated in currencies other than the transacting
entitys functional currency.
crisis planning
in order to be prepared for a
liquidity event, or a period of market stress, we base our
liquidity risk management framework and our resulting funding and
liquidity policies on conservative stress-scenario planning.
in addition, we maintain a liquidity
crisis plan that specifies an approach for analyzing and responding
to a liquidity-threatening event. the plan provides the framework
to estimate the likely impact of a liquidity event on goldman sachs
based on some of the risks identified above and outlines which and
to what extent liquidity maintenance activities should be
implemented based on the severity of the event. it also lists the
crisis management team and internal and external parties to be
contacted to ensure effective distribution of information.
cash flows
as a global financial institution,
our cash flows are complex and interrelated and bear little
relation to our net earnings and net assets and, consequently, we
believe that traditional cash flow analysis is less meaningful in
evaluating our liquidity position than the excess liquidity and
asset-liability management policies described above. cash flow
analysis may, however, be helpful in highlighting certain macro
trends and strategic initiatives in our business.
year ended november2004. our cash
and cash equivalents decreased by $2.72billion to $4.37billion
at the end of 2004. we raised $31.75billion in net
cash from financing activities, primarily in long-term debt, in
light of the favorable debt financing environment. we used net cash
of $34.47billion in our operating and investing activities,
primarily to capitalize on trading and investing opportunities for
ourselves and our clients, to meet additional collateral
requirements at securities exchanges and clearing organizations and
to provide additional funding support for our william street loan
commitments program.
year ended november2003. our cash
and cash equivalents increased by $2.27billion to $7.09billion
at the end of 2003. we raised $20.58billion in net
cash from financing activities, primarily in long-term debt. we
used net cash of $18.32billion in our operating and investing
activities primarily to capitalize on opportunities in our trading
and principal investing businesses, including the purchase of
investments that could be difficult to fund in periods of market
stress. we also increased our global core excess liquidity,
provided funding support for our william street loan commitments
program, invested in the convertible preferred stock of smfg and
financed the acquisition of east coast power l.l.c.
table of contents
year ended november2002. our cash
and cash equivalents decreased by $2.09billion to $4.82billion
at the end of 2002. we raised $9.09billion in net cash
from financing activities, primarily in net short-term debt and
long-term debt (net of repayments of long-term debt). we used net
cash of $11.18billion in our operating and investing
activities, primarily to capitalize on opportunities in our trading
and principal investing businesses, including the purchase of
investments that could be difficult to fund in periods of market
stress. we also increased our global core excess liquidity, made
leasehold improvements, and purchased telecommunications and
technology-related equipment.
operational risk
operational risk relates to the risk
of loss arising from shortcomings or failures in internal
processes, people or systems, and from external events. operational
risk can arise from many factors ranging from more or less routine
processing errors to potentially costly incidents arising, for
example, from major systems failures. operational risk may also
entail reputational harm. thus, efforts to identify, manage and
mitigate operational risk must be equally sensitive to the risk of
reputational damage as well as the risk of financial loss.
we manage operational risk through
the application of long standing, but continuously evolving,
firmwide control standards; the training, supervision and
development of our people; the active participation and commitment
of senior management in a continuous process of identifying and
mitigating key operational risks at both the business unit level
and for the firm as a whole; and a framework of strong and
independent control departments that monitor quantitative and
qualitative indicators of operational risk. together, these
elements comprise a strong firmwide control culture that is at the
center of our efforts aimed at minimizing operational shortcomings
and the damage they can cause.
the operational risk department is
responsible for the oversight and coordination of the design,
implementation and maintenance of our overall operational risk
management framework. this framework, which evolves with the
changing needs of business complexities and regulatory guidance,
takes into account internal and external operational risk events,
business unit specific risk assessments, the ongoing analysis of
business specific risk metrics and the use of scenario analysis.
while the direct responsibility for the control and mitigation of
operational risk lies with the individual business units, this
framework provides a consistent methodology for identifying and
monitoring operational risk factors for both individual business
unit managers and senior management.
table of contents
recent accounting developments
in december2003, the financial
accounting standards board (fasb)issued fasb interpretation
(fin)no.46-r. finno.46-r replaced finno.46,
which was issued in january2003. as permitted, we adopted
either finno.46 or finno.46-r for substantially
all vies in which we held a variable interest as of november2003.
as of may2004, we adopted finno.46-r for all vies in
which we held a variable interest. the effect of our adoption of finno.46
and finno.46-r was not material to our
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
in december2003, the fasb issued sfasno.132
(revised 2003), employers disclosures about
pensions and other postretirement benefits. sfasno.132
(revised 2003) amends the disclosure requirements for pension plans
and other postretirement benefits by requiring additional
disclosures such as descriptions of the types of plan assets,
investment strategies, measurement dates, plan obligations, cash
flows and components of net periodic pension costs recognized
during interim periods. the statement does not change the
measurement or recognition of plan assets and obligations. we
adopted the interim period disclosures beginning with the first
quarter of fiscal 2004. as required, we adopted the annual
disclosure provisions effective for our fiscal year ending november
2004. see note11 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k for
further information regarding our employee benefit plans.
in may2004, the fasb issued the fasb
staff position (fsp)no.fas106-2, accounting and
disclosure requirements related to the medicare prescription drug,
improvement and modernization act of 2003, which supersedes fsp no.fas106-1
of the same title issued in january2004. the
medicare prescription drug, improvement and modernization act of
2003 (the medicare act) introduces a federal subsidy to sponsors of
retiree health care benefit plans that provide a benefit that is at
least actuarially equivalent to medicare partd. management has
concluded that, if provisions are finalized in their current form,
benefits provided under our plan meet the actuarially equivalent
standard set forth in the medicare act. as permitted, we
prospectively adopted fspno.fas106-2 in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2004, thereby reducing our accumulated benefit
obligation by $13million. the impact on net periodic
postretirement benefit cost in future periods is not expected to
have a material effect on our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
in december2004, the fasb issued a
revision to sfasno.123, accounting for stock-based
compensation, sfasno.123-r, share-based payment. sfasno.123-r
focuses primarily on transactions in which an
entity exchanges its equity instruments for employee services and
generally establishes standards for the accounting for transactions
in which an entity obtains goods or services in share-based payment
transactions. sfasno.123-r is effective for our fourth
quarter of fiscal2005. we are currently evaluating the effect
of adoption of sfasno.123-r, but do not expect adoption
to have a material effect on our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
quantitative and qualitative
disclosure about market risk is set forth under managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations risk management in partii, item7 of the
annual report on form10-k and in note3 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k.
table of contents
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
index
page
no.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1 description of business
note2 significant accounting policies
note3 financial instruments
note4 short-term borrowings
note5 long-term borrowings
note6 commitments, contingencies and guarantees
note7 shareholders equity
note8 earnings per share
note9 goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
note10 other assets and other liabilities
note11 employee benefit plans
note12 employee incentive plans
note13 income taxes
note14 regulated subsidiaries
note15 business segments
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
selected financial data
financial statement schedule
report of independent registered public accounting firm
schedulei
condensed nonconsolidated financial information of registrant
(parent
company only)
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
f-3
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
f-4
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
f-5
table of contents
managements report on internal control over
financial reporting
management of the goldman sachs
group, inc., together with its consolidated subsidiaries (the
firm), is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate
internal control over financial reporting. the firms internal
control over financial reporting is a process designed under the
supervision of the firms principal executive and principal
financial officers to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the
firms financial statements for external reporting purposes in
accordance with u.s.generally accepted accounting principles.
as of the end of the firms 2004
fiscal year, management conducted an assessment of the
effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial
reporting based on the framework established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this
assessment, management has determined that the firms internal
control over financial reporting as of november26, 2004 is
effective.
our internal control over financial
reporting includes policies and procedures that pertain to the
maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and
fairly reflect transactions and dispositions of assets; provide
reasonable assurances that transactions are recorded as necessary
to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with
u.s.generally accepted accounting principles, and that
receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and the directors of the firm; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the
firms assets that could have a material effect on our financial
statements.
managements assessment of the
effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial
reporting as of november26, 2004 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing on pages93
and 94, which expresses unqualified opinions on managements
assessment and on the effectiveness of the firms internal control
over financial reporting as of november26, 2004.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and the shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
we have completed an integrated audit
of the goldman sachs group, inc.s 2004 consolidated financial
statements and of its internal control over financial reporting as
of november26, 2004 and audits of its 2003 and 2002
consolidated financial statements in accordance with the standards
of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
our opinions, based on our audits, are presented below.
consolidated financial statements
in our opinion, the consolidated
financial statements listed in the accompanying index present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
goldman sachs group, inc. and its subsidiaries (the company) at
november26, 2004 and november28, 2003, and the results of
its operations and its cash flows for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended november26,2004 in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states
of america. in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement
schedule listed in the accompanying index presents fairly, in all
material respects, the information set forth therein when read in
conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
these financial statements and financial statement schedule are the
responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is
to express an opinion on these financial statements and financial
statement schedule based on our audits. we conducted our audits of
these statements in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement. an audit of financial statements includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, and
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
internal control over financial reporting
also, in our opinion, managements
assessment, included in managements report on internal control
over financial reporting appearing on page92, that the company
maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as
of november26, 2004 based on criteria established in internal
control integrated framework issued by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso), is
fairly stated, in all material respects, based on those criteria.
furthermore, in our opinion, the company maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of november26, 2004, based on criteria
established in internal control integrated framework issued
by the coso. the companys management is responsible for
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and
for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting. our responsibility is to express opinions on
managements assessment and on the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. we
conducted our audit of internal control over financial reporting in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting
oversight board (united states). those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. an audit of internal control
over financial reporting includes obtaining an understanding of
internal control over financial reporting, evaluating managements
assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other
procedures as we consider necessary in the circumstances. we
believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.
table of contents
a companys internal control over
financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a
companys internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that
receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a material
effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations,
internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect
misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness
to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february4, 2005
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
revenues
investment banking
$
3,286
$
2,400
$
2,572
trading and principal investments
11,984
8,555
7,297
asset management and securities services
2,655
1,917
1,716
interest income
11,914
10,751
11,269
total revenues
29,839
23,623
22,854
interest expense
8,888
7,600
8,868
cost of power generation
revenues, net of interest expense and cost of power generation
20,550
16,012
13,986
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
9,591
7,393
6,744
amortization of employee initial public offering and acquisition
awards
brokerage, clearing and exchange fees
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
other expenses
total non-compensation expenses
4,222
4,052
3,696
total operating expenses
13,874
11,567
10,733
pre-tax earnings
6,676
4,445
3,253
provision for taxes
2,123
1,440
1,139
net earnings
$
4,553
$
3,005
$
2,114
earnings per share
basic
$
9.30
$
6.15
$
4.27
diluted
8.92
5.87
4.03
average common shares outstanding
basic
489.5
488.4
495.6
diluted
510.5
511.9
525.1
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of financial condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
4,365
$
7,087
cash and securities segregated in compliance with u.s. federal
and other regulations
48,179
29,715
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
14,458
9,197
receivables from customers and counterparties
38,087
27,180
securities borrowed
155,086
129,118
securities purchased under agreements to resell
44,257
26,856
financial instruments owned, at fair value
183,880
139,029
financial instruments owned and pledged as collateral, at fair value
27,924
21,690
total financial instruments owned, at fair value
211,804
160,719
other assets
15,143
13,927
total assets
$
531,379
$
403,799
liabilities and shareholders equity
secured short-term borrowings
$
8,558
$
3,321
unsecured short-term borrowings
46,401
40,881
total short-term borrowings, including the current portion of
long-term borrowings
54,959
44,202
payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
8,000
3,515
payables to customers and counterparties
153,221
105,513
securities loaned
19,394
17,528
securities sold under agreements to repurchase
47,573
43,084
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
132,097
102,699
other liabilities and accrued expenses
10,360
8,144
secured long-term borrowings
12,087
6,043
unsecured long-term borrowings
68,609
51,439
total long-term borrowings
80,696
57,482
total liabilities
506,300
382,167
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01per share; 150,000,000shares
authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
common stock, par value $0.01per share; 4,000,000,000shares
authorized, 554,063,234 and 527,371,946shares issued as
of november2004 and november2003, respectively, and 480,959,660
and 473,014,926shares outstanding as of november2004 and
november2003, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
2,013
2,984
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01per share; 200,000,000shares
authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
15,501
13,562
retained earnings
13,970
9,914
unearned compensation
(117
)
(339
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
treasury stock, at cost, par value $0.01per share; 73,103,574
and 54,357,020shares as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively
(6,305
)
(4,500
)
total shareholders equity
25,079
21,632
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
531,379
$
403,799
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
common stock, par value $0.01per share
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
issued
balance, end of year
restricted stock units and employee stock options
balance, beginning of year
2,984
3,517
4,561
issued
1,050
delivered
(1,948
)
(714
)
(1,293
)
forfeited
(62
)
(156
)
(257
)
options exercised
(11
)
(2
)
(1
)
balance, end of year
2,013
2,984
3,517
additional paid-in capital
balance, beginning of year
13,562
12,750
11,766
issuance of common stock
1,609
excess net tax benefit related to delivery of stock-based awards
balance, end of year
15,501
13,562
12,750
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year
9,914
7,259
5,373
net earnings
4,553
3,005
2,114
dividends declared
(497
)
(350
)
(228
)
balance, end of year
13,970
9,914
7,259
unearned compensation
balance, beginning of year
(339
)
(845
)
(1,220
)
restricted stock units granted
(6
)
(387
)
restricted stock units forfeited
amortization of restricted stock units
balance, end of year
(117
)
(339
)
(845
)
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
balance, beginning of year
(122
)
(168
)
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
balance, end of year
(122
)
treasury stock, at cost, par value $0.01per share
balance, beginning of year
(4,500
)
(3,561
)
(2,086
)
repurchased
(1,805
)
(939
)
(1,475
)
balance, end of year
(6,305
)
(4,500
)
(3,561
)
total shareholders equity
$
25,079
$
21,632
$
19,003
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
4,553
$
3,005
$
2,114
noncash items included in net earnings
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
deferred income taxes
1,040
stock-based compensation
1,224
changes in operating assets and liabilities
cash and securities segregated in compliance with u.s.federal
and other regulations
(18,437
)
(9,311
)
1,745
net receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
(776
)
(1,797
)
(2,423
)
net payables to customers and counterparties
36,669
7,826
5,265
securities borrowed, net of securities loaned
(24,102
)
(10,249
)
(7,039
)
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, net of securities
purchased under agreements to resell
(12,912
)
2,081
2,429
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(52,366
)
(30,264
)
(20,878
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
29,429
19,227
8,756
other, net
1,442
(1,686
)
net cash used for operating activities
(33,612
)
(17,003
)
(10,104
)
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(608
)
(592
)
(1,008
)
business combinations, net of cash acquired
(255
)
(697
)
(68
)
purchase of other investments
(24
)
net cash used for investing activities
(863
)
(1,313
)
(1,076
)
cash flows from financing activities
short-term borrowings, net
3,901
6,354
issuance of long-term borrowings
39,283
28,238
12,740
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the current portion of
long-term borrowings
(10,198
)
(7,471
)
(8,358
)
derivative contracts with a financing element, net
common stock repurchased
(1,805
)
(939
)
(1,475
)
dividends paid
(497
)
(350
)
(228
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
net cash provided by financing activities
31,753
20,581
9,093
net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents
(2,722
)
2,265
(2,087
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
7,087
4,822
6,909
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
4,365
$
7,087
$
4,822
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $8.55billion, $7.21billion
and $8.92billion for the years ended november2004, november2003 and november2002,
respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $1.02billion, $846million
and $1.22billion for the years ended november2004, november2003 and november2002,
respectively.
noncash activities:
the firm assumed $1.63billion and $584million of debt in connection with business
combinations for the years ended november2004 and november2003, respectively.
the value of common stock issued in connection with business combinations was $165million
and $47million for the years ended november2003 and november2002, respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
year ended november
(in millions)
net earnings
$
4,553
$
3,005
$
2,114
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
comprehensive income
$
4,558
$
3,133
$
2,160
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1.
description of business
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group
inc.), a delaware corporation, together with its consolidated
subsidiaries (collectively, the firm), is a leading global
investment banking, securities and investment management firm that
provides a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals.
the firms activities are divided
into three segments:
investment banking. the firm provides a broad range of investment banking
services to a diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments
and individuals.
trading and principal investments. the firm facilitates customer transactions
with a diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments and
individuals and takes proprietary positions through market making in, and trading
of, fixed income and equity products, currencies, commodities and derivatives on
such products. in addition, the firm engages in floor-based and electronic market
making as a specialist on u.s.equities and options exchanges and clears
customer transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide. in
connection with the firms merchant banking and other investment activities, the
firm makes principal investments directly and through funds that the firm raises
and manages.
asset management and securities services. the firm offers a broad array of
investment strategies, advice and planning across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide, and provides prime
brokerage, financing services and securities lending services to mutual funds,
pension funds, hedge funds, foundations and high-net-worth individuals worldwide.
note2.
significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
these consolidated financial
statements include the accounts of group inc. and all other
entities in which the firm has a controlling financial interest.
all material intercompany transactions and balances have been
eliminated. the firm determines whether it has a controlling
financial interest in an entity by first evaluating whether the
entity is a voting interest entity, a variable interest entity
(vie)or a qualifying special-purpose entity (qspe)under generally
accepted accounting principles.
voting interest entities. voting interest entities are entities in which (i)the
total equity investment at risk is sufficient to enable the entity to finance
itself independently and (ii)the equity holders have the obligation to absorb
losses, the right to receive residual returns and the right to make decisions about
the entitys activities. voting interest entities are consolidated in accordance
with accounting research bulletin (arb)no.51, consolidated financial
statements, as amended. arb no.51states that the usual condition for a
controlling financial interest in an entity is ownership of a majority voting
interest. accordingly, the firm consolidates voting interest entities in which it
has the majority of the voting interest.
variable interest entities. vies are entities that lack one or more of the
characteristics of a voting interest entity. a controlling financial interest in a
vie is present when an enterprise has a variable interest, or a combination of
variable interests, that will absorb a majority of the vies expected losses,
receive a majority of the vies expected residual returns, or both.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the enterprise with a controlling financial interest, known as the primary beneficiary,
consolidates the vie.
the firm determines whether it is the primary beneficiary of a vie by first performing a
qualitative analysis of the vie that includes, among other factors, its capital structure,
contractual terms, which variable interests create or absorb variability, related party
relationships and the design of the vie. where qualitative analysis is not conclusive, the
firm performs a quantitative analysis. for purposes of allocating a vies expected losses
and expected residual returns to the vies variable interest holders, the firm utilizes the
top down method. under that method, the firm calculates its share of the vies expected
losses and expected residual returns using the specific cash flows that would be allocated
to it, based on contractual arrangements and/or the firms position in the capital structure
of the vie, under various probability-weighted scenarios.
the financial accounting standards board (fasb)issued fasb interpretation (fin)no.46-r,
consolidation of variable interest entities, in december2003. finno.46-r
replaced finno.46, which was issued in january2003. as permitted, the firm
adopted either finno.46 or finno.46-r for substantially all vies in
which it held a variable interest as of november2003. as of may2004, the firm adopted finno.46-r
for all vies in which it held a variable interest.
qspes. qspes are passive entities that hold financial assets transferred to them
and are commonly used in mortgage and other securitization transactions. in
accordance with statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)no.
140, accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets and
extinguishments of liabilities, and finno.46-r, the firm does not
consolidate qspes.
equity-method investments. when the firm does not have a controlling financial
interest in an entity but exerts significant influence over the entitys operating
and financial policies (generally defined as owning a voting interest of 20% to
50%) and has an investment in common stock or in-substance common stock, the firm
accounts for its investment in accordance with the equity method of accounting
prescribed by accounting principles board (apb)opinion no.18, the equity
method of accounting for investments in common stock.
other. if the firm does not consolidate an entity or apply the equity method of
accounting, the firm accounts for its investment at fair value.
the firm also has formed numerous
nonconsolidated merchant banking funds with third-party investors
that are typically organized as limited partnerships. the firm acts
as general partner for these funds and does not hold a majority of
the economic interests in any fund. where the firm holds more than
a minor interest in a fund, it is subject to removal as general
partner. such fund investments are included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value in the consolidated statements of
financial condition.
these consolidated financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles that require management to make certain
estimates and assumptions regarding fair value measurements, the
accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, the
provision for potential losses that may arise from litigation and
regulatory proceedings, tax audits and other matters that affect
the consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
these estimates and assumptions are based on the best available
information; nonetheless, actual results could be materially
different from these estimates.
unless otherwise stated herein, all
references to november2004, november2003 and november2002 refer
to the firms fiscal years ended, or the dates, as the context
requires,
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
november26, 2004, november28, 2003 and november29,
2002, respectively. certain reclassifications have been
made to previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
revenue recognition
investment banking. underwriting
revenues and fees from mergers and acquisitions and other corporate
finance advisory assignments are recorded when the services related
to the underlying transaction are completed under the terms of the
engagement. expenses associated with such transactions are deferred
until the related revenue is recognized or the engagement is
otherwise concluded. underwriting revenues are presented net of
related expenses. expenses associated with advisory transactions
are recorded as non-compensation expenses, net of client
reimbursements.
repurchase agreements and
collateralized financing arrangements. securities purchased under
agreements to resell and securities sold under agreements to
repurchase, principally u.s.government, federal agency and
investment-grade foreign sovereign obligations, represent
short-term collateralized financing transactions and are carried in
the consolidated statements of financial condition at their
contractual amounts plus accrued interest. these amounts are
presented on a net-by-counterparty basis when the requirements of
finno.41, offsetting of amounts related to certain
repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements, or finno.39,
offsetting of amounts related to certain contracts, are
satisfied. the firm takes possession of securities purchased under
agreements to resell, makes delivery of securities sold under
agreements to repurchase, monitors the market value of these
securities on a daily basis and delivers or obtains additional
collateral as appropriate.
securities borrowed and loaned are
recorded based on the amount of cash collateral advanced or
received. these transactions are generally collateralized by cash,
securities or letters of credit. the firm takes possession of
securities borrowed, makes delivery of securities loaned, monitors
the market value of securities borrowed and loaned, and delivers or
obtains additional collateral as appropriate. interest income or
expense on repurchase agreements and collateralized financing
arrangements is recognized in net revenues over the life of the
transaction.
financial instruments. the
consolidated statements of financial condition reflect purchases
and sales of financial instruments on a trade-date basis.
total financial instruments owned,
at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value in the consolidated statements of
financial condition consist of financial instruments carried at
fair value or amounts that approximate fair value, with related
unrealized gains or losses recognized in the firms results of
operations. the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount
at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction
between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale.
in determining fair value, the firm
separates financial instruments into three categories cash
(i.e., nonderivative) trading instruments, derivative contracts and
principal investments.
cash trading instruments. fair values of the firms cash trading instruments are
generally obtained from quoted market prices in active markets, broker or dealer
price quotations, or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price
transparency. the types of instruments valued in this manner include u.s.
government and agency securities, other sovereign government obligations, liquid
mortgage products, investment-grade corporate bonds, listed equities, money market
securities, state, municipal and provincial obligations, and physical commodities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
certain cash trading instruments trade infrequently and, therefore, have little or no price
transparency. such instruments may include certain high-yield debt, corporate bank loans,
mortgage whole loans and distressed debt. the firm values these instruments using
methodologies such as the present value of known or estimated cash flows and generally does
not adjust underlying valuation assumptions unless there is substantive evidence supporting
a change in the value of the underlying instrument or valuation assumptions (such as similar
market transactions, changes in financial ratios and changes in the credit ratings of the
underlying companies).
cash trading instruments owned by the firm (long positions) are marked to bid prices and
instruments sold but not yet purchased (short positions) are marked to offer prices. if
liquidating a position is reasonably expected to affect its prevailing market price, the
valuation is adjusted generally based on market evidence or predetermined policies. in
certain circumstances, such as for highly illiquid positions, managements estimates are
used to determine this adjustment.
derivative contracts. fair values of the firms derivative contracts consist of
exchange-traded and over-the-counter (otc)derivatives and reflect cash that
the firm has paid and received (for example, option premiums or cash paid or
received pursuant to credit support agreements). fair values of the firms
exchange-traded derivatives are generally determined from quoted market prices. otc
derivatives are valued using valuation models. the firm uses a variety of valuation
models including the present value of known or estimated cash flows, option-pricing
models and option-adjusted spread models. the valuation models used to derive the
fair values of the firms otc derivatives require inputs including contractual
terms, market prices, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility,
prepayment rates and correlations of such inputs. the selection of a model to value
an otc derivative depends upon the contractual terms of, and specific risks
inherent in, the instrument as well as the availability of pricing information in
the market. the firm generally uses similar models to value similar instruments.
where possible, the firm verifies the values produced by its pricing models to
market transactions. for otc derivatives that trade in liquid markets, such as
generic forwards, swaps and options, model selection does not involve significant
judgment because market prices are readily available. for otc derivatives that
trade in less liquid markets, model selection requires more judgment because such
instruments tend to be more complex and pricing information is less available in
the market. as markets continue to develop and more pricing information becomes
available, the firm continues to review and refine the models it uses.
at the inception of an otc derivative contract (day one), the firm values the contract at
the model value if the firm can verify all of the significant model inputs to observable
market data and verify the model to market transactions. when appropriate, valuations are
adjusted to reflect various factors such as liquidity, bid/offer and credit considerations.
these adjustments are generally based on market evidence or predetermined policies. in
certain circumstances, such as for highly illiquid positions, managements estimates are
used to determine these adjustments.
where the firm cannot verify all of the significant model inputs to observable market data
and verify the model to market transactions, the firm values the contract at the transaction
price at inception and, consequently, records no day one gain or loss in accordance with
emerging issues task force (eitf)issue no.02-3, issues involved in accounting for
derivative contracts held for trading purposes and contracts involved in energy trading and
risk management activities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
following day one, the firm adjusts the inputs to valuation models only to the extent that
changes in such inputs can be verified by similar market transactions, third-party pricing
services and/or broker quotes or can be derived from other substantive evidence such as
empirical market data. in circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model to market
transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model could produce a materially
different estimate of fair value.
principal investments. in valuing corporate and real estate principal
investments, the firms portfolio is separated into investments in private
companies, investments in public companies (excluding the firms investment in the
convertible preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)) and
the firms investment in smfg.
the firms private principal investments, by their nature, have little or no price
transparency. such investments are initially carried at cost as an approximation of fair
value. adjustments to carrying value are made if there are third-party transactions
evidencing a change in value. downward adjustments are also made, in the absence of
third-party transactions, if it is determined that the expected realizable value of the
investment is less than the carrying value. in reaching that determination, many factors are
considered, including, but not limited to, the operating cash flows and financial
performance of the companies or properties relative to budgets or projections, trends within
sectors and/or regions, underlying business models, expected exit timing and strategy, and
any specific rights or terms associated with the investment, such as conversion features and
liquidation preferences.
the firms public principal investments, which tend to be large, concentrated holdings that
result from initial public offerings or other corporate transactions, are valued using
quoted market prices discounted for restrictions on sale. if liquidating a position is
reasonably expected to affect market prices, valuations are adjusted accordingly based on
predetermined written policies.
the firms investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg is carried at fair value,
which is derived from a model that incorporates smfgs common stock price and credit
spreads, the impact of nontransferability and illiquidity and downside protection on the
conversion strike price. the firm has the right to convert its preferred stock investment in
smfg into shares of smfg common stock beginning on february8, 2005. the current
conversion price is 322,300, but this price is subject to downward adjustment if the price
of smfg common stock at the time of conversion is less than the conversion price (subject to
a floor of 106,300). the firms convertible preferred investment is generally
nontransferable. one-third of the underlying shares of smfg common stock will become
transferable on february8, 2005, with the remaining shares of common stock becoming
transferable in equal installments on february7, 2006 and february7, 2007. in
addition, restrictions on the firms ability to hedge the underlying common stock will lapse
in three equal annual installments beginning on february7, 2005.
in general, transfers of financial
assets are accounted for as sales under sfasno.140 when
the firm has relinquished control over the transferred assets. for
transfers accounted for as sales, any related gains or losses are
recognized in net revenues. transfers that are not accounted for as
sales are accounted for as collateralized financing arrangements,
with the related interest expense recognized in net revenues over
the lives of the transactions.
commissions. the firm generates
commissions from executing and clearing client transactions on
stock, options and futures markets worldwide. these commissions are
recorded on a trade-date basis in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
power generation. power generation
revenues associated with the firms consolidated power plant
operations are included in trading and principal investments in
the consolidated statements of earnings when power is delivered.
cost of power generation in the consolidated statement of
earnings includes all of the direct costs of these plant operations
(e.g., fuel, operations and maintenance), as well as the
depreciation and amortization associated with the plant and related
contractual assets.
the following table sets forth the
power generation revenues and costs directly associated with the
firms consolidated power plant operations:
year ended november
2003 (2)
2002 (2)
(in millions)
revenues(1)
$
$
$
cost of power generation
(1)
excludes revenues from nonconsolidated power
plant operations, accounted for in accordance with the
equity method of accounting, as well as revenues
associated with the firms power trading activities.
(2)
the firms consolidated power plant operations
commenced in october2003.
asset management. asset management
fees are generally recognized over the period that the related
service is provided based upon average net asset values. in certain
circumstances, the firm is entitled to receive incentive fees when
the return on assets under management exceeds certain benchmark
returns or other performance targets. incentive fees are generally
based on investment performance over a twelve-month period and are
subject to adjustment prior to the end of the measurement period.
accordingly, incentive fees are recognized in the consolidated
statements of earnings when the measurement period ends. asset
management fees and incentive fees are included in asset
management and securities services in the consolidated statements
of earnings.
merchant banking overrides. the firm
is entitled to receive merchant banking overrides (i.e., an
increased share of a funds income and gains) when the return on
the funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns. overrides
are based on investment performance over the life of each merchant
banking fund, and future investment underperformance may require
amounts previously distributed to the firm to be returned to the
funds. accordingly, overrides are recognized in the consolidated
statements of earnings only when all material contingencies have
been resolved. overrides are included in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings.
stock-based compensation
effective for fiscal 2003, the firm
began to account for stock-based employee compensation in
accordance with the fair-value method prescribed by sfasno.123,
accounting for stock-based compensation, as amended by
sfasno.148, accounting for stock-based compensation
transition and disclosure, using the prospective adoption
method. under this method of adoption, compensation expense is
recognized over the relevant service period based on the fair value
of stock options and restricted stock units granted for fiscal 2003
and future years. no unearned compensation is included in
shareholders equity for such stock options and restricted stock
units granted. rather, such stock options and restricted stock
units are included in shareholders equity under sfasno.123
when services required from employees in exchange for the
awards are rendered and expensed.
compensation expense resulting from
stock options and restricted stock units granted for the years
ended november2002 and prior years is accounted for under the
intrinsic-value-based method
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
prescribed by apb opinion no.25,
accounting for stock issued to employees, as permitted by sfasno.123.
therefore, no compensation expense is recognized
for unmodified stock options issued for years prior to fiscal 2003
that had no intrinsic value on the date of grant. compensation
expense for restricted stock units issued for the years prior to
fiscal 2003 was, and continues to be, recognized over the relevant
service periods using amortization schedules based on the
applicable vesting provisions.
the firm pays cash dividend
equivalents on outstanding restricted stock units. dividend
equivalents paid on restricted stock units accounted for under sfasno.123
are charged to retained earnings when paid.
dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units that are later
forfeited by employees are reclassified to compensation expense
from retained earnings. dividend equivalents paid on restricted
stock units granted for the year ended november2002 and prior
years, accounted for under apb opinion no.25, are charged to
compensation expense.
if the firm were to recognize
compensation expense over the relevant service period under the
fair-value method of sfasno.123 with respect to stock
options granted for the year ended november2002 and all prior
years, net earnings would have decreased, resulting in pro forma
net earnings and eps as presented below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per share amounts)
net earnings, as reported
$
4,553
$
3,005
$
2,114
add:
stock-based employee compensation expense, net of related tax
effects, included in reported net earnings
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense, net of related tax
effects, determined under the fair-value method for all awards
(947
)
(782
)
(785
)
pro forma net earnings
$
4,396
$
2,681
$
1,745
eps, as reported
basic
$
9.30
$
6.15
$
4.27
diluted
8.92
5.87
4.03
pro forma eps
basic
$
8.98
$
5.49
$
3.52
diluted
8.61
5.24
3.32
goodwill
goodwill is the cost of acquired
companies in excess of the fair value of identifiable net assets at
acquisition date. in accordance with sfasno.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets, goodwill is tested at least
annually for impairment. an impairment loss is triggered if the
estimated fair value of an operating segment is less than its
estimated net book value. such loss is calculated as the difference
between the implied fair value of goodwill and its carrying value.
identifiable intangible assets
identifiable intangible assets, which
consist primarily of customer lists and specialist rights, are
amortized over their estimated useful lives. identifiable
intangible assets are tested for potential impairment whenever
events or changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset
groups carrying value may not be fully recoverable in accordance
with sfasno.144, accounting for the
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
impairment or disposal of long-lived assets. an impairment loss, calculated as
the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying
value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the sum of the
estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset
group is less than the corresponding carrying value.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization, are
included in other assets in the consolidated statements of
financial condition. effective december1, 2001, the firm
changed to the straight-line method of depreciation for certain
property, leasehold improvements and equipment placed in service on
or after december1, 2001.
the firms depreciation and
amortization is computed using the methods set forth below:
property and
certain internal use
equipment
leasehold improvements
software costs
term of lease greater
term of lease less
than useful life
than useful life
placed in service prior to december1, 2001
accelerated cost recovery
accelerated cost recovery
straight-line over the term of the lease
straight-line over the useful life of the asset
placed in service on or after december1, 2001
straight-line over the useful life of the asset
straight-line over the useful life of the asset
straight-line over the term of the lease
straight-line over the useful life of the asset
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment are tested for potential impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups
carrying value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with sfasno.144.
an impairment loss, calculated as the difference
between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset
or asset group, is recognized if the sum of the expected
undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset group is
less than the corresponding carrying value.
the firms operating leases include
space held in excess of current needs. rent expense relating to
space held for growth is included in occupancy in the
consolidated statements of earnings. in accordance with sfasno.146,
accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal
activities, the firm records a liability, based on the remaining
lease rentals reduced by any potential or existing sublease
rentals, for leases where the firm has ceased using the space and
management has concluded that the firm will not derive any future
economic benefits. costs to terminate a lease before the end of its
term are recognized and measured at fair value upon termination.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
non-u.s.currencies are translated at rates of exchange
prevailing on the date of the consolidated statement of financial
condition, and revenues and expenses are translated at average
rates of exchange for the fiscal year. gains or losses on
translation of the financial statements of a non-u.s.operation,
when the functional currency is other than the u.s.dollar,
are included, net of hedges and taxes, on the consolidated
statements of comprehensive income. the firm seeks to reduce its
net investment exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates
through the use of foreign currency forward contracts and foreign
currency denominated debt. for foreign currency forward contracts,
hedge effectiveness is assessed based on changes in forward
exchange rates; accordingly, forward points are reflected as a
component of the currency translation adjustment in the
consolidated statements of comprehensive income. for foreign
currency denominated debt, hedge effectiveness is assessed based on
changes in spot rates.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
foreign currency remeasurement gains or
losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are included in
the consolidated statements of earnings.
income taxes
deferred tax assets and liabilities
are recognized for temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of the firms assets and liabilities.
valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets
to the amount that more likely than not will be realized. the
firms tax assets and liabilities are presented as a component of
other assets and other liabilities and accrued expenses,
respectively, in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. tax provisions are computed in accordance with sfasno.109,
accounting for income taxes. contingent liabilities
related to income taxes are recorded when the criteria for loss
recognition under sfasno.5, accounting for
contingencies, as amended, have been met.
earnings per share
basic eps is calculated by dividing
net earnings by the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding. common shares outstanding includes common stock and
restricted stock units for which no future service is required as a
condition to the delivery of the underlying common stock. diluted
eps includes the determinants of basic eps and, in addition,
reflects the dilutive effect of the common stock deliverable
pursuant to stock options and restricted stock units for which
future service is required as a condition to the delivery of the
underlying common stock.
cash and cash equivalents
the firm defines cash equivalents as
highly liquid overnight deposits held in the ordinary course of
business.
recent accounting developments
in december2003, the fasb issued finno.46-r.
finno.46-r replaced finno.46,
which was issued in january2003. as permitted, the firm
adopted either finno.46 or finno.46-r for
substantially all vies in which the firm held a variable interest
as of november2003. as of may2004, the firm adopted finno.46-r
for all vies in which it held a variable interest. the
effect of the firms adoption of finno.46 and finno.46-r
was not material to the firms financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
in december2003, the fasb issued sfasno.132
(revised 2003), employers disclosures about
pensions and other postretirement benefits. sfasno.132
(revised 2003) amends the disclosure requirements for pension plans
and other postretirement benefits by requiring additional
disclosures such as descriptions of the types of plan assets,
investment strategies, measurement dates, plan obligations, cash
flows and components of net periodic pension costs recognized
during interim periods. the statement does not change the
measurement or recognition of plan assets and obligations. the firm
adopted the interim period disclosures beginning with the first
quarter of fiscal2004. as required, the firm adopted the
annual disclosure provisions effective for the firms fiscalyear
ending november2004. see note11 for further information
regarding the firms employee benefit plans.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
in may2004, the fasb issued fasb
staff position (fsp)no.fas106-2, accounting and
disclosure requirements related to the medicare prescription drug,
improvement and modernization act of 2003, which supersedes fsp no.fas106-1
of the same title issued in january2004. the
medicare prescription drug, improvement and modernization act of
2003 (the medicare act) introduces a federal subsidy to sponsors of
retiree health care benefit plans that provide a benefit that is at
least actuarially equivalent to medicare partd. management has
concluded that, if provisions are finalized in their current form,
benefits provided under the firms plan meet the actuarially
equivalent standard set forth in the medicare act. as permitted,
the firm prospectively adopted fsp no.fas106-2 in the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2004, thereby reducing the firms accumulated
benefit obligation by $13million. the impact on net periodic
postretirement benefit cost in future periods is not expected to
have a material effect on the firms financial condition, results
of operations or cash flows.
in december2004, the fasb issued a
revision to sfasno.123, accounting for stock-based
compensation, sfasno.123-r, share-based payment. sfasno.123-r
focuses primarily on transactions in which an
entity exchanges its equity instruments for employee services and
generally establishes standards for the accounting for transactions
in which an entity obtains goods or services in share-based payment
transactions. sfasno.123-r is effective for the firms
fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. management is currently evaluating
the effect of adoption of sfasno.123-r, but does not
expect adoption to have a material effect on the firms financial
condition, results of operations or cash flows.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note3.
financial instruments
fair value of financial instruments
the following table sets forth the
firms financial instruments owned, including those pledged as
collateral, at fair value, and financial instruments sold, but not
yet purchased, at fair value:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other
money market instruments
$
7,386
(1)
$
$
4,987
(1)
$
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
46,777
40,866
36,634
34,003
corporate and other debt obligations
mortgage whole loans and collateralized debt obligations
18,346
11,768
investment-grade corporate bonds
11,783
5,163
9,862
4,641
bank loans
8,900
6,706
high-yield securities
6,057
1,725
4,817
1,394
preferred stock
4,792
3,822
other
50,763
8,344
37,544
6,982
equities and convertible debentures
42,263
18,766
35,006
19,651
state, municipal and provincial obligations
1,308
derivative contracts
62,495
64,001
45,733
41,886
physical commodities
total
$
211,804
$
132,097
$
160,719
$
102,699
(1)
includes $5.04billion and $4.32billion,
as of november2004 and november2003, respectively, of
money market instruments held by william street funding
corporation to support the william street credit
extension program.
credit concentrations
credit concentrations may arise from
trading, underwriting and securities borrowing activities and may
be impacted by changes in economic, industry or political factors.
as of november2004 and november2003, the firm held u.s.government
and federal agency obligations that represented 5% and
6% of the firms total assets, respectively. in addition, most of
the firms securities purchased under agreements to resell are
collateralized by u.s.government, federal agency and other
sovereign obligations. as of november2004 and november2003, the
firm did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty that
exceeded 5% of the firms total assets.
derivative activities
derivative contracts are instruments,
such as futures, forwards, swaps or option contracts, which derive
their value from underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a
combination of these factors. derivative instruments may be
privately negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
derivatives may involve future commitments to purchase or sell
financial instruments or commodities, or to exchange currency or
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
interest payment streams. the amounts exchanged are based on the
specific terms of the contract with reference to specified rates,
securities, commodities, currencies or indices.
certain cash instruments, such as
mortgage-backed securities, interest-only and principal-only
obligations, and indexed debt instruments, are not considered
derivatives even though their values or contractually required cash
flows are derived from the price of some other security or index.
however, certain commodity-related contracts are included in the
firms derivatives disclosure, as these contracts may be settled in
cash or are readily convertible into cash.
substantially all of the firms
derivative transactions are entered into for trading purposes, in
order to facilitate customer transactions, to take proprietary
positions or as a means of risk management. risk exposures are
managed through diversification, by controlling position sizes and
by establishing hedges in related securities or derivatives. for
example, the firm may hedge a portfolio of common stock by taking
an offsetting position in a related equity-index futures contract.
gains and losses on derivatives used for trading purposes are
generally included in trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
in addition to derivative
transactions entered into for trading purposes, the firm enters
into derivative contracts to hedge its net investment in non-u.s.operations
(see note2 for further information regarding
the firms policy on foreign currency translation) and to manage
the interest rate and currency exposure on its long-term borrowings
and certain short-term borrowings. to manage exposure on its
borrowings, the firm uses derivatives to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. the firm applies fair-value
hedge accounting to derivative contracts that hedge the benchmark
interest rate (i.e., libor) on its long-term borrowings.
fair values of the firms derivative
contracts reflect cash paid or received pursuant to credit support
agreements and are reported on a net-by-counterparty basis in the
firms consolidated statements of financial condition when
management believes a legal right of setoff exists under an
enforceable netting agreement. the fair value of derivative
financial instruments, computed in accordance with the firms
netting policy, is set forth below:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
forward settlement contracts
$
13,137
$
14,578
$
8,134
$
9,271
swap agreements
34,727
30,836
25,471
17,317
option contracts
14,631
18,587
12,128
15,298
total
$
62,495
$
64,001
$
45,733
$
41,886
securitization activities
the firm securitizes commercial and
residential mortgages, home equity loans, government and corporate
bonds, and other types of financial assets. the firm acts as
underwriter of the beneficial interests that are sold to investors.
the firm derecognizes financial assets transferred in
securitizations provided it has relinquished control over such
assets. transferred assets are accounted for at fair value prior to
securitization. net revenues related to these underwriting
activities are recognized in connection with the sales of the
underlying beneficial interests to investors.
the firm may retain interests in
securitized financial assets. retained interests are accounted for
at fair value and included in total financial instruments owned,
at fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
during the years ended november2004
and november2003, the firm securitized $62.93billion and
$95.00billion, respectively, of financial assets, including
$21.24billion and $70.89billion, respectively, of agency
mortgage-backed securities. cash flows received on retained
interests and other securitization cash flows were approximately
$984million and $1billion for the years ended november
2004 and november2003, respectively.
as of november2004 and november
2003, the firm held $4.33billion and $3.20billion of
retained interests, respectively, including $4.11billion and
$3.04billion, respectively, held in qspes. as of november2004
and november2003, the fair value of $949million and $1.05billion,
respectively, of retained interests was based on quoted
market prices in active markets.
the following table sets forth the
weighted average key economic assumptions used in measuring the
fair value of $3.38billion and $2.15billion,
respectively, as of november2004 and november2003, of retained
interests for which fair value is based on alternative pricing
sources with reasonable, little or no price transparency and the
sensitivity of those fair values to immediate adverse changes of
10% and 20% in those assumptions:
as of november 2004
as of november 2003
type of retained interests
type of retained interests
mortgage-
corporate debt
mortgage-
corporate debt
backed
and other(3)
backed
and other(3)
($ in millions)
fair value of retained interests
$
1,798
$
1,578
$
1,199
$
weighted average life (years)
4.2
3.7
3.8
3.4
annual constant prepayment rate
21.5
%
n/a
22.0
%
n/a
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(6
)
$
$
(3
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(10
)
(7
)
annual credit losses(1)
4.0
%
4.1
%
2.9
%
1.3
%
impact of 10% adverse change(2)
$
(10
)
$
(1
)
$
(11
)
$
(6
)
impact of 20% adverse change(2)
(14
)
(2
)
(19
)
(11
)
annual discount rate
8.5
%
4.9
%
15.0
%
8.3
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(39
)
$
(24
)
$
(27
)
$
(6
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(75
)
(48
)
(51
)
(11
)
(1)
annual percentage credit loss is based only on
positions in which expected credit loss is a key
assumption in the determination of fair values.
(2)
the impacts of adverse change take into account
credit mitigants incorporated in the retained interests,
including over collateralization and subordination
provisions.
(3)
includes retained interests in bonds and other
types of financial assets that are not subject to
prepayment risk.
the preceding table does not give
effect to the offsetting benefit of other financial instruments
that are held to hedge risks inherent in these retained interests.
changes in fair value based on a 10% adverse variation in
assumptions generally cannot be extrapolated because the
relationship of the change in assumptions to the change in fair
value is not usually linear. in addition, the impact of a change in
a particular assumption is calculated independently of changes in
any other assumption. in practice, simultaneous changes in
assumptions might magnify or counteract the sensitivities disclosed
above.
in addition to the retained interests
described above, the firm also held interests in qspes, primarily
agency mortgage-backed securities, purchased in connection with
secondary market-making activities. these purchased interests
approximated $5billion and $6billion as of november2004
and november2003, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
in connection with the issuance of
asset-repackaged notes to investors, the firm had derivative
receivables from qspes, to which the firm has transferred assets,
with a fair value of $126million and $188million as of
november2004 and november2003, respectively. these receivables
are collateralized by a first-priority interest in the assets held
by each qspe.
variable interest entities (vies)
the firm, in the ordinary course of
its business, retains interests in vies in connection with its
securitization activities. the firm also purchases and sells
variable interests in vies, primarily mortgage-backed and
asset-backed interests, in connection with its market-making
activities and makes investments in and loans to vies that hold
performing and nonperforming debt, real estate and other assets. in
addition, the firm utilizes vies to provide investors with
credit-linked and asset-repackaged notes designed to meet their
objectives.
vies generally purchase assets by
issuing debt and equity instruments and through other contractual
arrangements. in certain instances, the firm has provided
guarantees to certain vies or holders of variable interests in
these vies. in such cases, the maximum exposure to loss included in
the tables set forth below is the notional amount of such
guarantees. such amounts do not represent anticipated losses in
connection with these guarantees. the firms variable interests in
these vies include senior and subordinated debt; limited and
general partnership interests; preferred and common stock; interest
rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit derivatives;
guarantees; and residual interests in mortgage-backed and
asset-backed securitization vehicles. group inc. generally is not
directly or indirectly obligated to repay the debt and equity
instruments and contractual arrangements entered into by these vies.
the following table sets forth the
firms total assets and maximum exposure to loss associated with
its significant variable interests in consolidated vies where the
firm does not hold a majority voting interest:
as of november
(in millions)
vie assets(1)
$
5,197
$
1,832
maximum exposure to loss
(1)
consolidated vie assets include assets financed
by nonrecourse short-term and long-term debt. nonrecourse
debt is debt that group inc. is not directly or
indirectly obligated to repay.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following tables set forth total
assets in nonconsolidated vies in which the firm holds significant
variable interests and the firms maximum exposure to loss
associated with these interests:
as of november 2004
maximum exposure to loss
vie
purchased
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
mortgage-backed
$
9,921
$
$
$
$
$
1,245
asset repackagings and credit linked notes
5,138
power-related
5,340
other asset-backed
8,295
1,129
total
$
28,694
$
$
$
$
2,657
$
3,534
as of november 2003
maximum exposure to loss
vie
purchased
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
mortgage-backed
$
1,648
$
$
$
$
$
asset repackagings and credit linked notes
power-related
other asset-backed
5,720
1,139
total
$
8,265
$
$
$
$
1,427
$
1,852
secured borrowing and lending activities
the firm obtains secured short-term
financing principally through the use of repurchase agreements and
securities lending agreements to obtain securities for settlement,
finance inventory positions and meet customers needs. in these
transactions, the firm either provides or receives collateral,
including cash, u.s.government, federal agency,
mortgage-backed, investment-grade foreign sovereign obligations,
equity securities, convertible bonds, letters of credit and
corporate bonds.
the firm receives collateral in
connection with resale agreements, securities lending transactions,
derivative transactions, customer margin loans and other secured
lending activities. in many cases, the firm is permitted to sell or
repledge securities held as collateral. these securities may be
used to secure repurchase agreements, enter into securities lending
or derivative transactions, or cover short positions. as of
november2004 and november2003, the fair value of securities
received as collateral by the firm that it was permitted to sell or
repledge was $511.98billion and $410.01billion,
respectively, of which the firm sold or repledged $451.79billion
and $350.57billion, respectively.
the firm also pledges its own assets
to collateralize repurchase agreements and other secured
financings. as of november2004 and november2003, the carrying
value of securities included in financial instruments owned, at
fair value that had been loaned or pledged to counterparties that
did not have the right to sell or repledge was $46.86billion
and $47.39billion, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note4.
short-term borrowings
the firm obtains secured and
unsecured short-term borrowings primarily through issuance of
promissory notes, commercial paper and bank loans. as of november
2004 and november2003, secured short-term borrowings were $8.56billion
and $3.32billion, respectively, and unsecured
short-term borrowings were $46.40billion and $40.88billion,
respectively. short-term borrowings also include the
portion of long-term borrowings maturing within one year and
certain long-term borrowings that may be redeemable within one year
at the option of the holder. the carrying value of these short-term
obligations approximates fair value due to their short-term nature.
short-term borrowings are set forth
below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
19,513
$
24,119
commercial paper
4,355
4,767
bank loans and other
13,474
8,183
current portion of long-term borrowings
17,617
7,133
total(1)
$
54,959
$
44,202
(1)
as of november2004 and november2003, the
weighted average interest rates for short-term
borrowings, including commercial paper, were 2.73% and
1.48%, respectively. the weighted average interest rates,
after giving effect to hedging activities, were 2.30% and
1.25% as of november2004 and november2003, respectively.
note5.
long-term borrowings
the firm obtains secured and
unsecured long-term borrowings, which consist principally of senior
borrowings with maturities extending to 2034. as of november2004
and november2003, secured long-term borrowings were $12.09billion
and $6.04billion, respectively, and unsecured
long-term borrowings were $68.61billion and $51.44billion,
respectively.
long-term borrowings are set forth
below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
32,078
$
28,242
non-u.s.dollar
12,553
8,703
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
26,033
13,269
non-u.s.dollar
10,032
7,268
total
$
80,696
$
57,482
(1)
as of november2004 and november2003, interest
rates on u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged
from 2.85% to 12.00% and from 4.13% to 12.00%,
respectively. as of both november2004 and november2003,
interest rates on non-u.s.dollar fixed rate
obligations ranged from 0.70% to 8.88%.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on
libor, the u.s.treasury bill rate or the federal
funds rate. certain equity-linked and indexed instruments
are included in floating rate obligations.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
nonrecourse debt is debt that group
inc. is not directly or indirectly obligated to repay. long-term
borrowings include nonrecourse debt issued by the following
subsidiaries:
as of november
(in millions)
william street funding corporation
$
5,144
$
3,173
variable interest entities
4,546
1,635
other subsidiaries(1)
2,364
total
$
12,054
$
5,430
(1)
includes $978million and $583million of
nonrecourse debt issued by the firms consolidated power
plant operations as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
long-term borrowings by fiscal
maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2004(1)(2)
2003(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
7,854
$
4,598
$
12,452
10,691
2,616
13,307
6,133
1,576
7,709
7,116
8,064
1,274
1,838
4,626
3,179
7,805
3,105
2,546
5,651
9,061
4,116
13,177
5,317
1,100
6,417
2010-thereafter
26,617
11,726
38,343
17,828
5,587
23,415
total
$
58,111
$
22,585
$
80,696
$
41,511
$
15,971
$
57,482
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year and
certain long-term borrowings that may be redeemable
within one year at the option of the holder are included
as short-term borrowings in the consolidated statements
of financial condition.
(2)
long-term borrowings repayable at the option of
the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. certain long-term borrowings that may be
redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holder
are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
the firm enters into derivative
contracts, such as interest rate futures contracts, interest rate
swap agreements, currency swap agreements and equity-linked
contracts, to effectively convert a substantial portion of its
long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based floating rate
obligations. accordingly, the aggregate carrying value of these
long-term borrowings and related hedges approximates fair value.
the effective weighted average
interest rates for long-term borrowings, after hedging activities,
are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
2,383
6.56
%
$
1,517
7.43
%
floating rate obligations
78,313
2.48
55,965
1.79
total
$
80,696
2.60
$
57,482
1.94
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
deferrable interest junior subordinated debentures
in february2004, goldman sachs
capitali (the trust), a wholly owned delaware statutory trust,
was formed by the firm for the exclusive purposes of (i)issuing
$2.75billion of guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests and $85million of common beneficial interests in the
trust, (ii)investing the proceeds from the sale to purchase
junior subordinated debentures from group inc. and (iii)engaging
in only those other activities necessary or incidental to
these purposes. the preferred beneficial interests were purchased
by third parties, and, as of november2004, the firm held all of
the common beneficial interests.
the trust is a wholly owned finance
subsidiary of the firm for legal and regulatory purposes. however,
for accounting purposes, under finno.46-r, the trust is
not a consolidated subsidiary of the firm because the firms
ownership of the common beneficial interest is not considered at
risk, since the trusts principal asset is the $2.84billion of
junior subordinated debentures issued by the firm. the firm pays
interest semiannually on these debentures at an annual rate of
6.345% and the debentures mature on february15, 2034. the
coupon rate and payment dates applicable to the beneficial
interests are the same as the interest rate and payment dates
applicable to the debentures. see note6 for further
information regarding the firms guarantee of the preferred
beneficial interests issued by the trust.
the firm has the right, from time to
time, to defer payment of interest on the junior subordinated
debentures, and, therefore, cause payment of dividends on the
trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in each case
for up to ten consecutive semiannual periods, and during any such
extension period group inc. will not be permitted to, among other
things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of its common
stock. the trust is not permitted to pay any distributions on the
common beneficial interests held by the firm unless all dividends
payable on the preferred beneficial interests have been paid in
full.
note6.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
commitments
the firm had commitments to enter
into forward secured financing transactions, including certain
repurchase and resale agreements and secured borrowing and lending
arrangements, of $48.32billion and $35.25billion as of
november2004 and november2003, respectively.
in connection with its lending
activities, the firm had outstanding commitments of $27.72billion
and $15.83billion as of november2004 and november
2003, respectively. the firms commitments to extend credit are
agreements to lend to counterparties that have fixed termination
dates and are contingent on all conditions to borrowing set forth
in the contract having been met. since these commitments may expire
unused, the total commitment amount does not necessarily reflect
the actual future cash flow requirements.
as of november2004 and november
2003, $9.40billion and $4.32billion, respectively, of the
firms outstanding commitments to extend credit have been issued
through the william street credit extension program. these
commitments were primarily issued through william street commitment
corporation (commitment corp), a consolidated wholly owned
subsidiary of group inc. another consolidated wholly owned
subsidiary, william street funding corporation (funding corp), was
formed to raise funding to support the william street credit
extension program. commitment corp and funding corp are each
separate corporate entities, with assets and liabilities that are
legally separated from the other assets and liabilities of the
firm. accordingly, the assets of commitment corp and of funding
corp will not be available to their respective shareholders until
the claims of their respective creditors have been paid. in
addition, no affiliate of either commitment corp or
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
funding corp, except in limited cases as expressly agreed in writing, is
responsible for any obligation of either entity. substantially all
of the credit risk associated with these commitments has been
covered by credit loss protection provided to the firm by smfg. the
firm has also hedged the credit risk of certain non-william street
commitments using a variety of other financial instruments.
the firm provides letters of credit
issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu of securities or
cash to satisfy various collateral and margin deposit requirements.
letters of credit outstanding were $11.15billion and $12.60billion
as of november2004 and november2003, respectively.
the firm acts as an investor in
merchant banking transactions, which includes making long-term
investments in equity and debt securities in privately negotiated
transactions, corporate acquisitions and real estate transactions.
in connection with these activities, the firm had commitments to
invest up to $1.04billion and $1.38billion in corporate
and real estate investment funds as of november2004 and november
2003, respectively.
the firm had construction-related
commitments of $107million and $87million as of november2004
and november2003, respectively, and other purchase
commitments of $242million and $255million as of november
2004 and november2003, respectively.
as of november2004, the firm had
entered into a contract to acquire interests in power plants and
related businesses from national energy& gas transmission,
inc., including additional interests in some of the same power
plants and a natural gas pipeline in which cogentrix energy, inc.,
a wholly owned subsidiary of the firm, already holds interests, for
approximately $550million.
the firm has contractual obligations
under long-term noncancelable lease agreements, principally for
office space, expiring on various dates through 2029. certain
agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for
increases in real estate taxes and other charges. future minimum
rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals, and rent charged
to operating expense for the last three years are set forth below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2010-thereafter
1,884
total
$
3,519
net rent expense
$
contingencies
the firm is involved in a number of
judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings concerning matters
arising in connection with the conduct of its businesses.
management believes, based on currently available information, that
the results of such proceedings, in the aggregate, will not have a
material adverse effect on the firms financial condition, but may
be material to the firms operating results for any particular
period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such
period. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of
the firms litigation matters, particularly in cases in
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
which claimants seek substantial or indeterminate damages, the firm
cannot estimate losses or ranges of losses for cases where there is
only a reasonable possibility that a loss may have been incurred.
guarantees
the firm enters into various
derivative contracts that meet the definition of a guarantee under
finno.45. such derivative contracts include credit
default swaps, written equity and commodity put options, written
currency contracts and interest rate caps, floors and swaptions. finno.45
does not require disclosures about derivative
contracts if such contracts may be cash settled and the firm has no
basis to conclude it is probable that the counterparties held, at
inception, the underlying instruments related to the derivative
contracts. the firm has concluded that these conditions have been
met, for certain large, internationally active commercial and
investment bank end users and certain other users. accordingly, the
firm has not included such contracts in the tables below.
the firm, in its capacity as an
agency lender, occasionally indemnifies securities lending
customers against losses incurred in the event that borrowers do
not return securities and the collateral held is insufficient to
cover the market value of the securities borrowed. in relation to
certain asset sales and securitization transactions, the firm
guarantees the collection of contractual cash flows. in connection
with its merchant banking activities, the firm may issue loan
guarantees to secure financing and to obtain preferential terms. in
addition, the firm provides letters of credit and other guarantees,
on a limited basis, to enable clients to enhance their credit
standing and complete transactions.
in connection with the firms
establishment of the trust, group inc. effectively provided for the
full and unconditional guarantee of the beneficial interests in the
trust held by third parties. timely payment by group inc. of
interest on the junior subordinated debentures and other amounts
due and performance of its other obligations under the transaction
documents will be sufficient to cover payments due by the trust on
its beneficial interests. as a result, management believes that it
is unlikely the firm will have to make payments related to the
trust other than those required under the junior subordinated
debentures and in connection with certain expenses incurred by the
trust.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following tables set forth
certain information about the firms derivative contracts that meet
the definition of a guarantee and certain other guarantees as of
november2004 and november2003:
as of november 2004
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration (4)
carrying
2006-
2008-
2010-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives (1)
$
6,752
$
269,246
$
96,829
$
175,910
$
349,789
$
891,774
securities lending indemnifications(2)
14,737
14,737
guarantees of trust preferred beneficial interest(3)
7,025
7,897
guarantee of the collection of contractual cash flows
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and other guarantees
(1)
the carrying value of $6.75billion
excludes the effect of a legal right of setoff
that may exist under an enforceable netting
agreement.
(2)
collateral held in connection with securities
lending indemnifications was $15.28billion as of
november2004.
(3)
includes the guarantee of all payments scheduled
to be made over the life of the trust, which could be
shortened in the event the firm redeemed the junior
subordinated debentures issued to fund the trust (see note5
for further information regarding the trust).
(4)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated
losses in connection with these contracts.
as of november 2003
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration (3)
carrying
2005-
2007-
2009-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives (1)
$
7,639
$
216,038
$
87,843
$
126,385
$
163,721
$
593,987
securities lending indemnifications(2)
7,955
7,955
guarantee of the collection of contractual cash flows
1,543
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and other guarantees
(1)
the carrying value of $7.64billion excludes the
effect of a legal right of setoff that may exist under an
enforceable netting agreement.
(2)
collateral held in connection with securities
lending indemnifications was $8.23billion as of
november2003.
(3)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated
losses in connection with these contracts.
in the normal course of its business,
the firm indemnifies and guarantees certain service providers, such
as clearing and custody agents, trustees and administrators,
against specified potential losses in connection with their acting
as an agent of, or providing services to, the firm or its
affiliates. the firm also indemnifies some clients against
potential losses incurred in the event
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
specified third-party service providers, including subcustodians and third-party brokers,
improperly execute transactions. in addition, the firm is a member
of payment, clearing and settlement networks as well as securities
exchanges around the world that may require the firm to meet the
obligations of such networks and exchanges in the event of member
defaults. in connection with its prime brokerage and clearing
businesses, the firm may agree to clear and settle on behalf of its
clients the transactions entered into by them with other brokerage
firms. the firms obligations in respect of such transactions are
secured by the assets in the clients account as well as any
proceeds received from the transactions cleared and settled by the
firm on behalf of the client. in connection with joint venture
investments, the firm may issue loan guarantees under which it may
be liable in the event of fraud, misappropriation, environmental
liabilities and certain other matters involving the borrower. the
firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under
these guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes
that it is unlikely the firm will have to make material payments
under these arrangements, and no liabilities related to these
guarantees and indemnifications have been recognized in the
consolidated statements of financial condition as of november2004
and november2003.
the firm provides representations and
warranties to counterparties in connection with a variety of
commercial transactions and occasionally indemnifies them against
potential losses caused by the breach of those representations and
warranties. the firm may also provide indemnifications protecting
against changes in or adverse application of certain u.s.tax
laws in connection with ordinary-course transactions such as
securities issuances, borrowings or derivatives. in addition, the
firm may provide indemnifications to some counterparties to protect
them in the event additional taxes are owed or payments are
withheld, due either to a change in or an adverse application of
certain non-u.s.tax laws. these indemnifications generally are
standard contractual terms and are entered into in the normal
course of business. generally, there are no stated or notional
amounts included in these indemnifications, and the contingencies
triggering the obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur.
the firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout
under these guarantees. however, management believes that it is
unlikely the firm will have to make material payments under these
arrangements, and no liabilities related to these arrangements have
been recognized in the consolidated statements of financial
condition as of november2004 and november2003.
note7.
shareholders equity
dividends declared per common share
were $1.00 in 2004, $0.74 in 2003 and $0.48 in 2002. on december15,
2004, the board of directors of group inc. (the board)
declared a dividend of $0.25per share to be paid on february24,
2005 to common shareholders of record on january25,
2005.
during 2004 and 2003, the firm
repurchased 18.7million shares and 12.2million shares of
the firms common stock, respectively. the average price paid per
share for repurchased shares was $96.29 and $76.83 for the years
ended november2004 and november2003, respectively. in addition,
to satisfy minimum statutory employee tax withholding requirements
related to the delivery of shares underlying restricted stock
units, the firm cancelled 9.1million restricted stock units at
an average price of $95.20per unit in 2004. on january30,
2004, the board authorized the repurchase of an additional 15.0million
shares of common stock pursuant to the firms existing
repurchase program. as of november2004, the firm was authorized to
repurchase up to 6.4million additional shares of common stock
pursuant to the firms repurchase program.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note8.
earnings per share
the computations of basic and diluted
eps are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
numerator for basic and diluted eps earnings available to
common shareholders
$
4,553
$
3,005
$
2,114
denominator for basic eps weighted average number of common
shares
489.5
488.4
495.6
effect of dilutive securities
restricted stock units
9.6
16.0
22.1
stock options
11.4
7.5
7.4
dilutive potential common shares
21.0
23.5
29.5
denominator for diluted eps weighted average number of common
shares and dilutive potential common shares(1)
510.5
511.9
525.1
basic eps
$
9.30
$
6.15
$
4.27
diluted eps
8.92
5.87
4.03
(1)
the diluted eps computations do not include the
antidilutive effect of the following options:
year ended november
(in millions)
number of antidilutive options, end of period
note9.
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
goodwill
as of november2004 and november
2003, goodwill of $3.18billion and $3.16billion,
respectively, was included in other assets in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
identifiable intangible assets
the following table sets forth the
gross carrying amount, accumulated amortization and net carrying
amount of identifiable intangible assets:
as of november
(in millions)
customer lists (1)
gross carrying amount
$
1,021
$
1,021
accumulated amortization
(193
)
(141
)
net carrying amount
$
$
new york stock
exchange (nyse)
specialist rights
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(107
)
(78
)
net carrying amount
$
$
exchange-traded
fund (etf)and option
specialist rights
gross carrying amount
$
(3)
$
accumulated amortization
(24
) (3)
(182
)
net carrying amount
$
$
other (2)
gross carrying amount
$
(3)
$
accumulated amortization
(165
) (3)
(177
)
net carrying amount
$
$
total
gross carrying amount
$
2,178
$
2,398
accumulated amortization
(489
)
(578
) (4)
net carrying amount
$
1,689
$
1,820
(1)
primarily includes the firms clearance and
execution and nasdaq customer lists acquired in the
firms combination with slk llc (slk)and financial
counseling customer lists acquired in the firms
combination with the ayco company, l.p.
(2)
primarily includes technology-related assets
acquired in the firms combination with slk.
(3)
gross carrying amount and accumulated
amortization exclude amounts related to assets that were
no longer in service at the beginning of the period.
(4)
accumulated amortization includes $188million
of impairment charges primarily related to option
specialist rights.
identifiable intangible assets are
amortized over their estimated useful lives. the weighted average
remaining life of the firms identifiable intangibles is
approximately 17years. there were no identifiable intangible
assets that were considered to be indefinite-lived and, therefore,
not subject to amortization.
amortization expense associated with
identifiable intangible assets was $125million, $319million
(including $188million of impairment charges) and $127million
for the fiscal years ended november2004, november
2003 and november2002, respectively.
estimated future amortization expense
for existing identifiable intangible assets is set forth below:
(in millions)
$
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note10.
other assets and other liabilities
other assets are generally less
liquid, nonfinancial assets. the following table sets forth the
firms other assets by type:
as of november
(in millions)
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets (1)
$
4,871
$
4,982
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
4,083
3,527
equity-method investments and joint ventures
2,447
2,159
prepaid assets and deposits
net deferred tax assets (2)
1,420
miscellaneous receivables and other
2,349
1,463
total
$
15,143
$
13,927
(1)
see note9 for further information regarding
the firms goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
(2)
see note13 for further information regarding the firms income taxes.
other liabilities and accrued
expenses primarily includes compensation and benefits, minority
interest in certain consolidated entities, litigation liabilities,
tax-related payables, deferred revenue and other payables. the
following table sets forth the firms other liabilities and accrued
expenses by type:
as of november
(in millions)
compensation and benefits
$
5,571
$
3,956
minority interest
1,809
1,281
accrued expenses and other
2,980
2,907
total
$
10,360
$
8,144
note11.
employee benefit plans
the firm sponsors various pension
plans and certain other postretirement benefit plans, primarily
healthcare and life insurance, which cover most employees
worldwide. the firm also provides certain benefits to former or
inactive employees prior to retirement. a summary of these plans is
set forth below.
defined benefit pension plans and postretirement plans
the firm maintains a defined benefit
pension plan for substantially all u.s.employees. as of
november2004, this plan has been closed to new participants and no
further benefits will be accrued to existing participants.
employees of certain non-u.s.subsidiaries participate in
various local defined benefit plans. these plans generally provide
benefits based on years of credited service and a percentage of the
employees eligible compensation. in addition, the firm has
unfunded postretirement benefit plans that provide medical and life
insurance for eligible retirees, employees and dependents in the
united states.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table provides a
summary of the changes in the plans benefit obligations and the
fair value of assets for november2004 and november2003 and a
statement of the funded status of the plans as of november2004 and
november2003:
as of or for the year ended november
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
benefit obligation
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
business combination
service cost
interest cost
plan amendments
(2
)
actuarial loss/(gain)
(3
)
benefits paid
(4
)
(14
)
(6
)
(3
)
(13
)
(6
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
fair value of plan assets
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
business combination
actual return on plan assets
firm contributions
benefits paid
(4
)
(14
)
(6
)
(3
)
(13
)
(6
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
funded status
$
(37
)
$
(92
)
$
(215
)
$
(17
)
$
(31
)
$
(196
)
unrecognized loss
unrecognized transition (asset)/obligation
(22
)
(26
)
unrecognized prior service cost
adjustment to recognize additional minimum liability
(1
)
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
$
$
$
(142
)
$
$
$
(116
)
the accumulated benefit obligation
for all defined benefit plans was $742million and $560million
as of november2004 and november2003, respectively.
for plans in which the accumulated
benefit obligation exceeded plan assets, the aggregate projected
benefit obligation and accumulated benefit obligation was $184million
and $154million, respectively, as of november2004,
and $160million and $139million, respectively, as of
november2003. the fair value of plan assets for each of these
plans was $104million and $97million as of november2004
and november2003, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the components of pension
expense/(income) and postretirement expense are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(23
)
(16
)
(12
)
net amortization
(2
)
total
$
$
$
non-u.s.pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(20
)
(15
)
(12
)
net amortization
total
$
$
$
postretirement
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(1
)
net amortization
total
$
$
$
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the weighted average assumptions used
to develop net periodic pension cost and the actuarial present
value of the projected benefit obligation are set forth below.
these assumptions represent a weighted average of the assumptions
used for the u.s. and non-u.s.plans and are based on the
economic environment of each applicable country.
year ended november
defined benefit pension plans
u.s.pension projected benefit obligation
discount rate
5.50
%
6.00
%
6.75
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
5.00
5.00
u.s.pension net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
6.00
6.59
(1)
7.00
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
8.50
8.50
8.50
non-u.s.pension projected benefit obligation
discount rate
4.63
4.76
4.78
rate of increase in future compensation levels
4.49
4.37
4.14
non-u.s.pension net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
4.76
4.78
4.93
rate of increase in future compensation levels
4.37
4.14
4.11
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
6.25
5.86
5.74
postretirement plans projected benefit obligation
discount rate
5.50
%
6.00
%
6.75
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
5.00
5.00
postretirement plans net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
6.00
6.75
(1)
7.00
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
8.50
(1)
includes plan added in connection with business combination.
the firms approach in determining
the long-term rate of return for plan assets is based upon
historical financial market relationships that have existed over
time with the presumption that this trend will generally remain
constant in the future.
for measurement purposes, an annual
growth rate in the per capita cost of covered healthcare benefits
of 12.53% was assumed for the fiscal year ending november2005. the
rate was assumed to decrease ratably to 5.00% for the fiscal year
ending november2009 and remain at that level thereafter.
the assumed cost of healthcare has an
effect on the amounts reported for the firms postretirement plans.
a 1% change in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would have
the following effects:
1% increase
1% decrease
(in millions)
cost
$
$
$
(4
)
$
(3
)
obligation
(29
)
(26
)
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table sets forth the
composition of plan assets for the u.s. and non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans by asset category:
as of november
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
pension
pension
pension
pension
equity securities
%
%
%
%
debt securities
other
total
%
%
%
%
the investment approach of the firms
u.s. and major non-u.s.defined benefit pension plans involves
employing a sufficient level of flexibility to capture investment
opportunities as they occur, while maintaining reasonable
parameters to ensure that prudence and care are exercised in the
execution of the investment programs. the plans employ a total
return on investment approach, whereby a mix, which is broadly
similar to the actual asset allocation as of november2004, of
equity securities, debt securities and other assets is targeted to
maximize the long-term return on assets for a given level of risk.
investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis by
the firms retirement committee through periodic portfolio reviews,
meetings with investment managers and annual liability measurements.
the firm will contribute a minimum of
$5million to its pension plans and $7million to its
postretirement plans in fiscal 2005.
the following table sets forth
benefits projected to be paid from the firms u.s. and non-u.s.defined
benefit pension and postretirement plans and reflects
expected future service, where appropriate:
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
$
$
$
2010-2014
defined contribution plans
the firm contributes to
employer-sponsored u.s. and non-u.s.defined contribution
plans. the firms contribution to these plans was $189million,
$199million and $154million for the years ended november
2004, november2003 and november2002, respectively.
the firm maintained a nonqualified
defined contribution plan (the plan) for certain senior employees.
shares of common stock contributed to the plan and outstanding as
of november2004 were 0.1million. remaining shares were
distributed to participants and there were no remaining assets in
the plan as of january2005. plan expense was immaterial for the
years ended november2004, november2003 and november
2002.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note12.
employee incentive plans
stock incentive plan
the firm sponsors a stock incentive
plan, the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan
(the amended sip), which provides for grants of incentive stock
options, nonqualified stock options, stock appreciation rights,
dividend equivalent rights, restricted stock, restricted stock
units and other stock-based awards. in the second quarter of fiscal
2003, the amended sip was approved by the firms shareholders,
effective for grants after april1, 2003, and no further awards
were or will be made under the original plan after that date,
although awards granted under the original plan prior to that date
remain outstanding.
the total number of shares of common
stock that may be issued under the amended sip through fiscal 2008
may not exceed 250million shares and, in each fiscal year
thereafter, may not exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares
of common stock, determined as of the last day of the immediately
preceding fiscal year, increased by the number of shares available
for awards in previous fiscal years but not covered by awards
granted in such years. as of november2004 and november2003, 218.9million
and 236.8million shares, respectively, were
available for grant under the amended sip, after taking into
account stock-based compensation awards that were issued subsequent
to year end, as part of year-end compensation.
other compensation arrangements
in november2004, the firm adopted
new deferred compensation plans for eligible employees for fiscal
2005. in general, under the plans, participants will be able to
defer payment of a portion of their cash year-end compensation.
during the deferral period, participants will be able to nominally
invest their deferrals in certain alternatives available under the
plans. generally, under current tax law, participants will not be
subject to income tax on amounts deferred or on any notional
investment earnings until the returns are distributed, and the firm
will not be entitled to a corresponding tax deduction until the
amounts are distributed.
in november2004, the firm adopted a
discount stock program through which eligible senior executives may
acquire restricted stock units in fiscal 2005 under the firms
amended sip at an effective 25% discount. the 25% discount is
effected by an additional grant of restricted stock units equal to
one-third of the number of restricted stock units purchased by
qualifying participants. the purchased restricted stock units will
be 100% vested when granted, but the shares underlying them will
not be able to be sold or transferred (other than to satisfy tax
obligations) before the third anniversary of the grant date. the
remaining shares underlying the restricted stock units will
generally vest in equal installments on the second and third
anniversaries following the grant date and will not be transferable
before the third anniversary of the grant date.
restricted stock units
the firm issued restricted stock
units to employees under the amended sip, primarily in connection
with year-end compensation and acquisitions. of the total
restricted stock units outstanding as of november2004 and november
2003, (i)24.9million units and 24.5million units,
respectively, required future service as a condition to the
delivery of the underlying shares of common stock and (ii)13.0million
units and 23.3million units, respectively, did
not require future service.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
in all cases, delivery of the
underlying shares of common stock is conditioned on the grantees
satisfying certain other requirements outlined in the award
agreements. the activity related to these restricted stock units is
set forth below:
restricted stock units outstanding
no future service
future service
required
required
outstanding, november2001
25,629,933
41,669,062
granted(1)
1,484,153
4,855,553
forfeited
(591,957
)
(3,135,134
)
delivered
(21,700,672
)
vested
13,494,481
(13,494,481
)
outstanding, november2002
18,315,938
29,895,000
granted(1)
3,615,366
9,357,593
forfeited
(179,708
)
(1,886,420
)
delivered
(11,261,989
)
vested
12,824,458
(12,824,458
)
outstanding, november2003
23,314,065
24,541,715
granted(1)
6,629,717
11,253,970
forfeited
(142,163
)
(879,420
)
delivered
(26,806,448
)
vested
10,032,240
(10,032,240
)
outstanding, november2004
13,027,411
24,884,025
(1)
includes restricted stock units granted to
employees subsequent to year end as part of year-end
compensation.
total employee stock compensation
expense, net of forfeitures, was $1.22billion, $711million
and $645million for the years ended november2004,
november2003 and november2002, respectively.
stock options
as of november2004, all stock
options granted to employees in may of 1999 in connection with the
firms initial public offering are fully vested and exercisable.
stock options granted to employees subsequent to the firms initial
public offering generally vest as outlined in the applicable stock
option agreement and first become exercisable on the third
anniversary of the grant date. all employee stock option agreements
provide that vesting is accelerated in certain circumstances, such
as upon retirement, death and extended absence. in general, all
stock options expire on the tenth anniversary of the grant date,
although they may be subject to earlier termination or cancellation
in certain circumstances in accordance with the terms of the
amended sip and the applicable stock option agreement. the dilutive
effect of the firms outstanding stock options is included in
average common shares outstanding diluted, in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the activity related to these stock
options is set forth below:
weighted
weighted average
options
average
remaining
outstanding
exercise price
life(years)
outstanding, november2001
84,366,885
$
73.04
8.65
granted(1)
15,908,162
79.16
exercised
(1,138,087
)
52.78
forfeited
(4,867,859
)
68.77
outstanding, november2002
94,269,101
74.53
8.08
granted(1)
902,511
95.81
exercised
(2,686,955
)
52.76
forfeited
(3,428,692
)
73.08
outstanding, november2003
89,055,965
75.47
7.17
granted
22,500
96.08
exercised
(9,025,867
)
57.80
forfeited
(1,496,863
)
81.00
outstanding, november2004
78,555,735
77.40
6.33
exercisable, november2004
37,387,049
$
66.48
5.16
(1)
includes stock options granted to employees
subsequent to year end as part of year-end compensation.
the options outstanding as of
november2004 are set forth below:
weighted
weighted average
options
average
remaining
exercise
price
outstanding
exercise
price
life(years)
$45.00    $59.99
20,770,884
$
52.96
4.44
60.00   74.99
75.00   89.99
30,339,112
81.02
6.95
90.00   104.99
27,445,739
91.89
7.08
outstanding, november2004
78,555,735
the weighted average fair value of
options granted during fiscal 2004, fiscal 2003 and fiscal2002
was $32.22per option, $31.31per option and $27.38per
option, respectively. fair value was estimated as of the grant date
based on a binomial option-pricing model using the following
weighted average assumptions:
year ended november
risk-free interest rate
3.4
%
3.4
%
3.5
%
expected volatility
35.0
35.0
35.0
dividend yield
1.0
1.0
0.6
expected life
5 years
5 years
5 years
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note13.
income taxes
the components of the net tax expense
reflected in the consolidated statements of earnings are set forth
below:
year ended november
(in millions)
current taxes
u.s.federal
$
$
$
state and local
non-u.s.
total current tax expense
1,083
1,347
deferred taxes
u.s.federal
state and local
non-u.s.
total deferred tax expense
1,040
net tax expense
$
2,123
$
1,440
$
1,139
deferred income taxes reflect the net
tax effects of temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. these temporary
differences result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years
and are measured using the tax rates and laws that will be in
effect when such differences are expected to reverse.
significant components of the firms
deferred tax assets and liabilities are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
deferred tax assets
compensation and benefits
$
$
1,301
unrealized losses
other, net
1,147
1,634
valuation allowance(1)
(21
)
(18
)
total deferred tax assets
1,126
1,616
deferred tax liabilities
depreciation and amortization
unrealized gains
total deferred tax liabilities
$
$
(1)
relates primarily to the ability to utilize
certain state and local and foreign tax credits.
the firm permanently reinvests
eligible earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly,
does not accrue any u.s.income taxes that would arise if such
earnings were repatriated. as of november2004, this policy
resulted in an unrecognized net deferred tax liability of $135million
attributable to reinvested earnings of $1.65billion.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
additionally, during 2004, the
valuation allowance was increased by $3million, primarily due
to an increase in certain state and local tax credits. acquired
federal net operating loss carryforwards of $88million as of
november2004 and $49million as of november2003 are subject
to annual limitations on utilization and will begin to expire in
2019. acquired state and local net operating loss carryforwards of
$436million as of november2004 are subject to annual
limitations and will begin to expire in 2005. acquired alternative
minimum tax credit carryforwards of $32million as of november2004
are subject to annual limitations on utilization, but can
be carried forward indefinitely.
a reconciliation of the u.s.federal
statutory income tax rate to the firms effective income
tax rate is set forth below:
year ended november
u.s.federal statutory income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase related to state and local taxes, net of u.s.
income tax effects
1.4
2.1
2.7
tax credits
(3.6
)
(3.1
)
(2.0
)
foreign operations
(1.2
)
(1.2
)
(0.9
)
tax-exempt income, including dividends
(0.7
)
(1.0
)
(1.3
)
other
0.9
0.6
1.5
effective income tax rate
31.8
%
32.4
%
35.0
%
tax benefits of approximately $330million
in november2004, $103million in november2003
and $119million in november2002, related to the delivery of
restricted stock units and the exercise of options, were credited
directly to additional paid-in capital in the consolidated
statements of financial condition and changes in shareholders
equity.
note14.
regulated subsidiaries
the firms principal u.s. and
international regulated subsidiaries include goldman, sachs&
co. (gs&co.) and goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p.(1)
(gsec)in new york, goldman sachs international (gsi)in
london and goldman sachs (japan) ltd. (gsjl)in tokyo.
gs&co. and gsec are registered u.s.broker-dealers
and futures commission merchants subject to rule15c3-1
of the securities and exchange commission (sec)and
rule1.17 of the commodity futures trading commission, which
specify uniform minimum net capital requirements, as defined, for
their registrants. they have elected to compute their net capital
in accordance with the alternative net capital requirement as
permitted by rule15c3-1. as of november2004 and november
2003, gs&co. had regulatory net capital, as defined, of $5.92billion
and $3.66billion, respectively, which exceeded the
amounts required by $4.83billion and $2.82billion,
respectively. as of november2004 and november2003, gsec had
regulatory net capital, as defined, of $1.05billion and $1.12billion,
respectively, which exceeded the amounts required by
$1.00billion and $1.08billion, respectively.
gsi, a registered u.k. broker-dealer,
is subject to the capital requirements of the financial services
authority, and gsjl, a tokyo-based broker-dealer, is subject to the
capital requirements of the financial services agency. as of
november2004 and november2003, gsi and gsjl were in compliance
with their local capital adequacy requirements.
certain other subsidiaries of the
firm are also subject to capital adequacy requirements promulgated
by authorities of the countries in which they operate. as of
november2004 and
(1)
the firm renamed spear, leeds & kellogg, l.p., goldman sachs execution & clearing, l.p., effective january14, 2005.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
november2003, these subsidiaries were in
compliance with their local capital adequacy requirements.
the sec has adopted rule amendments
that establish alternative net capital requirements for
broker-dealers that are part of a consolidated supervised entity.
as a condition to its use of the alternative method, a
broker-dealers ultimate holding company and affiliates (referred
to collectively as a consolidated supervised entity or cse) must
consent to group-wide supervision and examination by the sec.
gs&co. anticipates applying for permission to use this alternative
method. the firm expects that doing so will enable it to comply
with the requirements of the financial groups directive (directive
2002/87/ec of the european parliament and of the council, relating
to the regulation in europe of financial services organizations).
on becoming subject to the secs group-wide supervision, the firm
will be required to report to the sec computations of the firms
capital adequacy.
note15.
business segments
in reporting to management, the
firms operating results are categorized into the following three
segments: investment banking, trading and principal investments,
and asset management and securities services.
the firm made certain changes to its
segment reporting structure in 2003. these changes included
reclassifying the following from asset management and securities
services to trading and principal investments:
equity commissions and clearing and execution fees;
merchant banking overrides;and
the matched book businesses.
these reclassifications did not
affect the firms historical consolidated results of operations,
financial condition or cash flows. certain reclassifications have
been made to previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
basis of presentation
in reporting segments, certain of the
firms business lines have been aggregated where they have similar
economic characteristics and are similar in each of the following
areas: (i)the nature of the services they provide, (ii)their
methods of distribution, (iii)the types of clients they
serve and (iv)the regulatory environments in which they
operate.
the cost drivers of the firm taken as
a whole compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of the firms business
segments. compensation expenses within the firms segments reflect,
among other factors, the overall performance of the firm as well as
performance of individual business units. consequently, pre-tax
margins in one segment of the firms business may be significantly
affected by the performance of the firms other business segments.
the firm allocates revenues and
expenses among the three segments. due to the integrated nature of
the business segments, estimates and judgments have been made in
allocating certain revenue and expense items. transactions between
segments are based on specific criteria or approximate third-party
rates. total operating expenses include corporate items that have
not been allocated to individual business segments. the allocation
process is based on the manner in which management views the
business of the firm.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the segment information presented in
the table below is prepared according to the following
methodologies:
revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are included in
determining pre-tax earnings.
net revenues in the firms segments include allocations of interest income and
interest expense to specific securities, commodities and other positions in relation
to the cash generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying positions. net
interest is included within segment net revenues as it is consistent with the way in
which management assesses segment performance.
overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments are allocated
ratably based on direct segment expenses.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
segment operating results
management believes that the
following information provides a reasonable representation of each
segments contribution to consolidated pre-tax earnings and total
assets:
as of or for the year ended november
(in millions)
investment
net revenues(1)
$
3,374
$
2,711
$
2,830
banking
operating expenses(2)
2,973
2,504
2,454
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
segment assets
$
4,759
$
4,867
$
4,555
trading and principal
net revenues(1)
$
13,327
$
10,443
$
8,647
investments
operating expenses(2)
8,287
6,938
6,505
pre-tax earnings
$
5,040
$
3,505
$
2,142
segment assets
$
358,137
$
250,490
$
246,789
asset management and
net revenues(1)
$
3,849
$
2,858
$
2,509
securities services
operating expenses(2)
2,430
1,890
1,562
pre-tax earnings
$
1,419
$
$
segment assets
$
167,957
$
147,647
$
103,436
total
net revenues(1)
$
20,550
$
16,012
$
13,986
operating expenses(2)(3)
13,874
11,567
10,733
pre-tax earnings
$
6,676
$
4,445
$
3,253
total assets(4)
$
531,379
$
403,799
$
355,574
(1)
net revenues include net interest and cost of
power generation as set forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
1,343
1,888
1,350
asset management and securities services
1,194
total net interest and cost of power generation
$
2,625
$
3,140
$
2,401
(2)
operating expenses include depreciation and
amortization, including the amortization of identifiable
intangible assets, as set forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
asset management and securities services
total depreciation and amortization
$
$
$
(3)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to the firms segments: (i)the
amortization of employee initial public offering awards,
net of forfeitures, of $19million, $80million
and $212million for the years ended november2004,
november2003 and november2002, respectively, (ii)net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory
proceedings of $103million and $155million for
the years ended november2004 and november2003,
respectively, and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of goldman sachs gao
hua securities company limited, an investment banking and
securities venture in china, for the year ended november
2004.
(4)
includes deferred tax assets relating to the
firms conversion to corporate form and certain assets
that management believes are not allocable to a
particular segment.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
geographic information
due to the highly integrated nature
of international financial markets, the firm manages its businesses
based on the profitability of the enterprise as a whole.
accordingly, management believes that profitability by geographic
region is not necessarily meaningful.
the firms revenues, expenses and
identifiable assets are generally allocated based on the country of
domicile of the legal entity providing the service.
the following table sets forth the
total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and identifiable assets of the
firm and its consolidated subsidiaries by geographic region
allocated on the basis described above:
as of or for the year ended november
(in millions)
net revenues
united states
$
12,932
$
10,040
$
8,633
other americas
united kingdom
4,335
3,610
2,991
other europe
asia
2,368
1,704
1,531
total net revenues
$
20,550
$
16,012
$
13,986
pre-tax earnings
united states
$
4,761
$
3,105
$
1,850
other americas
(6
)
united kingdom
other europe
asia
1,121
other(1)
(184
)
(235
)
(212
)
total pre-tax earnings
$
6,676
$
4,445
$
3,253
identifiable assets
united states
$
528,077
$
400,996
$
393,333
other americas
1,626
1,241
3,284
united kingdom
240,748
184,476
144,608
other europe
12,468
8,022
8,573
asia
37,293
26,650
25,422
eliminations and other(2)
(288,833
)
(217,586
)
(219,646
)
total identifiable assets
$
531,379
$
403,799
$
355,574
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to the firms segments: (i)the
amortization of employee initial public offering awards,
net of forfeitures, of $19million, $80million
and $212million for the years ended november2004,
november2003 and november2002, respectively, (ii)net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory
proceedings of $103million and $155million for
the years ended november2004 and november2003,
respectively, and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of goldman sachs gao
hua securities company limited, an investment banking and
securities venture in china, for the year ended november
2004.
(2)
reflects eliminations and certain assets that are
not allocable to a particular geographic region.
table of contents
supplemental financial information
quarterly results (unaudited)
the following represents the firms
unaudited quarterly results for fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003. these
quarterly results were prepared in accordance with u.s.generally
accepted accounting principles and reflect all
adjustments that are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a
fair statement of the results. these adjustments are of a normal
recurring nature.
2004 fiscal quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
7,905
$
7,676
$
6,803
$
7,455
interest expense
1,873
2,038
2,156
2,821
cost of power generation
revenues, net of interest expense and
cost of power generation
5,928
5,511
4,530
4,581
operating expenses
3,999
3,771
3,237
2,867
pre-tax earnings
1,929
1,740
1,293
1,714
provision for taxes
net earnings
$
1,293
$
1,187
$
$
1,194
earnings per share
basic
$
2.63
$
2.43
$
1.80
$
2.44
diluted
2.50
2.31
1.74
2.36
dividends declared per common share
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
2003 fiscal quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
6,094
$
5,985
$
5,715
$
5,829
interest expense
1,907
2,000
1,922
1,771
cost of power generation
revenues, net of interest expense and
cost of power generation
4,187
3,985
3,793
4,047
operating expenses
3,169
2,947
2,813
2,638
pre-tax earnings
1,018
1,038
1,409
provision for taxes
net earnings
$
$
$
$
earnings per share
basic
$
1.35
$
1.43
$
1.39
$
1.98
diluted
1.29
1.36
1.32
1.89
dividends declared per common share
0.12
0.12
0.25
0.25
table of contents
supplemental financial information
common stock price range
the following table sets forth, for
the fiscal quarters indicated, the high and low sales prices per
share of the firms common stock as reported by the consolidated
tape association.
sales price
fiscal 2004
fiscal 2003
fiscal 2002
high
low
high
low
high
low
first quarter
$
108.00
$
95.73
$
80.90
$
63.75
$
97.25
$
77.52
second quarter
109.29
90.08
81.67
61.02
92.25
74.00
third quarter
95.15
83.29
91.98
81.50
81.97
65.55
fourth quarter
105.40
88.46
97.39
83.64
81.00
58.57
as of january28, 2005, there
were approximately 5,660holders of record of the firms common
stock.
on january28, 2005, the last
reported sales price for the firms common stock on the new york
stock exchange was $106.12 per share.
table of contents
supplemental financial information
selected financial data
as of or for the year ended november
2000(7)
income statement data (in millions)
total revenues
$
29,839
$
23,623
$
22,854
$
31,138
$
33,000
interest expense
8,888
7,600
8,868
15,327
16,410
cost of power generation(1)
revenues, net of interest expense and cost of power generation
20,550
16,012
13,986
15,811
16,590
compensation and benefits
9,591
7,393
6,744
7,700
7,773
nonrecurring employee initial public offering and acquisition awards
amortization of employee initial public offering and acquisition
awards
other operating expenses
4,222
4,052
3,696
3,951
3,079
pre-tax earnings
$
6,676
$
4,445
$
3,253
$
3,696
$
5,020
balance sheet data (in millions)
total assets
$
531,379
$
403,799
$
355,574
$
312,218
$
284,410
long-term borrowings(2)
80,696
57,482
38,711
31,016
31,395
total liabilities
506,300
382,167
336,571
293,987
267,880
shareholders equity
25,079
21,632
19,003
18,231
16,530
common share data (in millions, except per share amounts)
earnings per share
basic
$
9.30
$
6.15
$
4.27
$
4.53
$
6.33
diluted
8.92
5.87
4.03
4.26
6.00
dividends declared per share
1.00
0.74
0.48
0.48
0.48
book value per share(3)
50.77
43.60
38.69
36.33
32.18
average common shares outstanding
basic
489.5
488.4
495.6
509.7
484.6
diluted
510.5
511.9
525.1
541.8
511.5
selected data (unaudited)
employees
united states
13,278
12,786
12,511
14,565
14,755
international
7,444
6,690
7,228
8,112
7,872
total employees
20,722
19,476
19,739
22,677
22,627
assets under management (in billions)(4)
asset class
money markets
$
$
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity(5)
alternative investments(6)
total assets under management
$
$
(8)
$
$
$
(1)
cost of power generation includes all of the direct
costs of the firms power plant operations (e.g., fuel,
operations and maintenance), as well as the depreciation and
amortization associated with the plant and related
contractual assets.
(2)
long-term debt includes nonrecourse debt issued by
funding corp, consolidated vies and other consolidated
entities. nonrecourse debt is debt, issued by certain
consolidated entities, that group inc. is not directly or
indirectly obligated to repay.
(3)
book value per share is based on common shares
outstanding, including restricted stock units granted to
employees with no future service requirements, of 494.0million,
496.1million, 491.2million, 501.8million
and 513.7million as of november2004, november
2003, november2002, november2001 and november2000,
respectively.
(4)
substantially all assets under management are valued
as of calendar month end.
table of contents
(5)
includes both fundamental equity and quantitative
equity strategies.
(6)
includes other quantitative and/or non-traditional
investment strategies (e.g., hedge funds), merchant banking
funds and vehicles where the firm contracts with subadvisors
for clients.
(7)
in 2000, pre-tax earnings included a charge of $290million
($180million after taxes), or $0.35per
average diluted common share outstanding, related to the
firms combination with slk.
(8)
includes $4billion in non-money market assets
acquired in the firms combination with ayco.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
there were no changes in or
disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure during the last two fiscal years.
item9a.
controls and procedures
as of the end of the period covered
by this report, an evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs
management, with the participation of our chief executive officer
and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in rule13a-15(e) under the
securities exchange act of 1934). based upon that evaluation, our
chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that
these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the
end of the period covered by this report. in addition, no change in
our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in rule13a-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934) occurred
during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended november26,
2004 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal
control over financial reporting and the report of independent
registered public accounting firm thereon are set forth in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
information relating to the
registrants executive officers is included on pages38 to 39
of the annual report on form10-k. information relating to
directors of the registrant, including its audit committee and
audit committee financial experts, and its executive officers will
be in the definitive proxy statement for its 2005 annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on april6, 2005, which will be filed
within 120days of the end of our fiscal year ended november26,
2004 (the 2005 proxy statement) and is incorporated herein
by reference. information relating to the registrants code of
business conduct and ethics that applies to its senior financial
officers, as defined in the code, is included in parti, item1
of the annual report on form10-k.
item11.
executive compensation
information relating to the
registrants executive officer and director compensation will be in
the 2005 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
information relating to security
ownership of certain beneficial owners of the registrants common
stock and information relating to the security ownership of the
registrants management will be in the 2005 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
the following table provides
information as of november26, 2004, the last day of fiscal
2004, regarding securities issued under our equity compensation
plans that were in effect during fiscal2004, including those
granted on december14, 2004 in respect of fiscal 2004
performance as part of the firms discount stock program.
number of securities
number of
remaining available
securities to be
for future issuance
issued upon
weighted average
under equity
exercise of
exercise price of
compensation plans
outstanding
outstanding
(excluding securities
options, warrants
options, warrants
reflected in the
plan category
and rights
and rights
second column)
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive
plan(1)
78,562,923
(2)
$77.4032
(2)
257,383,307
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
none
total
78,562,923
(2)
257,383,307
(3)(4)
(1)
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock
incentive plan (the sip) was approved by the shareholders
of goldman sachs at our 2003 annual meeting of
shareholders and is a successor plan to the goldman sachs
1999 stock incentive plan, which was approved by our
shareholders immediately prior to our initial public
offering in may1999 and under which no additional
awards have been granted since approval of the sip.
(2)
the number of securities to be issued upon
exercise of outstanding options, warrants and rights, as
well as the weighted average exercise price of the
outstanding options, warrants and rights, excludes
approximately 120,000 options granted with a strike price
of $0.01 or less in foreign jurisdictions that were
intended to replicate the economic effect of our
restricted stock units.
(3)
of the 257,383,307shares remaining available
for future issuance under the sip (including shares that
may be delivered in the future under existing awards),
41,027,946 of these shares may be issued pursuant to
outstanding restricted stock units.
(4)
the total number of shares of common stock that
may be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the sip
initially may not exceed 250,000,000shares.
beginning november29, 2008 and each fiscal year
thereafter, the number of shares of common stock that may
be delivered pursuant to awards granted after april
1, 2003 under the sip may not exceed 5% of our issued and
outstanding shares of common stock, determined as of the
last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year,
increased by the number of shares available for awards in
previous fiscal years but not then covered by awards
granted in such years.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
information regarding certain
relationships and related transactions will be in the 2005 proxy
statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.
principal accountant fees and services
information regarding principal
accountant fees and services will be in the 2005 proxy statement
and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
(a)documents filed as part of this report:
1.
consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed in the annual report on form10-k
are listed on pagef-1 hereof and in partii, item8 hereof.
2.
financial statement schedule
the financial statement schedule required in the annual report on form10-k is listed on pagef-1
hereof. the required schedule appears on pagesf-2 through f-15 hereof.
3.
exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation.*
3.1
amended and restated certificate of incorporation of the goldman
sachs group, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to
the registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs group, inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august29,
2003).
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19, 1999, between the goldman sachs
group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit6 to the registrants registration statement
on form8-a, filed june29, 1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated as of february20, 2004,
between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as
trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.2 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november28, 2003).
certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
securities of the registrant and its subsidiaries are omitted
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulations-k. the
registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon request,
copies of any such instruments.
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended february28,
2003).
10.2
the goldman sachs defined contribution plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.16 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.3
the goldman sachs restricted partner compensation plan (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report
on form10-q for the period ended february28, 2003).
10.4
form of employment agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.19
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.5
form of agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.20 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.6
form of award agreement (discretionary rsus) (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.23 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.7
form of option agreement (discretionary options) (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.24 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
table of contents
10.8
form of 2004year-end rsu award agreement.
10.9
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7, 1999, by and
among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.25 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.10
amended and restated shareholders agreement, dated june22,
2004, among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties
(incorporated by reference to exhibitm to amendment no.54
to schedule13d, filed june23, 2004, relating to the
registrants common stock).
10.11
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.27
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.12
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.28 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.13
registration rights instrument, dated as of december10,
1999 (incorporated by reference to exhibitg to amendment no.1
to schedule13d, filed december17,1999, relating to
the registrants common stock (no.005-56295)).
10.14
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december10,
1999 (incorporated by reference to exhibith to amendment no.1
to schedule13d, filed december17, 1999, relating to
the registrants common stock).
10.15
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.44 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.16
form of indemnification agreement, dated as of july5, 2000
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,
2000).
10.17
amendment no.1, dated as of september5, 2000, to the tax
indemnification agreement, dated as of may7, 1999 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.3 to the registrants quarterly report
on form10-q for the period ended august25,2000).
10.18
form of non-employee director option agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.55 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.19
form of non-employee director rsu agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.56 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.20
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december21,
2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibitaa to amendment no.12
to schedule13d, filed january23, 2001, relating to
the registrants common stock).
10.21
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december21,
2001 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4 to
registrants registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-74006)).
10.22
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december20,
2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4 to
registrants registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-101093)).
10.23
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to dr.ruth j. simmons (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.63
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.24
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.john h. bryan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.64
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for
the fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
table of contents
10.25
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.james a. johnson (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.65
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24,2000).
10.26
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to lord browne of madingley (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.66
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24,2000).
10.27
letter, dated december18, 2002, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.william w. george (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.39 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november29,2002).
10.28
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.claes dahlbck (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1
to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.29
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.edward m. liddy (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2
to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.30
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december19,
2003 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-110371)).
10.31
letter, dated march31, 2004, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to ms.lois d. juliber (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1
to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may28, 2004).
10.32
form of amendment, dated november27, 2004, to agreement relating
to noncompetition and other covenants, dated may7, 1999.
10.33
form of 2004 rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
(subject to transfer restrictions).
10.34
form of 2004 rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (not
subject to transfer restrictions).
10.35
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation
plan for u.s.participating managing directors.
10.36
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation
plan for u.s.extended managing directors and other select
employees.
10.37
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation
plan for u.k. participating managing directors.
10.38
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation
plan for u.k. extended managing directors and other select u.k.
employees.
12.1
statement re computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1
powers of attorney (included on signature page).
31.1
rule13a-14(a) certifications.
32.1
section1350 certifications.
99.1
report of independent registered public accounting firm on selected
financial data.
*
incorporated by reference to the corresponding exhibit to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-74449).
this exhibit is a management contract or a compensatory plan or arrangement.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
index to financial statements and financial statement schedule
items 15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
page
no.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
notes to consolidated financial statements
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
selected financial data
financial statement schedule
report of independent registered public accounting firm
schedulei condensed nonconsolidated financial information of registrant (parent
company only)
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
f-3
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
f-4
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
f-5
schedules not listed are omitted
because of the absence of the conditions under which they are
required or because the information is in the consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto.
f-1
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions)
revenues
equity in earnings of subsidiaries
$
4,785
$
3,476
$
2,754
principal investments
1,561
interest income
2,843
2,181
2,135
total revenues
9,189
6,218
4,891
interest expense
2,834
2,154
2,131
revenues, net of interest expense
6,355
4,064
2,760
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
5,972
3,836
2,527
provision for taxes
1,419
net earnings
$
4,553
$
3,005
$
2,114
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-2
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
financial instruments owned, at fair value
9,894
6,702
receivables from affiliates
3,846
4,839
short-term loans to affiliates
74,262
64,086
subordinated loans to affiliates
23,178
16,784
investments in subsidiaries
23,667
20,625
other assets
1,725
2,133
total assets
$
136,612
$
115,170
liabilities and shareholders equity
unsecured short-term borrowings
with third parties
$
39,628
$
37,870
with affiliates
2,545
total unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current
portion of long-term borrowings
40,499
40,415
payables to affiliates
1,019
other liabilities and accrued expenses
1,016
unsecured long-term borrowings
with third parties
65,391
49,087
with affiliates
3,608
2,963
total unsecured long-term borrowings
68,999
52,050
total liabilities
111,533
93,538
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01per share; 150,000,000shares
authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
common stock, par value $0.01per share; 4,000,000,000shares
authorized, 554,063,234 and 527,371,946shares issued as
of november2004 and november2003, respectively, and 480,959,660
and 473,014,926shares outstanding as of november2004 and
november2003, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
2,013
2,984
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01per share; 200,000,000shares
authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
15,501
13,562
retained earnings
13,970
9,914
unearned compensation
(117
)
(339
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
treasury stock, at cost, par value $0.01per share; 73,103,574
and 54,357,020shares as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively
(6,305
)
(4,500
)
total shareholders equity
25,079
21,632
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
136,612
$
115,170
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements.
f-3
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
4,553
$
3,005
$
2,114
noncash items included in net earnings
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
(3,663
)
(1,323
)
(118
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
1,017
stock-based compensation
changes in operating assets and liabilities
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(3,317
)
(2,126
)
receivables from affiliates, net
2,730
(58
)
other, net
(890
)
(1,214
)
net cash provided by operating activities
1,259
1,842
cash flows from investing activities
short-term loans to affiliates
(10,175
)
(13,270
)
(5,894
)
subordinated loans to affiliates
(6,394
)
(3,472
)
(1,200
)
investment in subsidiaries, net
(165
)
(774
)
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(46
)
(8
)
(44
)
business combinations, net of cash acquired
(740
)
(68
)
purchase of other investments
(1,165
)
net cash used for investing activities
(15,865
)
(17,316
)
(9,145
)
cash flows from financing activities
short-term borrowings, net
(2,869
)
3,988
issuance of long-term borrowings
30,004
22,168
13,616
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the current portion of
long-term borrowings
(10,102
)
(5,363
)
(8,657
)
common stock repurchased
(1,805
)
(939
)
(1,475
)
dividends paid
(497
)
(350
)
(228
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
net cash provided by financing activities
15,252
16,057
7,304
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $2.59billion, $1.97billion
and $2.21billion for the years ended november2004, november2003 and november2002,
respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $284million, $324million and
$546million for the years ended november2004, november2003 and november2002, respectively.
noncash activities:
the value of common stock issued in connection with business combinations was $165million
and $47million for the years ended november2003 and november2002, respectively.
stock-based compensation expense included in subsidiary net earnings was $1.10billion,
$644million and $609million for the years ended november2004, november2003 and
november2002, respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-4
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
note1.
significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
the condensed nonconsolidated
financial statements of the goldman sachs group, inc. (the parent
company), a delaware corporation, should be read in conjunction
with the consolidated financial statements of the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries (the firm) and notes thereto (the
consolidated financial statements), which are included in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k. these
condensed nonconsolidated financial statements reflect the results
of operations, financial condition and cash flows for the parent
company only. investments in subsidiaries are accounted for using
the equity method of accounting prescribed by accounting principles
board (apb)opinion no.18 the equity method of accounting for
investments in common stock.
the parent company has formed
numerous nonconsolidated merchant banking funds with third-party
investors that are typically organized as limited partnerships. the
parent company acts as general partner for these funds and does not
hold a majority of the economic interests in any fund. where the
parent company holds more than a minor interest in a fund, it is
subject to removal as general partner. such fund investments are
included in financial instruments owned, at fair value in the
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
these condensed nonconsolidated
financial statements have been prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles that require management to
make certain estimates and assumptions regarding fair value
measurement, the accounting for goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, the provision for potential losses that may
arise from litigations, regulatory proceedings, tax audits, and
other matters that affect the condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements and related disclosures. these estimates and assumptions
are based on the best available information; nonetheless, actual
results could be materially different from these estimates.
unless otherwise stated herein, all
references to november2004, november2003 and november2002 refer
to the parent companys fiscal years ended, or the dates, as the
context requires, november26, 2004, november28, 2003 and
november29, 2002, respectively. certain reclassifications have
been made to previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
revenue recognition
financial instruments. the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition reflect purchases
and sales of financial instruments on a trade-date basis.
financial instruments owned, at fair
value in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial
condition consist of financial instruments carried at fair value or
amounts that approximate fair value, with related unrealized gains
or losses recognized in the parent companys results of operations.
the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the
instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between
willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale.
in determining fair value, the parent
company separates financial instruments into two categories
derivative contracts and principal investments.
fair values of the parent companys
derivative contracts consist of exchange-traded and over-the-counter (otc)derivatives entered into with affiliates and
reflect cash that the parent company has paid and received. fair
values of the parent companys exchange-traded derivatives are
f-5
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
generally determined from quoted market prices. otc derivatives are
valued using valuation models. the parent company uses a variety of
valuation models including the present value of known or estimated
cash flows, option-pricing models and option-adjusted spread models.
in valuing corporate and real estate
principal investments, the parent companys portfolio is separated
into investments in private companies and investments in public
companies.
the parent companys private
principal investments, by their nature, have little or no price
transparency. such investments are initially carried at cost as an
approximation of fair value. adjustments to carrying value are made
if there are third-party transactions evidencing a change in value.
downward adjustments are also made, in the absence of third-party
transactions, if it is determined that the expected realizable
value of the investment is less than the carrying value. in
reaching that determination, many factors are considered,
including, but not limited to, the operating cash flows and
financial performance of the companies or properties relative to
budgets or projections, trends within sectors and/or regions,
underlying business models, expected exit timing and strategy, and
any specific rights or terms associated with the investment, such
as conversion features and liquidation preferences.
the parent companys public principal
investments, which tend to be large, concentrated holdings that
result from initial public offerings or other corporate
transactions, are valued using quoted market prices discounted for
restrictions on sale. if liquidating a position is reasonably
expected to affect market prices, valuations are adjusted
accordingly based on predetermined written policies.
merchant banking overrides. the
parent company is entitled to receive merchant banking overrides
(i.e., an increased share of a funds income and gains) when the
return on the funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns.
overrides are based on investment performance over the life of each
merchant banking fund, and future investment underperformance may
require amounts previously distributed to the parent company to be
returned to the funds. accordingly, overrides are recognized in the
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings only when all
material contingencies have been resolved. overrides are included
in principal investments in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of earnings.
goodwill
goodwill is the cost of acquired
companies in excess of the fair value of identifiable net assets at
acquisition date. in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards (sfas)no.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, goodwill is tested at least annually for
impairment. an impairment loss is triggered if the estimated fair
value of an operating segment is less than its estimated net book
value. such loss is calculated as the difference between the
implied fair value of goodwill and its carrying value.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization, are
included in other assets in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition. effective december1, 2001,
the parent company changed to the straight-line method of
depreciation for certain property, leasehold improvements and
equipment placed in service on or after december1, 2001.
f-6
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
non-u.s.currencies are translated at rates of exchange
prevailing on the dates of the condensed nonconsolidated statements
of financial condition, and revenues and expenses are translated at
average rates of exchange for the fiscal year. the parent company
seeks to reduce its net investment exposure to fluctuations in
foreign exchange rates through the use of foreign currency forward
contracts and foreign currency denominated debt. for foreign
currency forward contracts, hedge effectiveness is assessed based
on changes in forward exchange rates; accordingly, forward points
are reflected as a component of the currency translation adjustment
in accumulated other comprehensive income in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition. for foreign
currency denominated debt, hedge effectiveness is assessed based on
changes in spot rates. foreign currency remeasurement gains or
losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are included in
the condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings.
income taxes
deferred tax assets and liabilities
are recognized for temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of the parent companys assets and
liabilities. valuation allowances are established to reduce
deferred tax assets to the amount that more likely than not will be
realized. the parent companys tax assets and liabilities are
presented as a component of other assets and other liabilities
and accrued expenses, respectively, in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition. tax provisions
are computed in accordance with sfasno.109, accounting
for income taxes. contingent liabilities related to income taxes
are recorded when the criteria for loss recognition under sfasno.5,
accounting for contingencies, as amended, have been
met.
cash and cash equivalents
the parent company defines cash
equivalents as highly liquid overnight deposits held in the
ordinary course of business.
affiliate transactions
substantially all of the firms
unsecured liquidity is raised by the parent company. the parent
company then lends the necessary funds to its subsidiaries and
affiliates, some of which are regulated, to meet their financing
and capital requirements. in addition, the parent company advances
its regulated subsidiaries the necessary capital to meet their
regulatory requirements. such funding is included in short-term
loans to affiliates and subordinated loans to affiliates in the
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
intercompany exposure is managed by requiring senior and
subordinated intercompany loans to have maturities equal to or
shorter than the maturities of the aggregate borrowings of the
parent company. this policy ensures that the subsidiaries
obligations to the parent company will generally mature in advance
of the parent companys third-party borrowings. in addition, many
of the subsidiaries and affiliates pledge collateral at loan value
to cover their intercompany borrowings (other than subordinated
debt) in order to mitigate parent company liquidity risk. equity
investments in subsidiaries are generally funded with equity
capital and included in investments in subsidiaries in the
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
the parent company enters into
derivative contracts with affiliates to hedge its net investment in
non-u.s.operations and to manage the interest rate and
currency exposure on its long-term borrowings and certain
short-term borrowings. to manage exposure on its borrowings, the parent
f-7
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
company uses derivatives to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. the parent company applies
fair-value hedge accounting to derivative contracts that hedge the
benchmark interest rate (i.e., libor) on its long-term borrowings.
derivative balances with affiliates are included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition and were $7.40billion and
$4.26billion as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
interest income is largely generated
from loans made to affiliates.
the parent company also allocates
rental and other costs relating to properties occupied by certain
subsidiaries and affiliates to those subsidiaries and affiliates.
the parent company additionally allocates the cost of stock-based
compensation programs to subsidiaries and affiliates associated
with employees of those subsidiaries and affiliates.
note2.
short-term borrowings
the parent company obtains
third-party unsecured short-term borrowings primarily through
issuance of promissory notes, commercial paper and bank loans.
short-term borrowings also include the portion of long-term
borrowings maturing within one year and certain long-term
borrowings that may be redeemable within one year at the option of
the holder. the carrying value of these short-term obligations
approximates fair value due to their short-term nature.
short-term borrowings with third
parties are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
19,513
$
24,101
commercial paper
4,040
4,305
bank loans and other
3,197
2,676
current portion of long-term borrowings
12,878
6,788
total(1)
$
39,628
$
37,870
(1)
as of november2004 and november2003, the
weighted average interest rates for short-term
borrowings, including commercial paper, were 2.61% and
1.33%, respectively. the weighted average interest
rates, after giving effect to hedging activities, were
2.24% and 1.26% as of november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
in addition, the parent company may
borrow overnight funds from certain subsidiaries and affiliates on
an unsecured basis. as of november2004 and november2003, such
amounts were $871million and $2.55billion, respectively,
and are included in unsecured short-term borrowings with
affiliates in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of
financial condition.
f-8
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
note3.
long-term borrowings
the parent company obtains unsecured
long-term borrowings consisting principally of senior borrowings
with maturities extending to 2034. long-term borrowings with third
parties are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
30,799
$
26,647
non-u.s.dollar
11,408
8,303
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
18,046
8,776
non-u.s.dollar
5,138
5,361
total
$
65,391
$
49,087
(1)
as of november2004 and november2003,
interest rates on u.s.dollar fixed rate
obligations ranged from 2.85% to 12.00% and from 4.13%
to 12.00%, respectively. as of both november2004 and
november2003, the interest rates on non-u.s.dollar
fixed rate obligations ranged from 0.70% to 8.88%.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on
libor, the u.s.treasury bill rate or the federal
funds rate. certain equity-linked and indexed instruments
are included in floating rate obligations.
long-term borrowings with third
parties by fiscal maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2004(1)(2)
2003(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
6,765
$
3,438
$
10,203
9,289
1,777
11,066
4,471
1,580
6,051
6,122
6,819
1,400
2,721
2,538
5,259
2,881
2,235
5,116
6,275
2,583
8,858
3,509
4,486
2010-thereafter
24,438
8,951
33,389
16,954
4,877
21,831
total
$
48,845
$
16,546
$
65,391
$
35,423
$
13,664
$
49,087
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year and
certain long-term borrowings that may become redeemable
within one year at the option of the holder are included
as short-term borrowings in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition.
(2)
long-term borrowings repayable at the option of
the parent company are reflected at their contractual
maturity dates. certain long-term borrowings redeemable
prior to maturity at the option of the holders are
reflected at the dates such options become exercisable.
f-9
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
the parent company enters into
derivative contracts with affiliates to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. accordingly, the aggregate
carrying value of these long-term borrowings and related hedges
approximates fair value.
the effective weighted average
interest rates for long-term borrowings with third parties, after
hedging activities, are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
10.68
%
$
10.99
%
floating rate obligations
64,946
2.50
48,450
1.73
total
$
65,391
2.56
$
49,087
1.85
long-term borrowings with affiliates
are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
$
non-u.s.dollar
1,120
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
1,797
1,796
non-u.s.dollar
total
$
3,608
$
2,963
(1)
as of both november2004 and november2003, the
interest rate on u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations
was 5.78%. as of november2004 and november2003,
interest rates on non-u.s.dollar fixed rate
obligations ranged from 3.35% to 6.17% and 3.35% to
6.00%, respectively.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor.
f-10
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
long-term borrowings with affiliates
by fiscal maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2004(1)
2003(1)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
$
$
2010-thereafter
2,181
2,181
2,181
2,181
total
$
2,478
$
1,130
$
3,608
$
2,478
$
$
2,963
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year and
certain long-term borrowings that may become redeemable
within one year at the option of the holder are included
as short-term borrowings in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition.
deferrable interest junior subordinated debentures
in february2004, goldman sachs
capitali (the trust), a wholly owned delaware statutory trust,
was formed by the parent company for the exclusive purposes of (i)issuing
$2.75billion of guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests and $85million of common beneficial interests in the
trust, (ii)investing the proceeds from the sale to purchase
junior subordinated debentures from the parent company and (iii)engaging
in only those other activities necessary or
incidental to these purposes. the preferred beneficial interests
were purchased by third parties, and, as of november2004, the
parent company held all of the common beneficial interests.
the parent company has the right,
from time to time, to defer payment of interest on the junior
subordinated debentures, and, therefore, cause payment of dividends
on the trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in
each case for up to ten consecutive semiannual periods, and during
any such extension period the parent company will not be permitted
to, among other things, pay dividends on or make certain
repurchases of its common stock. the trust is not permitted to pay
any distributions on the common beneficial interests held by the
parent company unless all dividends payable on the preferred
beneficial interests have been paid in full.
note4.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
commitments
the parent company provides letters
of credit issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu of
securities or cash to satisfy various collateral and margin deposit
requirements. letters of credit outstanding were $25million as
of both november2004 and november2003.
the parent company acts as an
investor in merchant banking transactions, which includes making
long-term investments in equity and debt securities in privately
negotiated transactions, corporate acquisitions and real estate
transactions. in connection with these activities, the parent
company had commitments to invest up to $1.04billion and $1.30billion
in corporate and real estate investment funds as of
november2004 and november2003, respectively.
f-11
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
the parent company had
construction-related commitments of $19million as of november
2004 and other purchase commitments of $10million and $5million
as of november2004 and november2003, respectively.
as of november2004, the parent
company had commitments to fund a newly formed subsidiary that had
entered into a contract to acquire interests in power plants and
related businesses from national energy& gas transmission,
inc., including additional interests in some of the same power
plants and a natural gas pipeline in which cogentrix energy, inc.,
a wholly owned subsidiary, already holds interests, for
approximately $550million.
the parent company has contractual
obligations under long-term noncancelable lease agreements,
principally for office space occupied by subsidiaries and
affiliates, expiring on various dates through 2029. certain
agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for
increases in real estate taxes and other charges. future minimum
rental payments, which are generally reimbursed by affiliates, are
set forth below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2010-thereafter
total
$
1,660
contingencies
the parent company is involved in a
number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings
concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of its
businesses. management believes, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on the parent
companys financial condition, but may be material to the parent
companys operating results for any particular period, depending,
in part, upon the operating results for such period. given the
inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of the parent
companys litigation matters, particularly in cases in which
claimants seek substantial or indeterminate damages, the parent
company cannot estimate losses or ranges of losses for cases where
there is only a reasonable possibility that a loss may have been
incurred.
f-12
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
guarantees
the parent company guarantees many of
the obligations of its consolidated subsidiaries including its
largest operating entities in the americas, europe and asia and
many of its primary derivatives and commodities trading entities as
well as certain other subsidiaries. the parent company typically
does not guarantee all of the obligations of any particular
subsidiary; rather, it guarantees obligations on a
transaction-by-transaction basis, as negotiated with the
counterparty. the parent company typically does not issue
guarantees of the obligations of its u.s.broker-dealer
subsidiaries, although the parent company is the general partner of
goldman, sachs& co. the parent company is unable to develop an
estimate of the maximum payout under these guarantees. however,
because the guaranteed obligations are obligations of consolidated
subsidiaries, the parent companys liabilities as guarantor are
already reported and disclosed in note6 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k.
the parent company occasionally
indemnifies securities lending customers against losses incurred in
the event that borrowers do not return securities and the
collateral held is insufficient to cover the market value of the
securities borrowed. in relation to certain asset sales and
securitization transactions, the parent company guarantees the
collection of contractual cash flows. in connection with its
merchant banking activities, the parent company may issue loan
guarantees to secure financing and to obtain preferential terms. in
addition, the parent company provides letters of credit and other
guarantees, on a limited basis, to enable clients to enhance their
credit standing and complete transactions.
in connection with the parent
companys establishment of the trust, the parent company
effectively provided for the full and unconditional guarantee of
the beneficial interests in the trust held by third parties. timely
payment by the parent company of interest on the junior
subordinated debentures and other amounts due and performance of
its other obligations under the transaction documents will be
sufficient to cover payments due by the trust on its beneficial
interests. as a result, management believes that it is unlikely the
parent company will have to make payments related to the trust
other than those required under the junior subordinated debentures
and in connection with certain expenses incurred by the trust.
f-13
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table sets forth
certain information about the parent companys guarantees as of
november2004 and november2003:
as of november 2004
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(3)
carrying
2006-
2008-
2010-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
securities lending indemnifications(1)
$
$
14,737
$
$
$
$
14,737
guarantee of trust preferred beneficial interests(2)
7,025
7,897
guarantee of the collection of contractual cash flows
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and other guarantees
(1)
collateral held in connection with
securities lending indemnifications was $15.28billion
as of november2004.
(2)
includes the guarantee of all payments scheduled
to be made over the life of the trust, which could be
shortened in the event the parent company redeemed the
junior subordinated debentures issued to fund the trust.
(3)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated
losses in connection with these contracts.
as of november 2003
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(2)
carrying
2005-
2007-
2009-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
securities lending indemnifications(1)
$
$
7,955
$
$
$
$
7,955
guarantee of the collection of contractual cash flows
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and other guarantees
(1)
collateral held in connection with
securities lending indemnifications was $8.23billion
as of november2003.
(2)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated
losses in connection with these contracts.
in the normal course of its business,
the parent company indemnifies and guarantees certain service
providers, such as clearing and custody agents, trustees and
administrators, against specified potential losses in connection
with their acting as an agent of, or providing services to, the
parent company or its subsidiaries or affiliates. the parent
company also indemnifies some clients against potential losses
incurred in the event specified third-party service providers,
including subcustodians and third-party brokers, improperly execute
transactions. the parent company is unable to develop an estimate
of the maximum payout under these guarantees and indemnifications.
however, management believes that it is unlikely the parent company
will have to make material payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities
f-14
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
related to these guarantees and indemnifications
have been recognized in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of
financial condition as of november2004 and november2003.
the parent company provides
representations and warranties to counterparties in connection with
a variety of commercial transactions and occasionally indemnifies
them against potential losses caused by the breach of those
representations and warranties. the parent company may also provide
indemnifications protecting against changes in or adverse
application of certain u.s.tax laws in connection with
ordinary-course transactions such as securities issuances,
borrowings or derivatives. in addition, the parent company may
provide indemnifications to some counterparties to protect them in
the event additional taxes are owed or payments are withheld, due
either to a change in or an adverse application of certain non-u.s.tax
laws. these indemnifications generally are standard
contractual terms and are entered into in the normal course of
business. generally, there are no stated or notional amounts
included in these indemnifications, and the contingencies
triggering the obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur.
the parent company is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum
payout under these guarantees. however, management believes that it
is unlikely the parent company will have to make material payments
under these arrangements and no liabilities related to these
arrangements have been recognized in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition as of november2004 and november2003.
note5.
shareholders equity
dividends declared per common share
were $1.00 in 2004, $0.74 in 2003 and $0.48 in 2002. on december15,
2004, the board of directors of the parent company (the
board) declared a dividend of $0.25per share to be paid on
february24, 2005 to common shareholders of record on january25,
2005.
during 2004 and 2003, the parent
company repurchased 18.7million shares and 12.2million
shares of its common stock, respectively. the average price paid
per share for repurchased shares was $96.29 and $76.83 for the
years ended november2004 and november2003, respectively. in
addition, to satisfy minimum statutory employee tax withholding
requirements related to the delivery of shares underlying
restricted stock units to employees of the firm, the parent company
cancelled 9.1million restricted stock units at an average
price of $95.20per unit in 2004. on january30,2004,
the board authorized the repurchase of an additional 15.0million
shares of common stock pursuant to the parent companys
existing repurchase program. as of november2004, the parent
company was authorized to repurchase up to 6.4million
additional shares of common stock pursuant to the parent companys
repurchase program.
f-15
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf
by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/ david a. viniar
name: david a. viniar
title: chief financial officer
date: february7, 2005
ii-1
table of contents
power of attorney
know all persons by these presents,
that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and
appoints henry m. paulson,jr., lloyd c. blankfein, david a.
viniar, gregory k. palm and esta e. stecher, and each of them
severally, his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact with power
of substitution and resubstitution to sign in his or her name,
place and stead, in any and all capacities, to do any and all
things and execute any and all instruments that such attorney may
deem necessary or advisable under the securities exchange act of
1934 and any rules, regulations and requirements of the u.s.securities
and exchange commission in connection with the annual
report on form10-k and any and all amendments hereto, as fully
for all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in
person, and hereby ratifies and confirms all said attorneys-in-fact
and agents, each acting alone, and his or her substitute or
substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the
securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below
by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
capacity
date
/s/henry m. paulson,jr.
henry m. paulson,jr.
director, chairman and chief executive officer (principal
executive officer)
february7, 2005
/s/lloyd c. blankfein
lloyd c. blankfein
director
february7, 2005
/s/lord browne of madingley
lord browne of madingley
director
february7, 2005
/s/john h. bryan
john h. bryan
director
february7, 2005
/s/claes dahlbck
claes dahlbck
director
february7, 2005
/s/william w. george
william w. george
director
february7, 2005
/s/james a. johnson
james a. johnson
director
february7, 2005
/s/lois d. juliber
lois d. juliber
director
february7, 2005
/s/ edward m. liddy
edward m. liddy
director
february7, 2005
/s/ ruth j. simmons
ruth j. simmons
director
february7, 2005
/s/ david a. viniar
david a. viniar
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
february7, 2005
/s/sarah e. smith
sarah e. smith
principal accounting officer
february7, 2005
ii-2
