10-k
y16720e10vk.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended november25, 2005
commission file number: 001-14965
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-4019460
(state or other jurisdiction ofincorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employeridentification no.)
85 broad streetnew york, n.y.
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(212)902-1000
(registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title of each class:
name of each exchange on which registered:
common stock, par value $.01per share, and attached shareholder protection rights
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000thinterest in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesa
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000thinterest in a share of 6.20% non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesb
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000thinterest in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesc
new york stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb, 0.25% exchangeable notes due 2007; index-linked notes due 2013; index-linked notes due april2013;
index-linked notes due may2013; index-linked notes due july2010;
and index-linked notes due 2011
american stock exchange
medium-term
notes, seriesb, 7.35%notes due 2009; 7.80% notes due
2010; floating rate notes due 2006; and floating rate notes due
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as
defined in rule405 of the securities act.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the act.yesonox
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90days.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of the annual report on form10-k or any amendment to the annual report on form10-k.x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see definition of
accelerated filer and large accelerated filer in
rule12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):
large
accelerated filer
xaccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filero
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the act).yesonox
as of may27, 2005 the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant was approximately $42.5billion.
as
of january30, 2006 there were 436,004,478shares of the registrants common stock outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference: portions of the goldman sachs group, inc.s proxy statement for its 2006 annual meeting of shareholders to be held on march31, 2006 are incorporated by reference in the annual report on form10-k
in response to partiii, items10,11, 12, 13 and 14.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november25, 2005
index
page
form10-k item number:
no.
parti
item1.
business
introduction
cautionary statement pursuant to the private securities litigation reform act of 1995
segment operating results
business segments
global investment research
technology
business continuity and information security
employees
competition
regulation
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
executive officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
partiii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
item14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
index to financial statements and financial statement scheduleitems15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
f-1
signatures
ii-1
power of attorney
ii-2
ex-3.1: restated certificate of incorporation of the goldman sachs group, inc.
ex-10.30: form of 2005 rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
ex-10.31: form of 2005 rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
ex-10.32: group inc. non-qualified deferred compensation plan for us pmds
ex-10.34: group inc. non-qualified deferred compensation plan for uk pmds
ex-10.41: description of non-employee director compensation
ex-10.42: description of certain benefits for participating managing directors
ex-10.43: form of one-time rsu award agreement
ex-10.45: general guarantee agreement, dated january 30, 2006
ex-12.1: statement re: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
ex-21.1: list of significant subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group, inc.
ex-23.1: consent of independent registered public accounting firm
ex-31.1: rule 13a-14(a) certifications
ex-32.1: section 1350 certifications
ex-99.1: report of independent registered public accounting firm
table of contents
parti
item1.
business
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global
investment banking, securities and investment management firm that
provides a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals. as of
november25, 2005, we operated offices in over 20 countries and
approximately 38% of our 22,425 employees were based outside the
united states.
goldman sachs is the successor to a
commercial paper business founded in 1869 by marcus goldman. on may7,
1999, we converted from a partnership to a corporation and
completed an initial public offering of our common stock.
our activities are divided into three
segments: (i)investment banking, (ii)trading and
principal investments and (iii)asset management and securities
services.
all references to 2005, 2004 and 2003
refer to our fiscal years ended, or the dates, as the context
requires, november25,
2005, november26, 2004 and november28,
2003, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman
sachs, we, us and our, we mean the goldman sachs group,
inc., a delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.
references herein to the annual report on form10-k are to our
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november25,
2005.
financial information concerning our
business segments and geographic regions for each of 2005, 2004 and
2003 is set forth in managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations, and the
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, which are
in partii, items7, 7a and 8 of the annual report on form10-k.
our internet address is www.gs.com
and the investor relations section of our web site is located
at www.gs.com/our_firm/investor_relations/. we
make available free of charge, on or through the investor relations
section of our web site, annual reports on form10-k, quarterly
reports on form10-q and current reports on form8-k and
amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to section13(a)
or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as well
as proxy statements, as soon as reasonably practicable after we
electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the u.s.securities
and exchange commission (sec). also posted on our
web site, and available in print upon request of any shareholder to
our investor relations department, are our certificate of
incorporation and by-laws, charters for our audit committee,
compensation committee and corporate governance and nominating
committee, our policy regarding director independence
determinations, our policy on reporting of concerns regarding
accounting and other matters, our corporate governance guidelines
and our code of business conduct and ethics governing our
directors, officers and employees. within the time period required
by the sec and the new york stock exchange (nyse), we will post on
our web site any amendment to the code of business conduct and
ethics and any waiver applicable to any executive officer, director
or senior financial officer (as defined in the code). in addition,
our web site includes information concerning purchases and sales of
our equity securities by our executive officers and directors, as
well as disclosure relating to certain non-gaap financial measures
(as defined in the secs regulationg) that we may make public
orally, telephonically, by webcast, by broadcast or by similar
means from time to time.
our investor relations department can
be contacted at the goldman sachs group, inc., 85broad street,
17thfloor, new york, new york 10004, attn: investor relations,
telephone: 212-902-0300, e-mail: gs-investor-relations@gs.com.
table of contents
cautionary statement pursuant to the private securities litigation reform act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by
reference in the annual report on form10-k, and from time to
time our management may make, statements that may constitute
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor
provisions of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995.
forward-looking statements are not historical facts but instead
represent only our belief regarding future events, many of which,
by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control.
these statements include statements other than historical
information or statements of current condition and may relate to
our future plans and objectives and results, among other things,
and may also include our belief regarding the effect of various
legal proceedings, as set forth under legal proceedings in parti,
item3 of the annual report on form10-k, as well
as statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our
liquidity policies, statements about trends in our businesses and
statements about our investment banking transaction backlog, in partii,
item7 of the annual report on form10-k. it is
possible that our actual results may differ, possibly materially,
from the anticipated results indicated in these forward-looking
statements. important factors that could cause actual results to
differ from those in the forward-looking statements include, among
others, those discussed below and under risk factors in parti,
item1a of the annual report on form10-k and
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations in partii, item7 of the annual
report on form10-k.
in the case of statements about our
investment banking transaction backlog, such statements are subject
to the risk that the terms of these transactions may be modified or
that they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net revenues
that we expect to earn from these transactions may differ, possibly
materially, from those currently expected. important factors that
could result in a modification of the terms of a transaction or a
transaction not being completed include, in the case of
underwriting transactions, a decline in general economic
conditions, outbreak of hostilities, volatility in the securities
markets generally or an adverse development with respect to the
issuer of the securities and, in the case of financial advisory
transactions, a decline in the securities markets, an adverse
development with respect to a party to the transaction or a failure
to obtain a required regulatory approval.
table of contents
segment operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking
net revenues
$
3,671
$
3,374
$
2,711
operating expenses
3,258
2,973
2,504
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
net revenues
$
16,362
$
13,327
$
10,443
operating expenses
10,144
8,287
6,938
pre-tax earnings
$
6,218
$
5,040
$
3,505
asset management and securities services
net revenues
$
4,749
$
3,849
$
2,858
operating expenses
3,070
2,430
1,890
pre-tax earnings
$
1,679
$
1,419
$
total
net revenues
$
24,782
$
20,550
$
16,012
operating expenses(1)
16,509
13,874
11,567
pre-tax earnings
$
8,273
$
6,676
$
4,445
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to our segments: (i)the amortization
of employee initial public offering awards, net of
forfeitures, of $19million and $80million for
the years ended november2004 and november2003,
respectively; (ii)net provisions for a number of
litigation and regulatory proceedings of $37million,
$103million and $155million for the years ended
november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively; and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of our joint venture in
china for the year ended november2004.
table of contents
business segments
these segments consist of various
products and activities that are set forth in the following chart:
business segment/component
primary products and activities
investment banking:
financial advisory
mergers and acquisitions advisory services
financial restructuring advisory services
underwriting
equity and debt underwriting
trading and principal investments:
fixed income, currency and commodities
commodities and commodity derivatives, including our power generation activities
credit products, including the trading of and investing in credit derivatives, investment-grade corporate securities, high-yield securities, bank loans, municipal securities, emerging market debt and other distressed debt, and equity securities
currencies and currency derivatives
interest rate products, including interest rate derivatives, global government securities and money market instruments, including our matched book
mortgage-backed securities and loans and other asset-backed securities
equities
equity securities and derivatives
securities, futures and options clearing services
specialist and market-making activities in equity securities and options
principal investments
principal investments in connection with merchant banking activities
investment in the convertible preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc.
asset management and securities services:
asset management
asset management, advisory services and investment products for all major asset classes, including money markets, fixed income, currencies, equities and alternative investments (including hedge funds, private equity funds and real estate funds), for institutional and high-net-worth clients, as well as retail clients through third-party channels
management of merchant banking funds
securities services
prime brokerage
financing services
securities lending
table of contents
investment banking
investment banking represented 15% of
2005net revenues. we provide a broad range of investment
banking services to a diverse group of corporations, financial
institutions, governments and individuals and seek to develop and
maintain long-term relationships with these clients as their lead
investment bank.
our current structure, which is
organized by regional, industry and product groups, seeks to
combine client-focused investment bankers with execution and
industry expertise. we continually assess and adapt our
organization to meet the demands of our clients in each geographic
region. through our commitment to teamwork, we believe that we
provide services in an integrated fashion for the benefit of our
clients.
our goal is to make available to our
clients the entire resources of the firm in a seamless fashion,
with investment banking serving as front of the house. to
accomplish this objective, we focus on coordination among our
equity and debt underwriting businesses and our corporate risk and
liability management businesses. this coordination is intended to
assist our investment banking clients in managing their asset and
liability exposures.
our investment banking segment is
divided into two components: financial advisory and underwriting.
financial advisory
financial advisory includes advisory
assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures,
corporate defense activities, restructurings and spin-offs. our
mergers and acquisitions capabilities are evidenced by our
significant share of assignments in large, complex transactions for
which we provide multiple services, including one-stop
acquisition financing and cross-border structuring expertise, as
well as services in other areas of the firm, such as interest rate
and currency hedging.
underwriting
underwriting includes public
offerings and private placements of a wide range of securities and
other financial instruments, including common and preferred stock,
convertible and exchangeable securities, investment-grade debt,
high-yield debt, sovereign and emerging market debt, municipal
debt, bank loans, asset-backed securities and real estate-related
securities, such as mortgage-backed securities and the securities
of real estate investment trusts.
equity underwriting. equity
underwriting has been a long-term core strength of goldman sachs.
as with mergers and acquisitions, we have been particularly
successful in winning mandates for large, complex transactions. we
believe our leadership in worldwide initial public offerings and
worldwide public common stock offerings reflects our expertise in
complex transactions, prior experience and distribution
capabilities.
debt underwriting. we engage in the
underwriting and origination of various types of debt instruments,
including investment-grade debt securities, high-yield debt
securities, bank and bridge loans and emerging market debt
securities, which instruments may be issued by, among others,
corporate, sovereign and agency issuers. in addition, we underwrite
and originate structured securities, which include mortgage-backed
and other asset-backed securities and collateralized debt
obligations.
trading and principal investments
trading and principal investments
represented 66% of 2005net revenues. trading and principal
investments facilitates client transactions with a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals
and takes proprietary positions through market making in,
table of contents
trading of and investing in fixed income and equity products, currencies,
commodities and derivatives on such products. in addition, we
engage in specialist and market-making activities on equities and
options exchanges and we clear client transactions on major stock,
options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection with our
merchant banking and other investing activities, we make principal
investments directly and through funds that we raise and manage.
to meet the needs of our clients,
trading and principal investments is diversified across a wide
range of products. we believe our willingness and ability to take
risk to facilitate client transactions distinguishes us from many
of our competitors and substantially enhances our client
relationships.
our trading and principal investments
segment is divided into three components: fixed income, currency
and commodities, equities and principal investments.
fixed income, currency and commodities and equities
fixed income, currency and
commodities (ficc)and equities are large and diversified
operations through which we engage in a variety of customer-driven
and proprietary trading and investing activities.
in their customer-driven businesses,
ficc and equities strive to deliver high-quality service by
offering broad market-making and market knowledge to our clients on
a global basis. in addition, we use our expertise to take positions
in markets, by committing capital and taking risk, to facilitate
client transactions and to provide liquidity. our willingness to
make markets, commit capital and take risk in a broad range of
fixed income, currency, commodity and equity products and their
derivatives is crucial to our client relationships and to support
our underwriting business by providing secondary market liquidity.
a core activity in ficc and equities
is market making in a broad array of securities and products. for
example, we are a primary dealer in many of the largest government
bond markets around the world, including the united states, japan
and the united kingdom. we are a member of the major futures
exchanges, and also have interbank dealer status in the currency
markets in new york, london, tokyo and hong kong.
we generate trading net revenues from
our customer-driven businesses in three ways.
first, in large, highly liquid markets, we undertake a high volume of transactions for modest spreads and fees.
second, by capitalizing on our strong relationships and capital position, we undertake transactions in less
liquid markets where spreads and fees are generally larger.
finally, we structure and execute transactions that address complex client needs.
we continue to increase coordination
among our ficc and equities businesses as we respond to what we
believe is client demand for more coordinated services and for
cross-market knowledge and expertise.
in our proprietary activities in both
ficc and equities, we assume a variety of risks and devote
resources to identify, analyze and benefit from these exposures. we
capitalize on our analytical models to analyze information and make
informed trading judgments and we seek to benefit from perceived
disparities in the value of assets in the trading markets and from
macroeconomic and issuer-specific trends.
through allmerica financial life
insurance and annuity company, an insurance subsidiary that we
acquired in december2005, we now manage interests in variable
annuity and variable life insurance contracts. we also plan to
participate opportunistically in both the life and annuity and
property reinsurance businesses.
table of contents
ficc
our ficc business makes markets in
and trades interest rate and credit products, mortgage-backed
securities and loans and other asset-backed securities, currencies
and commodities, structures and enters into a wide variety of
derivative transactions, and engages in proprietary trading and
investing. ficc has five principal businesses: commodities; credit
products; currencies; interest rate products, including money
market instruments; and mortgage-backed securities and loans and
other asset-backed securities.
commodities. we make markets in, and
trade for our clients and our own account, a wide variety of
commodities and commodity derivatives, including oil and oil
products, metals, natural gas and electricity and forest products.
we are also a member of or have relationships with major
commodities exchanges worldwide.
as part of our commodities business,
we have acquired interests in electric power generation facilities.
as of january1, 2006, we owned interests in 20 power
generation facilities located in the united states and one power
generation facility located outside the united states. of these
facilities, eight are fueled by natural gas, eight by coal, four by
waste coal and one by fuel oil. we acquired interests in the first
of these facilities in 2003. since that time, we have acquired and
disposed of interests in other power generation facilities.
credit products. we offer our
clients, and trade for our own account, a broad array of credit and
credit linked products, including credit derivatives,
investment-grade corporate securities, high-yield securities, bank
loans (origination and trading), municipal securities, emerging
market debt and other distressed debt. we also trade credit
products for the benefit of our clients. for example, we enter, as
principal, into complex structured transactions designed to meet
client needs and also provide credit through bridge and other loan
facilities.
our credit products business includes
making long-term and short-term investments for our own account
(often investing together with our merchant banking funds) in a
broad array of asset classes (including distressed debt) globally.
we opportunistically invest in assets across an entitys capital
structure, including in equity, senior loans, debt securities and
preferred stock.
currencies. we act as a dealer in
foreign exchange and trade for our clients and ourselves in most
currencies on exchanges and in cash and derivative markets globally.
interest rate products. we trade and
make markets in a variety of interest rate products, including
interest rate swaps, options and other derivatives and government
bonds, as well as money market instruments, such as commercial
paper, treasury bills, repurchase agreements and other highly
liquid securities and instruments. this business includes our
matched book, which consists of short-term collateralized financing
transactions.
mortgage business. we make markets
in, and trade for our clients and ourselves, mortgage-related
securities and loan products and other asset-backed securities, and
we securitize loan portfolios backed by real estate and other
assets.
equities
we make markets in, trade and act as
a specialist for equities and equity-related products, structure
and enter into equity derivative transactions and engage in
proprietary trading. we generate commissions from executing and
clearing client transactions on major stock, options and futures
exchanges worldwide through our equities customer franchise and
clearing activities.
equities includes three principal
businesses: our customer franchise business, principal strategies
and specialist activities.
customer franchise business. our
customer franchise business includes primarily customer-driven
activities in the shares, convertible securities and equity
derivatives markets.
table of contents
theseactivities also include clearing
client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges
worldwide, as well as our options specialist and market-making
businesses.
we trade equity securities and
equity-related products, including convertible securities, options,
futures and over-the-counter (otc)derivative instruments, on a
global basis as an agent, as a market maker or otherwise as a
principal. as a principal, we facilitate client transactions, often
by committing capital and taking risk, to provide liquidity to
clients with large blocks of stocks or options. for example, we are
active in the execution of large block trades. we also execute
transactions as agent and offer clients direct electronic access to
trading markets.
we are a member of most of the
worlds major stock, options and futures exchanges and
marketplaces, including those located in new york, chicago, london,
paris, frankfurt, tokyo and hong kong.
in the options and futures markets,
we structure, distribute and execute derivatives on market indices,
industry groups and individual company stocks to facilitate client
transactions and our proprietary activities. we develop strategies
and render advice with respect to portfolio hedging and
restructuring and asset allocation transactions. we also create
specially tailored instruments to enable sophisticated investors to
undertake hedging strategies and to establish or liquidate
investment positions. we are one of the leading participants in the
trading and development of equity derivative instruments. we are an
active participant in the trading of futures and options on most of
the major exchanges in the united states, europe and asia. in
options, we are a specialist and market maker on the international
securities exchange and a market maker on the boston options
exchange and the philadelphia stock exchange.
principal strategies. our principal
strategies business includes a multi-strategy proprietary
investment business that invests and trades for the firms own
account. principal strategies trades and invests the firms capital
across global markets employing strategies that are primarily
focused on public markets. most strategies involve fundamental
equities and relative value trading (which involves trading
strategies to take advantage of perceived discrepancies in the
relative value of financial instruments, including equity,
equity-related and debt instruments). other strategies involve
event-driven investments (which focus on event-oriented special
situations such as corporate restructurings, bankruptcies,
recapitalizations, mergers and acquisitions and legal and
regulatory events) as well as convertible bond trading, various
types of volatility trading and principal finance (which includes
private structured investments in public or private companies).
specialist activities. our specialist
activities business includes our stock and exchange-traded funds
(etf)specialist and market-making businesses. we engage in
specialist and market-making activities on equities exchanges. in
the united states, we are one of the leading stock specialists on
the nyse. for etfs, we are a specialist on the nyse and a
specialist and market maker on the american stock exchange.
principal investments
principal investments primarily
represents net revenues from our corporate and real estate merchant
banking investments. to date, these net revenues have been from
three primary sources: returns on corporate and real estate
investments, our investment in the convertible preferred stock of
sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)and overrides. in
january2006, the firm entered into a definitive agreement to
invest $2.58billion in the industrial and commercial bank of
china limited, with investment funds managed by the firm assuming a
substantial portion of the firms economic interest. the
transactions are expected to close by may2006, subject to receipt
of regulatory approvals and other closing conditions.
table of contents
returns on corporate and real estate
investments. in connection with our merchant banking activities, we
invest by making principal investments directly and through funds
that we raise and manage. as of november2005, the aggregate
carrying value of our principal investments held directly or
through our merchant banking funds, excluding our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg, was approximately $2.47billion,
comprised of corporate principal investments with an
aggregate carrying value of approximately $1.72billion and
real estate investments with an aggregate carrying value of
approximately $745million. in addition, as of november2005,
we had outstanding equity capital commitments of up to $3.54billion.
smfg. principal investments also
includes our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg,
which weacquired on february7, 2003. this preferred stock is
generally nontransferable, but is freely convertible into smfg
common stock. restrictions on our ability to hedge or sell
one-third of the common stock underlying our investment in smfg
lapsed in february2005. as of november2005, we were fully hedged
with respect to these unrestricted shares. under our initial
agreement with smfg, restrictions on our ability to hedge or sell
the remaining shares of common stock underlying our investment in
smfg lapse in equal installments on february7, 2006 and
february7, 2007. in connection with a public offering by smfg
of its common stock, we have separately agreed with smfg that the
restrictions that were to lapse on february7, 2006 will
instead lapse on march9, 2006. as of november2005, the
carrying value of our investment in the smfg preferred stock was
approximately $4.06billion.
overrides. principal investments also
includes net revenues from the increased share of the income and
gains derived from our merchant banking funds when the return on a
funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns (typically
referred to as an override).
asset management and securities services
asset management and securities
services represented 19% of 2005net revenues. our asset
management business provides investment advisory and financial
planning services and offers investment products to a diverse group
of institutions and individuals worldwide and primarily generates
revenues in the form of management and incentive fees. securities
services provides prime brokerage services, financing services and
securities lending services to mutual funds, pension funds, hedge
funds, foundations and high-net-worth individuals worldwide, and
generates revenues primarily in the form of interest rate spreads
or fees.
asset management
we offer a broad array of investment
strategies, advice and planning. we provide asset management
services and offer investment products across all major asset
classes: money markets, fixed income, currencies, equities and
alternative investments (which primarily includes private equity
funds, hedge funds, real estate funds, certain currency and asset
allocation strategies and other assets allocated to external
investment managers). through our subsidiary, the ayco company,
l.p. (ayco), we also provide fee-based financial counseling in the
united states.
assets under management (aum)
typically generate fees as a percentage of asset value. in certain
circumstances, we are also entitled to receive asset management
incentive fees based on a percentage of a funds return or when the
return on assets under management exceeds specified benchmark
returns or other performance targets. incentive fees are recognized
when the performance period ends and they are no longer subject to
adjustment. we have numerous incentive fee arrangements, many of
which have annual performance periods that end on december31
and are not subject to adjustment thereafter. for that reason,
incentive fees are seasonally weighted each year to our first
fiscal quarter. depending on the level of net revenues in our first
fiscal quarter of 2006, these incentive fees may be material to the
results of operations in that quarter.
table of contents
aum includes our mutual funds,
alternative investment funds and separately managed accounts for
institutional and individual investors. alternative investments
include our merchant banking funds, which generate revenues as
described below under management of merchant banking funds. aum
excludes assets in brokerage accounts, which generate commissions,
mark-ups and spreads that are included in our trading and principal
investments segment. increasingly, many of our individual clients
brokerage accounts pay fees based on the assets in their accounts
rather than commissions on transactional activity in the accounts.
the amount of aum is set forth in the
graph below. in the following graph, as well as in the following
tables, substantially all assets under management are valued as of
november30.
assets under management
(in billions)
the following table sets forth aum by asset class:
assets under management by asset class
(in billions)
as of november30
asset class
money markets
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity(1)
alternative investments(2)
total
$
$
$
(1)
includes both our fundamental equity and our quantitative equity strategies.
(2)
primarily includes private equity funds, hedge funds, real estate funds, certain currency and asset
allocation strategies and other assets allocated to external investment managers.
clients. our clients are institutions
and individuals, including both high-net-worth and retail
investors. we access institutional and high-net-worth clients
through both direct and third-party channels and retail clients
through third-party channels. our institutional clients include pension
table of contents
funds, governmental organizations, corporations, insurance
companies, foundations and endowments. in third-party distribution
channels, we distribute our mutual funds and separately managed
accounts through brokerage firms, banks, insurance companies and
other financial intermediaries. our clients are located worldwide.
the table below sets forth the amount
of aum by distribution channel and client category:
assets under management by distribution channel(1)
(in billions)
as of november30
distribution channel
directly distributed
institutional
$
$
$
high-net-worth individuals
third-party distributed
institutional, high-net-worth and retail
total
$
$
$
(1)
the primary investment vehicles for these assets under management are separately
managed accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and private investment funds.
management of merchant banking funds.
goldman sachs sponsors numerous corporate and real estate private
investment funds. our strategy with respect to these funds
generally is to invest opportunistically to build a portfolio of
investments that is diversified by industry, product type,
geographic region and transaction structure and type. our corporate
investment funds pursue, on a global basis, long-term investments
in equity and debt securities in privately negotiated transactions,
leveraged buyouts, acquisitions and investments in funds managed by
external parties. our real estate investment funds invest in real
estate operating companies, debt and equity interests in real
estate assets, and other real estate-related investments. our
clients in private investment funds include pension plans,
endowments, charitable institutions and high-net-worth individuals.
since inception, we have raised $52.53billion
of committed equity capital in these funds, of which
$37.23billion relates to our corporate funds and $15.30billion
relates to our real estate funds. as of november2005,
$37.30billion of the committed equity capital was funded and
the amount of aum remaining in these funds after distributions was
$28.85billion.
merchant banking activities generate
three primary revenue streams. first, we receive a management fee
that is generally a percentage of a funds committed capital,
invested capital, total gross acquisition cost or asset value.
these annual management fees are included in our asset management
net revenues. second, goldman sachs, as a substantial investor in
some of these funds, is allocated its proportionate share of the
funds unrealized appreciation or depreciation arising from changes
in fair value as well as gains and losses upon realization. third,
after a fund has achieved a minimum return for fund investors, we
receive an increased share of the funds income and gains that is a
percentage of the income and gains from the funds investments. the
second and third of these revenue streams are included in net
revenues of the principal investments component of our trading and
principal investments segment.
table of contents
securities services
securities services provides prime
brokerage services, financing services and securities lending
services to mutual funds, pension funds, hedge funds, foundations
and high-net-worth individuals worldwide.
prime brokerage services. we offer
prime brokerage services to our clients, allowing them the
flexibility to trade with most brokers while maintaining a single
source for financing and consolidated portfolio reports. our prime
brokerage business provides clearing and custody in 45 markets
(with net revenues from clearing and custody included in our
trading and principal investments segment), consolidated
multi-currency accounting and reporting and offshore fund
administration.
financing services. a central element
of our prime brokerage business involves providing financing to our
clients for their securities trading activities through margin and
securities loans that are collateralized by securities, cash or
other acceptable collateral.
securities lending services.
securities lending services principally involve the borrowing and
lending of securities to cover clients and goldman sachs short
sales and otherwise to make deliveries into the market. in
addition, we are an active participant in the broker-to-broker
securities lending business and the third-party agency lending
business.
global investment research
global investment research provides
fundamental research on companies, industries, economies,
currencies, commodities and macro strategy research on a worldwide
basis.
global investment research employs a
team approach that as of november28, 2005 provided research
coverage of approximately 2,250companies worldwide, over 50
national economies and 25 stock markets. this is accomplished by
the following departments:
the equity research departments provide fundamental analysis, earnings forecasts
and investment opinions for equity securities;
the credit research department provides fundamental analysis, forecasts and
investment opinions as to investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds and credit
derivatives;
the economic research department formulates macroeconomic forecasts for economic
activity, foreign exchange and interest rates;
the commodities research department provides research on the
commodity markets; and
the strategy research department provides equity market forecasts, opinions on
both asset and industry sector allocation, equity trading strategies and options
research.
further information regarding
research at goldman sachs is provided below under regulation
regulations applicable in and outside the united states,
risk factors in parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k and legal proceedings research independence
matters in parti, item3 of the annual report on form10-k.
technology
goldman sachs is committed to the
ongoing development, maintenance and use of technology throughout
the organization. our technology initiatives can be broadly
categorized into four efforts:
enhancing client service through increased connectivity and the provision of
value-added, tailored products and services;
table of contents
improving our trading, execution and clearing capabilities;
risk management;and
overall efficiency, productivity and control.
we have tailored our services to our
clients by providing them with electronic access to our products
and services. in particular, we provide global electronic trading
and information distribution capabilities covering many of our
fixed income, currency, commodity, equity and mutual fund products
around the world.
electronic commerce and technology
have changed and will continue to change the ways that securities
and other financial products are traded, distributed and settled.
this creates both opportunities and challenges for our businesses.
we remain committed to being at the forefront of technological
innovation in the global capital markets.
business continuity and information security
business continuity and information
security are high priorities for goldman sachs. our business
continuity program has been developed to provide reasonable
assurance of business continuity in the event of disruptions at the
firms critical facilities and to comply with nyse and national
association of securities dealers, inc.(nasd)regulatory
requirements. the key elements of the program are crisis
management, business recovery, systems and data recovery, people
recovery facilities and process improvement. in the area of
information security, a framework of principles, policies and
technology has been developed to protect the information assets of
the firm and our clients. safeguards are applied to maintain the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information
resources.
employees
management believes that a major
strength and principal reason for the success of goldman sachs is
the quality and dedication of our people and the shared sense of
being part of a team. we strive to maintain a work environment that
fosters professionalism, excellence, diversity, cooperation among
our employees worldwide and high standards of business ethics.
instilling the goldman sachs culture
in all employees is a continuous process, in which training plays
an important part. all employees are offered the opportunity to
participate in education and periodic seminars that we sponsor at
various locations throughout the world. another important part of
instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee review
process. employees are reviewed by supervisors, co-workers and
employees they supervise in a 360-degree review process that is
integral to our team approach.
as of november2005, we had 22,425
employees (excluding 1,437 employees of goldman sachs property
management and loan servicing subsidiaries, for whom the majority
of the costs are reimbursed to goldman sachs by the investment
funds for which these subsidiaries provide services, and 7,143
employees of certain consolidated entities that are held for
investment purposes only). consolidated entities held for
investment purposes include entities that are held strictly for
capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and are engaged
in activities that are not closely related to our principal
businesses.
competition
the financial services industry
and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we
expect them to remain so. our competitors are other brokers and
dealers, investment banking firms, insurance companies, investment
advisers, mutual funds, hedge funds, private equity funds,
commercial banks and merchant banks. we compete with some of our
competitors globally and with
table of contents
others on a regional, product or niche basis. our competition is based on a number of factors,
including transaction execution, our products and services, innovation, reputation and price.
we also face intense competition in
attracting and retaining qualified employees. our ability to
continue to compete effectively in our businesses will depend upon
our ability to attract new employees and retain and motivate our
existing employees.
over time, there has been substantial
consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial
services industry, due in part to u.s.federal legislation that
has expanded the activities permissible for firms affiliated with a
u.s.bank. in particular, a number of large commercial banks,
insurance companies and other broad-based financial services firms
have established or acquired broker-dealers or have merged with
other financial institutions. many of these firms have the ability
to offer a wide range of products, from loans, deposit-taking and
insurance to brokerage, asset management and investment banking
services, which may enhance their competitive position. they also
have the ability to support investment banking and securities
products with commercial banking, insurance and other financial
services revenues in an effort to gain market share, which has
resulted in pricing pressure in certain of our businesses and could
result in pricing pressure in other of our businesses.
moreover, we have faced, and expect
to continue to face, pressure to retain market share by committing
capital to businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns
that may not be commensurate with their risks. in particular,
corporate clients increasingly seek such commitments (such as
agreements to participate in their commercial paper backstop or
other revolving loan facilities) from financial services firms in
connection with investment banking and other assignments. to
respond to this trend, we established the william street entities,
through which we have issued commitments to lend to counterparties,
primarily investment-grade clients. with respect to these
commitments, we have credit loss protection provided to us by smfg,
which is generally limited to 95% of the first loss we realize on
approved loan commitments, subject to a maximum of $1.00billion.
in addition, subject to the satisfaction of certain
conditions, upon our request, smfg will provide protection for 70%
of the second loss on such commitments, subject to a maximum of
$1.13billion. we also use other financial instruments to hedge
certain william street commitments not covered by smfg. see
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations in partii, item7 of the annual
report on form10-k and note6 to our consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k for more information regarding the william
street entities and for a description of the credit loss protection
provided by smfg.
increasingly, in connection with
investment banking transactions, we are being called upon to
provide capital commitments that do not meet the criteria
established for the william street entities. these commitments are
issued through goldman sachs credit partners l.p. or our other
subsidiaries.
the trend toward consolidation and
convergence has significantly increased the capital base and
geographic reach of some of our competitors. this trend has also
hastened the globalization of the securities and other financial
services markets. as a result, we have had to commit capital to
support our international operations and to execute large global
transactions. to take advantage of some of our most significant
challenges and opportunities, we will have to compete successfully
with financial institutions that are larger and better capitalized
and that may have a stronger local presence and longer operating
history outside the united states.
we have experienced intense price
competition in some of our businesses in recent years. there has
been considerable pressure in the pricing of block trades. also,
equity and debt underwriting discounts, as well as trading spreads,
have been under pressure for a number of years and the ability to
execute trades electronically, through the internet and through
other alternative trading systems, has increased the pressure on
trading commissions. it appears that this trend toward electronic
and other low-touch, low-commission trading will continue. we
believe that we
table of contents
will continue to experience competitive pressures
in these and other areas in the future as some of our competitors
seek to obtain market share by reducing prices.
regulation
goldman sachs, as a participant in
the securities and commodity futures and options industries, is
subject to extensive regulation in the united states and elsewhere.
as a matter of public policy, regulatory bodies in the united
states and the rest of the world are charged with safeguarding the
integrity of the securities and other financial markets and with
protecting the interests of clients participating in those markets.
they are not, however, charged with protecting the interests of
goldman sachs shareholders or creditors.
broker-dealers, in particular, are
subject to regulations that cover all aspects of the securities
business, including sales methods, trade practices, use and
safekeeping of clients funds and securities, capital structure,
recordkeeping, the financing of clients purchases, and the conduct
of directors, officers and employees. a number of our affiliates
are regulated by investment advisory laws in and outside the united
states. additional legislation, changes in rules promulgated by
self-regulatory organizations, or changes in the interpretation or
enforcement of existing laws and rules, either in the united states
or elsewhere, may directly affect the operations and profitability
of goldman sachs.
regulation in the united states
in the united states, the sec is the
federal agency responsible for the administration of the federal
securities laws. the sec has approved an application by goldman,
sachs& co. (gs&co.), our principal broker-dealer in the united
states, to calculate net capital requirements using the alternative
method available to a broker-dealer that is part of a consolidated
supervised entity. as a condition to gs&co.s use of the
alternative method, the goldman sachs group, inc. was required to
consent to group-wide supervision and examination by the sec and to
report to the sec consolidated computations of our capital adequacy
on an ongoing basis. consenting to regulation as a consolidated
supervised entity is among the measures we have taken to enable us
to comply with the requirements of the european financial groups
directive described below under regulationoutside the
united states.
gs&co. is registered as a
broker-dealer and as an investment adviser with the sec and as a
broker-dealer in all 50states and the district of columbia.
self-regulatory organizations, such as the nyse and nasd, adopt
rules that apply to, and examine, broker-dealers such as gs&co. in
addition, state securities and other regulators also have
regulatory or oversight authority over gs&co. similarly, our
businesses are also subject to regulation by various non-u.s.governmental
and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory authorities
in virtually all countries where we have offices. goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec)and two of its
subsidiaries are registered u.s.broker-dealers and are
regulated by the sec and nyse and gsec is also regulated by the
nasd. goldman sachs financial markets, l.p. is registered with the
sec as an otc derivatives dealer and conducts certain otc
derivatives businesses.
the commodity futures and commodity
options industry in the united states is subject to regulation
under the commodity exchange act, as amended. the commodity futures
trading commission (cftc)is the federal agency charged with
the administration of the commodity exchange act and the
regulations thereunder. several of goldman sachs subsidiaries,
including gs&co. and gsec, are registered with the cftc and act as
futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators or commodity
trading advisors and are subject to the commodity exchange act and
the regulations thereunder. the rules and regulations of various
self-regulatory organizations, such as the chicago board of trade,
other futures exchanges and the national futures association, also
govern the commodity futures and commodity options businesses of
these entities.
table of contents
gs&co. and gsec are registered u.s.broker-dealers
and futures commission merchants subject to rule15c3-1
of the sec and rule1.17 of the cftc, which specify
minimum net capital levels for their registrants, and also require
that a significant part of the registrants assets be kept in
relatively liquid form. gs&co. and gsec have elected to compute
their minimum capital requirements in accordance with the
alternative minimum net capital requirement as permitted under
rule15c3-1. as of november2005, gs&co. and gsec had net
capital in excess of their minimum capital requirements. in
addition to its alternative minimum net capital requirements,
gs&co. is also required to hold tentative net capital in excess of
$1billion and net capital in excess of $500million in
accordance with the market and credit risk standards of appendixe
of rule15c3-1. gs&co. is required to notify the sec in
the event that its tentative net capital is less than $5billion.
as of november2005, gs&co. had tentative net capital and
net capital in excess of both the minimum and the notification
requirements. these net capital requirements may have the effect of
prohibiting these entities from distributing or withdrawing capital
and may require prior notice to the sec for certain withdrawals of
capital. see note15 to the consolidated financial statements
in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
goldman sachs has established three
limited purpose trust companies with limited powers under state and
federal law. they are not permitted to accept deposits or make
loans and, as a result, are not considered to be banks for purposes
of the bank holding company act, nor are they insured by the fdic
or subject to the community reinvestment act. these entities and
their regulators are: the goldman sachs trust company, n.a., a
national bank with limited trust powers that is regulated by the
office of the comptroller of the currency and is a member bank of
the federal reserve system; the goldman sachs trust company, a new
york limited purpose trust company that is regulated by the new
york state banking department; and the goldman sachs trust company
of delaware, a delaware limited purpose trust company that is
regulated by the office of the delaware state bank commissioner.
goldman sachs has established goldman
sachs bank usa (gs bank), a utah-chartered industrial bank, to
extend credit and to take deposits, other than demand deposits. gs
bank is subject to regulation by the fdic and the utah commissioner
of financial institutions. because it does not accept demand
deposits, gs bank is not considered to be a bank for purposes of
the bank holding company act. the deposits maintained at gs bank
are insured by the fdic to the extent provided by law and gs bank
is subject to the requirements of the community reinvestment act.
j.aron& company is
authorized by the federal energy regulatory commission (ferc)to
sell wholesale physical power at market-based rates. as a
ferc-authorized power marketer, j.aron& company is
subject to regulation under the federal power act and ferc
regulations.
in addition, as a result of our
interests in electric power generation facilities, we are subject
to extensive and evolving energy, environmental and other
governmental laws and regulations, as discussed under risk factors
our power generation interests subject us to the risks
associated with owning power generation facilities in parti,
item1a of the annual report on form10-k.
our u.s.insurance subsidiaries
are subject to state insurance regulation in the states in which
they are domiciled and in the other states in which they are
licensed.
the effort to combat money laundering
and terrorist financing is a priority in governmental policy with
respect to financial institutions. the usa patriot act of 2001
contains anti-money laundering and financial transparency laws and
mandates the implementation of various new regulations applicable
to broker-dealers and other financial services companies, including
standards for verifying client identification at account opening,
and obligations to monitor client transactions and report
suspicious activities. through these and other provisions, the usa
patriot act of 2001 seeks to promote the identification of parties
that may be involved in terrorism or money laundering. anti-money
laundering laws outside the united states contain some similar
provisions. the obligation of financial institutions, including
goldman sachs, to identify their clients, to watch for and report
suspicious transactions, to respond to requests for information by
regulatory authorities and law
table of contents
enforcement agencies, and to share
information with other financial institutions, has required the
implementation and maintenance of internal practices, procedures
and controls that have increased, and may continue to increase, our
costs, and
any failure with respect to our programs in this area
could subject us to substantial liability and regulatory fines.
regulationoutside the united states
goldman sachs is an active
participant in the international fixed income and equity markets.
many of our principal subsidiaries that participate in these
markets are subject to comprehensive regulations in the united
states and elsewhere that include some form of capital adequacy
rules and other customer protection rules. goldman sachs provides
investment services in and from the united kingdom under the
regulation of the financial services authority (fsa). various
goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking and regulatory
authorities of the other european countries in which goldman sachs
operates, including, among others, the federal financial
supervisory authority (bafin) and the bundesbank in germany, the
autorit des marchs financiers and banque de france in france,
banca ditalia and the commissione nazionale per le societ e la
borsa (consob)in italy and the swiss federal banking
commission. goldman sachs entities are also regulated by the
european securities, derivatives and commodities exchanges of which
they are members. the investment services that are subject to
oversight by the fsa and other european regulators are regulated in
accordance with european union directives requiring, among other
things, compliance with certain capital adequacy standards,
customer protection requirements and conduct of business rules.
these standards, requirements and rules are similarly implemented,
under the same directives, throughout the european union and are
broadly comparable in scope and purpose to the regulatory capital
and customer protection requirements imposed under the sec and cftc
rules. some european union directives also permit local regulation
in each jurisdiction, including those in which we operate, to be
more restrictive than the requirements of such directives and these
local requirements can result in certain competitive disadvantages
to goldman sachs.
the european unions european
financial groups directive (directive 2002/87/ec) introduced
certain changes to the way financial conglomerates and other
financial services organizations operating in europe are regulated.
as a result of these changes, activities that are conducted in
otherwise unregulated entities are now subject to certain forms of
regulation, including consolidated supervision and capital adequacy
requirements. the measures we have taken to comply with the
directive include becoming subject to the consolidated supervised
entity rules described above under regulation in the united
states.
the european unions european markets
in financial instruments directive (directive2004/39/ec) will
affect several of our subsidiaries by imposing detailed
pan-european requirements in areas such as internal organization
(including conflict management), best execution, real-time
disclosure of completed transactions in shares, quoting obligations
for internalized client orders in shares, transaction reporting to
regulators, client documentation and regulation of investment
services related to commodity derivatives. the practical
consequences of some of these changes on the european markets are
still unclear. the european parliament and the council of the
european union are currently considering a new directive that would
delay the implementation deadline from april30, 2006 to
november1, 2007.
in addition, the financial services
agency, the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka securities exchange,
the tokyo international financial futures exchange, the japan
securities dealers association, the tokyo commodity exchange and
the ministry of economy, trade and industry in japan, the
securities and futures commission in hong kong, the monetary
authority of singapore and the china securities regulatory
commission, among others, regulate various of our subsidiaries in
asia and also have capital standards and other requirements
comparable to the rules of the sec. certain of our insurance
subsidiaries are regulated by the bermuda registrar of companies.
table of contents
regulations applicable in and outside the united states
the u.s. and non-u.s.government
agencies, regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations, as
well as state securities commissions in the united states, are
empowered to conduct administrative proceedings that can result in
censure, fine, the issuance of cease and desist orders, or the
suspension or expulsion of a broker-dealer or its directors,
officers or employees. from time to time, our subsidiaries have
been subject to investigations and proceedings, and sanctions have
been imposed for infractions of various regulations relating to our
activities, none of which has had a material adverse effect on us
or our businesses.
compliance with the capital adequacy
and other regulatory requirements of u.s. and non-u.s.regulators
could limit those operations of our subsidiaries that
require the intensive use of capital, such as underwriting and
trading activities, specialist activities and the financing of
client account balances, and also could restrict our ability to
withdraw capital from our regulated subsidiaries, which in turn
could limit our ability to repay debt or to pay dividends on our
preferred and common stock.
in 2004, the basel committee on
banking supervision issued the baselii capital standards,
which are designed to
promote enhanced risk management practices
among large, international financial services firms by aligning
regulatory capital requirements more closely with the underlying
risks faced by these firms. under the currently proposed time
schedule, goldman sachs international would become subject to the
baselii requirements on january1, 2008. the consolidated
supervised entity rules described above under regulation in
the united states, which provide for group-wide supervision, are
consistent with baselii. complying with these new standards
requires us to develop and apply new and advanced measurement
techniques to determine our regulatory capital adequacy.
our specialist businesses are subject
to extensive regulation by a number of securities exchanges. the
rules of these exchanges generally require our specialists to
maintain orderly markets in the securities in which they are
specialists. these requirements, in turn, may require us to commit
significant amounts of capital to our specialist businesses.
changes to the rules and regulations
governing stock markets and the conduct of participants in those
markets, including the nyse, may impose additional costs on us,
adversely affect our customer-driven or specialist businesses or
impair the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
relating to those businesses.
the research areas of investment
banks have been and remain the subject of regulatory scrutiny. the
sec, nyse and nasd have adopted rules imposing restrictions on the
interaction between equity research analysts and investment banking
personnel at member securities firms. various non-u.s.jurisdictions
have imposed both substantive and disclosure-based
requirements with respect to research, and continue to consider
additional regulation. in addition, we are a party to a settlement
with certain federal and state securities regulators and
self-regulatory organizations that imposes restrictions on the
interaction between research and investment banking departments and
requires us to fund the provision of independent research to our
clients.
in connection with the research
settlement, the firm has also subscribed to a voluntary initiative
imposing restrictions on the allocation of shares in initial public
offerings to executives and directors of public companies. the fsa
in the united kingdom has imposed requirements on the conduct of
the allocation process in equity and fixed income securities
offerings (including initial public offerings and secondary
distributions). the sec, nyse and nasd have proposed rules that
would further affect the manner in which securities are distributed
and allocated in registered public offerings. we cannot fully
predict the practical effect that these new and proposed
requirements will have on our business, and the sec, nyse, nasd and
non-u.s.regulators, such as the fsa, may adopt additional and
more stringent rules with respect to offering procedures and the
management of conflicts of interest in the future.
table of contents
certain of our businesses are subject
to compliance with regulations enacted by u.s.federal and
state governments, the european union or other jurisdictions and/or
enacted by various regulatory organizations or exchanges relating
to the privacy of client information, and any failure to comply
with these regulations could expose us to liability and/or
reputational damage.
item1a.
risk factors
we face a variety of risks that are
substantial and inherent in our businesses, including market,
liquidity, credit, operational, legal and regulatory risks. our
business, by its nature, does not produce predictable earnings. the
following are some of the more important factors that could affect
our businesses.
our businesses may be adversely affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic conditions generally.
we have achieved record earnings per
common share in each of our last two fiscal years, reflecting a
favorable trading environment in ficc, an improvement in the
trading environment for equities and an increase in investment
banking activity. an adverse change in these market conditions may
adversely affect our results of operations.
our businesses are materially
affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic
conditions generally and these conditions may change suddenly and
dramatically. unfavorable or uncertain economic and market
conditions have adversely affected, and may in the future adversely
affect, our business and profitability in many ways, including the
following:
we have been operating in a low interest rate market for the past several years.
increasing or high interest rates and/or widening credit spreads, especially if such
changes are rapid, may create a less favorable environment for certain of our
businesses.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of our businesses
and generally maintain large trading, specialist and investing positions. market
fluctuations and volatility may adversely affect the value of those positions,
including, but not limited to, our interest rate and credit products, currency,
commodity and equity positions and our merchant banking investments, or may reduce
our willingness to enter into new transactions. from time to time, we have incurred
significant trading losses in periods of market turbulence. conversely, certain of
our trading businesses depend on market volatility to provide trading and arbitrage
opportunities, and decreases in volatility may reduce these opportunities and
adversely affect the results of these businesses.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings and mergers and
acquisitions may have an adverse effect on our revenues and, because we may be
unable to reduce expenses correspondingly, our profit margins. in particular,
because a significant portion of our investment banking revenues are derived from
our participation in large transactions, a decrease in the number of large
transactions due to uncertain or unfavorable market conditions may adversely affect
our investment banking business.
pricing and other competitive pressures have continued, even as the volume and
number of investment banking transactions have increased. in addition, the trend in
the underwriting business toward multiple book runners and co-managers handling
transactions, where previously there would have been a single book runner, may
adversely affect our business and reduce our revenues.
reductions in the level of the equity markets also tend to reduce the value of our
clients portfolios, which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for managing assets.
even in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or market conditions,
investment performance by our asset management business below the performance of
benchmarks or competitors could result in a decline in assets under management and
in the incentive and management fees we receive.
table of contents
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, proprietary trading and investing, block trading, merchant banking,
underwriting and lending businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand
our proprietary trading and investing businesses or commit capital to facilitate
customer-driven business. for example, large blocks of securities are increasingly
being sold in block trades rather than on a marketed basis, which increases the risk
that goldman sachs may be unable to resell the purchased securities at favorable
prices and may incur significant losses as a result. moreover, because of
concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic and market conditions
are generally favorable for others in the industry. we also regularly enter into
large transactions as part of our trading businesses. the number and size of such
transactions may affect our results of operations in a given period.
the volume of transactions that we execute for our clients and as a specialist or
market maker may decline, which would reduce the revenues we receive from
commissions and spreads. in addition, competitive pressures and other industry
factors, including the increasing use by our clients of low-cost electronic trading,
could cause a reduction in commissions and spreads. in our specialist businesses, we
are obligated by stock exchange rules to maintain an orderly market, including by
purchasing shares in a declining market. this may result in trading losses and an
increased need for liquidity. weakness in global equity markets and the trading of
securities in multiple markets and on multiple exchanges could adversely impact our
trading businesses and impair the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets. in addition, competitive pressures have been particularly intense in the
context of block trades.
we may incur losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and strategies.
we seek to monitor and control our
risk exposure through a variety of separate but complementary
financial, credit, operational, compliance and legal reporting
systems. our trading risk management process seeks to balance our
ability to profit from trading positions with our exposure to
potential losses. while we employ a broad and diversified set of
risk monitoring and risk mitigation techniques, those techniques
and the judgments that accompany their application cannot
anticipate every economic and financial outcome or the specifics
and timing of such outcomes. thus, we may, in the course of our
activities, incur losses.
for a further discussion of our risk
management policies and procedures, see managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
risk management in partii, item7 of the annual report on
form10-k.
our liquidity may be adversely affected by an inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets.
liquidity is essential to our
businesses. our liquidity could be impaired by an inability to
access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an inability to sell
assets or unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this situation
may arise due to circumstances that we may be unable to control,
such as a general market disruption or an operational problem that
affects third parties or us. further, our ability to sell assets
may be impaired if other market participants are seeking to sell
similar assets at the same time.
a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and businesses in many ways.
our credit ratings are important to
our liquidity. a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely
affect our liquidity and competitive position, increase our
borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or trigger
our obligations under certain bilateral provisions in some of our
trading and collateralized financing contracts. under these
provisions, counterparties could be permitted to
table of contents
terminate
contracts with goldman sachs or require us to post additional
collateral. termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our liquidity
by requiring us to find other sources of financing or to make
significant cash payments or securities movements.
an inability of the goldman sachs group, inc. to access funds from its subsidiaries could adversely affect its ability to meet its obligations.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is a
holding company and, therefore, depends on dividends, distributions
and other payments from its subsidiaries to fund dividend payments
and to fund all payments on its obligations, including debt
obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including gs&co., are
subject to laws that authorize regulatory bodies to block or reduce
the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to the goldman sachs
group, inc. regulatory action of that kind could impede access to
funds that the goldman sachs group, inc. needs to make payments on
obligations, including debt obligations, or dividend payments. in
addition, to the extent that the goldman sachs group, inc. (or any
other entity) holds equity interests in the firms regulated or
unregulated subsidiaries, its rights as an equity holder to the
assets of such subsidiaries are subject to the satisfaction of the
claims of the creditors of such subsidiaries.
our businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely affected by a deterioration in the credit quality of, or defaults by, third parties who owe us money, securities or other assets.
we are exposed to the risk that third
parties that owe us money, securities or other assets will not
perform their obligations. these parties may default on their
obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational
failure or other reasons. we are also subject to the risk that our
rights against third parties may not be enforceable in all
circumstances. in addition, a deterioration in the credit quality
of third parties whose securities or obligations we hold could
result in losses and/or adversely affect our ability to
rehypothecate or otherwise use those securities or obligations for
liquidity purposes. the amount and duration of our credit exposures
have been increasing over the past several years, as has the
breadth of the entities to which we have credit exposures. the
scope of our lending businesses has also been expanding and
includes loans to small and mid-size businesses, which are not
traditional goldman sachs clients. as a clearing member firm, we
finance our client positions and we could be held responsible for
the defaults or misconduct of our clients. in addition, we have
experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure to extend and
price credit at levels that may not always fully compensate us for
the risks we take. in particular, corporate clients sometimes seek
to require credit commitments from us in connection with investment
banking and other assignments. although we regularly review credit
exposures to specific clients and counterparties and to specific
industries, countries and regions that we believe may present
credit concerns, default risk may arise from events or
circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee. in addition,
concerns about, or a default by, one institution could lead to
significant liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other
institutions, which in turn could adversely affect goldman sachs.
mandatory physical settlement of derivative transactions may expose us to losses if we are unable to deliver the underlying security or obligation.
like many participants in the
derivatives marketplace, we are party to a large number of
derivative transactions, including credit derivatives, that require
that we deliver to the counterparty the underlying security or
obligation in order to receive payment. in a number of cases, we do
not hold the underlying security or obligation and may have
difficulty obtaining, or be unable to obtain, the underlying
security or obligation through the physical settlement of other
transactions. as a result, we are subject to the risk that we may
not be able to obtain the security or obligation within the
required contractual timeframe for delivery. this could cause us to
forfeit the payments due to us under these contracts or result in
settlement delays with the attendant credit and operational risk as
table of contents
well as increased costs to the firm. the derivatives industry is
working on various proposals to address this issue. a failure of
the industry to address this issue could result in an unwillingness
of counterparties to enter into certain types of derivative
transactions, which could negatively impact our businesses.
unconfirmed derivative transactions and unauthorized assignments of derivatives by counterparties may expose us to unexpected risk and potential losses.
derivative contracts and other
transactions entered into with third parties are not always
confirmed by the counterparties on a timely basis. while the
transaction remains unconfirmed, we are subject to heightened
credit and operational risk and in the event of a default may find
it more difficult to enforce the contract. the growth in the
derivatives industry, including credit derivatives and other swap
transactions, has also exposed us and other industry participants
to an increasing incidence of counterparties seeking to
unilaterally assign transactions without required prior notice and
consent. although industry participants have taken steps to
eliminate this practice and its effects on a going-forward basis,
including through the adoption of the 2005 isda novation protocol,
it is not yet clear how effective these efforts will be, and the
steps that have been taken by the industry do not resolve the issue
for derivative contracts that were previously entered into.
unauthorized assignments could introduce uncertainty as to the
status of a transaction, impair our ability to evaluate credit risk
and impede trade reconciliations, which could lead to a higher
number of failed transactions and collateral call defaults.
a failure in our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third parties, could impair our liquidity, disrupt our businesses, damage our reputation and cause losses.
shortcomings or failures in our
internal processes, people or systems could lead to impairment of
our liquidity, financial loss, disruption of our businesses,
liability to clients, regulatory intervention or reputational
damage. for example, our businesses are highly dependent on our
ability to process, on a daily basis, a large number of
transactions across numerous and diverse markets in many
currencies. the transactions we process have become increasingly
complex and often must adhere to client-specific guidelines, as
well as legal and regulatory standards. our financial, accounting,
data processing or other operating systems and facilities may fail
to operate properly or become disabled as a result of events that
are wholly or partially beyond our control, adversely affecting our
ability to process these transactions. the inability of our systems
to accommodate an increasing volume of transactions could also
constrain our ability to expand our businesses.
we also face the risk of operational
failure or termination of any of the clearing agents, exchanges,
clearing houses or other financial intermediaries we use to
facilitate our securities transactions, and as our
interconnectivity with our clients grows, we will increasingly face
the risk of operational failure with respect to our clients
systems. any such failure or termination could adversely affect our
ability to effect transactions, service our clients and manage our
exposure to risk.
despite the contingency plans and
facilities we have in place, our ability to conduct business may be
adversely impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that
supports our businesses and the communities in which we are
located. this may include a disruption involving electrical,
communications, transportation or other services used by goldman
sachs or third parties with which we conduct business. these
disruptions may occur, for example, as a result of events that
affect only the buildings of goldman sachs or such third parties,
or as a result of events with a broader impact on the cities where
those buildings are located. nearly all of our employees in our
primary locations, including new york, london, frankfurt, hong kong
and tokyo, work in close proximity to one another, in one or more
buildings. if a disruption occurs in one location and our employees
in that location are unable to occupy our offices or communicate
with or travel to other locations, our ability to service and
interact with our clients may suffer and we may not be able to
successfully implement contingency plans that depend on
communication or travel.
table of contents
our operations rely on the secure
processing, storage and transmission of confidential and other
information in our computer systems and networks. although we take
protective measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances
warrant, our computer systems, software and networks may be
vulnerable to unauthorized access, computer viruses or other
malicious code and other events that could have a security impact.
if one or more of such events occur, this potentially could
jeopardize our or our clients or counterparties confidential and
other information processed and stored in, and transmitted through,
our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause interruptions
or malfunctions in our, our clients, our counterparties or third
parties operations, which could result in significant losses or
reputational damage. we may be required to expend significant
additional resources to modify our protective measures or to
investigate and remediate vulnerabilities or other exposures, and
we may be subject to litigation and financial losses that are
either not insured against or not fully covered through any
insurance maintained by us.
conflicts of interest are increasing and a failure to appropriately deal with conflicts of interest could adversely affect our businesses.
our reputation is one of our most
important assets. as we have expanded the scope of our businesses
and our client base, we increasingly have to address potential
conflicts of interest, including those relating to our proprietary
activities. for example, conflicts may arise between our position
as a financial advisor in a merger transaction and a principal
investment we hold in one of the parties to the transaction. in
addition, hedge funds and private equity funds are an increasingly
important portion of our client base, and also compete with us in a
number of our businesses. we have extensive procedures and controls
that are designed to address conflicts of interest. however,
appropriately dealing with conflicts of interest is complex and
difficult and our reputation could be damaged if we fail, or appear
to fail, to deal appropriately with conflicts of interest.
in addition, the sec and other
federal and state regulators have increased their scrutiny of
potential conflicts of interest. for example, in june2005, the
nasd filed with the sec proposed rules that would require certain
disclosures to be contained in fairness opinions, and would mandate
specific procedures to be followed by member firms in connection
with issuing these opinions. while we have policies and procedures
in place that are intended to ensure that any potential conflicts
of interest are appropriately addressed, it is possible that
potential or perceived conflicts could give rise to litigation or
enforcement actions. it is possible that the regulatory scrutiny
of, and litigation in connection with, conflicts of interest will
make our clients less willing to enter into transactions in which
such a conflict may occur, and will adversely affect our businesses.
our businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive regulation around the world.
goldman sachs, as a participant in
the financial services industry, is subject to extensive regulation
in jurisdictions around the world. we face the risk of significant
intervention by regulatory authorities in all jurisdictions in
which we conduct our businesses. among other things, we could be
fined, prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities
or subject to limitations or conditions on our business activities.
new laws or regulations or changes in
enforcement of existing laws or regulations applicable to our
business or those of our clients may also adversely affect our
businesses. for example, the sec has adopted rules requiring the
registration of certain hedge funds advisers under the investment
advisers act of 1940, and the sec or other regulators may seek to
further regulate hedge funds in the future. it is possible that
these or other future regulatory developments rules may have a
significant impact on our trading, prime brokerage and other
business relationships with hedge funds, or on the growth of our
prime brokerage and securities lending businesses. in addition,
under the european unions transparency directive (directive2004/109/ec),
which is due to be implemented by member states by
january2007, issuers of securities admitted to listing on
regulated markets in the european union may, depending upon the
manner of implementation, be required to provide
table of contents
expanded ongoing
financial disclosure, which could have an adverse impact on our
ability or the ability of certain of our non-european union-based
clients to maintain the listing of these securities or to conduct
securities offerings in europe. furthermore, the secs regulationnms,
which was adopted in 2005 and is expected to become
effective in 2006, introduces significant changes to the regulation
of trading on securities exchanges and marketplaces. while it is
too early to predict the impact that regulationnms will have,
it could result in the imposition of additional compliance costs on
our trading businesses and alter the competitive environment in
which these businesses function.
many of our businesses are operating in an uncertain and difficult regulatory environment.
firms in the financial services
industry have been operating in a difficult regulatory environment.
the industry has experienced increased scrutiny from a variety of
regulators, both within and outside the united states. penalties
and fines sought by regulatory authorities have increased
substantially over the last several years. this environment has led
some of our clients to be less willing to engage in transactions
that may carry a risk of increased scrutiny by regulators. in
addition, while the firm always strives to fully comply with all
legal and regulatory requirements, this regulatory and enforcement
environment has created uncertainty with respect to a number of
transactions that had historically been entered into by financial
services firms, including our firm, and that were generally
believed to be permissible and appropriate. this environment has
led us and our competitors to modify transaction structures and, in
some cases, to limit or cease our execution of some types of
transactions.
substantial legal liability or significant regulatory action against goldman sachs could have material adverse financial effects or cause significant reputational harm to goldman sachs, which in turn could seriously harm our business prospects.
we face significant legal risks in
our businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of damages and
penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory proceedings against
financial institutions remain high.
the interaction between our equity research analysts and investment banking businesses has been subject to new requirements and litigation.
as discussed under business
regulation in parti, item1 of the annual report on form10-k,
the research areas of investment banks have been and
remain the subject of regulatory scrutiny that has led to
restrictions on the interaction between equity research analysts
and investment banking personnel at securities firms. gs&co. has
agreed to a global settlement to resolve investigations into equity
research analysts alleged conflicts of interest pursuant to which
gs&co. has been subject to certain restrictions and undertakings.
certain of these requirements and restrictions have imposed
additional costs and limitations on the conduct of our businesses.
litigation and regulatory scrutiny of complex, structured financial transactions remain high.
regulators, both within and outside
the united states, continue to scrutinize complex, structured
finance transactions and have brought enforcement actions against a
number of financial institutions in connection with such
transactions. in some of the enforcement actions, clients of the
financial institutions allegedly engaged in accounting, disclosure
or other violations of the securities laws, and the financial
institutions allegedly facilitated these improprieties by entering
into transactions with the clients. we seek to create innovative
solutions to address our clients needs, and we have entered into,
and continue to enter into, structured transactions with clients.
while we have policies and procedures in place that are intended to
ensure that the structured transactions we enter into are
appropriately reviewed and comply with applicable laws and
regulations, it is possible that certain of these transactions
could give rise to litigation or enforcement actions. it is
possible that the regulatory scrutiny of, and litigation in
connection with, structured finance transactions will make our
clients less willing to enter into these transactions, and will
adversely affect our business in this area.
table of contents
we are subject to regulatory inquiries and investigations into market timing, late trading and other activities involving mutual funds.
in recent years, there have been
industry-wide and other investigations by federal and state
authorities concerning market timing, late trading and other
activities involving mutual funds and investment advisers. federal
and state authorities have made informational requests regarding
trading practices broadly across all of the major fund companies
and broker-dealers. goldman sachs has received requests for
information and has been fully cooperating with those authorities.
while we believe that we have in place reasonable measures to
detect and deter disruptive and abusive trading practices and
comply with applicable legal and regulatory requirements, we cannot
predict the course that these inquiries and areas of focus may take
or the impact that any new laws or regulations governing mutual
funds may have on our businesses.
our specialist business is subject to a global settlement and civil actions.
regulators have also been conducting
investigations into certain trading practices of specialist firms,
including our specialist unit. in march2004, certain nyse
specialist firms, including our specialist unit, agreed to a global
settlement with the sec and nyse to resolve charges that the firms
violated certain federal securities laws and nyse rules in
connection with their activities as nyse specialists during the
years 1999 through 2003. the global settlement involves, among
others, restitution and penalties, a censure, cease and desist
order and certain undertakings with respect to our specialist
units systems and procedures. the settlement did not resolve the
related civil actions discussed under legal proceedings
specialist matters in parti, item3 of the annual report
on form10-k, or potential regulatory charges against
individuals. as a result of this global settlement and any related
developments, other investigations or any new laws or regulations
governing specialists, our specialist businesses may be adversely
affected and the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets related to these businesses may be impaired.
employee misconduct is difficult to detect and prevent and may have an adverse effect on our businesses.
there have been a number of highly
publicized cases involving fraud or other misconduct by employees
in the financial services industry in recent years, and we run the
risk that employee misconduct could occur. it is not always
possible to deter or prevent employee misconduct and the
precautions we take to prevent and detect this activity may not be
effective in all cases.
corporate governance and public disclosure requirements may adversely affect our investment banking businesses.
financial scandals in recent years
have led to insecurity and uncertainty in the financial markets and
contributed to declines in capital markets. in response to these
scandals, the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 and the rules of the sec,
nyse and nasdaq have necessitated significant changes to corporate
governance and public disclosure. these provisions generally apply
to companies with securities listed on u.s.securities
exchanges, and some provisions apply to non-u.s.issuers with
securities traded on u.s.securities exchanges. to the extent
that private companies, to avoid becoming subject to these
requirements, decide to forgo initial public offerings, our equity
underwriting business may be adversely affected and our ability to
successfully exit some of our merchant banking investments may be
adversely affected. similarly, the imposition of those provisions
on non-u.s.issuers has made these issuers less likely to list
their securities in the united states or undertake merger or
acquisition transactions that would result in their securities
being listed in the united states. these measures may result in
less activity by non-u.s.issuers in the united states and, as
a result, the u.s.capital markets and our investment banking
business may be adversely affected.
table of contents
the provisions of the sarbanes-oxley
act of 2002 and the nyse and nasdaq corporate governance rules have
imposed significant compliance costs on public companies and have
increased the cost of conducting many types of capital market
transactions, including securities offerings and acquisition and
disposition transactions. in particular, companies that are or are
planning to be public are incurring significant expenses in
complying with the sec and accounting standards relating to
internal control over financial reporting, and companies that
disclose material weaknesses in such controls under the new
standards may have some difficulty accessing the capital markets.
these factors, in addition to adopted or proposed accounting and
disclosure changes, may have an adverse effect on our investment
banking business.
the financial services industry is highly competitive.
the financial services industry
and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we
expect them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number of
factors, including transaction execution, our products and
services, innovation, reputation and price. we believe that we will
continue to experience pricing pressures in the future as some of
our competitors seek to increase market share by reducing prices.
over time, there has been substantial consolidation and convergence
among companies in the financial services industry. u.s.federal
legislation, which significantly expanded the activities
permissible for firms affiliated with a u.s.bank, may
accelerate this consolidation and further increase competition.
this trend toward consolidation and convergence has significantly
increased the capital base and geographic reach of our competitors.
this trend has also hastened the globalization of the securities
and other financial services markets. as a result, we have had to
commit capital to support our international operations and to
execute large global transactions.
the growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new technology may adversely affect our business and may increase competition.
technology is fundamental to our
business and our industry. the growth of electronic trading and the
introduction of new technologies is changing our businesses and
presenting us with new challenges. securities, futures and options
transactions are increasingly occurring electronically, both on our
own systems and through other alternative trading systems, and it
appears that the trend toward alternative trading systems will
continue and probably accelerate. some of these alternative trading
systems compete with our trading businesses, including our
specialist businesses, and we may experience continued competitive
pressures in these and other areas. in addition, the increased use
by our clients of low-cost electronic trading systems and direct
electronic access to trading markets could cause a reduction in
commissions and spreads.
our businesses may be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain qualified employees.
our performance is largely dependent
on the talents and efforts of highly skilled individuals.
competition in the financial services industry for qualified
employees is intense. in addition, competition with businesses
outside the financial services industry, such as hedge funds,
private equity funds and venture capital funds, for the most highly
skilled individuals has been intense. our continued ability to
compete effectively in our businesses depends on our ability to
attract new employees and to retain and motivate our existing
employees. changes in the business environment may cause us to move
employees from one business to another or to reduce the number of
employees in certain of our businesses; this may cause temporary
disruptions as our employees adapt to new roles and may reduce our
ability to take advantage of improvements in the business
environment. in addition, current and future laws (including laws
relating to immigration and outsourcing) may restrict our ability
to move responsibilities or personnel from one jurisdiction to
another. this may impact our ability to take advantage of business
opportunities or potential efficiencies.
table of contents
we may be unable to fully integrate future acquisitions or joint ventures into our businesses and systems.
we expect to grow in part through
acquisitions and joint ventures. we have undertaken joint ventures,
including in australia and china, and may enter into additional
joint ventures from time to time. to the extent we make
acquisitions or enter into combinations or joint ventures, we face
numerous risks and uncertainties combining or integrating the
relevant businesses and systems, including the need to combine
accounting and data processing systems and management controls and
to integrate relationships with clients and business partners. in
the case of joint ventures, we are subject to additional risks and
uncertainties in that we may be dependent upon, and subject to
liability, losses or reputational damage relating to, systems,
controls and personnel that are not under our control. in addition,
conflicts or disagreements between us and our joint venture
partners may negatively impact the benefits to be achieved by the
joint venture.
our power generation interests subject us to the risks associated with owning power generation facilities.
we own interests in electric power
generation facilities. as a result of these interests and future
investments that we may make in the power generation industry, we
face numerous risks and uncertainties.
we are a relatively new entrant to
the electric power generation industry. as a result, we have less
expertise and experience in owning and managing power generation
facilities than many of our competitors and we may not be
successful in owning and managing our power generation facilities.
in particular, in the future we may be unable to attract and retain
qualified independent contractors and employees.
the operation of power generation
facilities may be disrupted. the continued operation of power
generation facilities involves many risks, including the breakdown
or failure of power generation equipment, transmission lines or
other equipment or processes, and performance below expected levels
of output or efficiency. although our power generation facilities
contain various redundancies and backup mechanisms, a breakdown or
failure may prevent the affected facilities from performing under
applicable power sales agreements or otherwise operating as planned.
the power companies in which we own
interests are parties to numerous agreements with third parties,
including lenders, suppliers of raw materials, service providers
and utilities, which impose significant obligations on the power
companies. some of these obligations may be difficult for the power
companies to satisfy, depending, in some cases, on market
conditions and other factors. for example, during 2004 we faced
difficulties in obtaining and retaining adequate coal inventories
at many power generation facilities due to supply constraints on
coal and a rationing of services by railroads. any failure by the
power company to satisfy or obtain waivers of their obligations
under any of these agreements could cause them to lose the benefits
provided by the agreements, subject them to litigation, result in
reputational harm or impair their operations or financial results.
in addition, the operations or financial results of these power
companies could be adversely affected by the failure of any of
these third parties to perform their contractual obligations to the
power companies.
we are subject to extensive and
evolving energy, environmental and other governmental laws and
regulations. in the past several years, intensified scrutiny of the
energy market by federal, state and local authorities and the
public has resulted in increased regulatory and legal proceedings
involving energy companies, including those engaged in electric
power generation. we may incur substantial costs in complying with
current or future laws and regulations relating to power
generation, and our overall businesses and reputation may be
adversely affected by legal and regulatory proceedings arising out
of our power generation business. in particular, our power
generation activities are subject to extensive federal, state and
local environmental laws and regulations relating to, among others,
air quality, water quality, waste management, natural
table of contents
resources,
site remediation and health and safety. compliance with these
environmental laws and regulations may require us to commit
significant capital toward environmental monitoring, installation
of pollution control equipment, payment of emission fees, and
application for, and holding of, permits and licenses at our power
generation facilities. in certain instances, compliance with these
laws and regulations may require us to cease or curtail operations
of one or more of the power generation facilities in which we have
an ownership interest.
our failure to comply with
environmental laws or regulations or the associated requirements
and provisions of the permits and licenses may result in the
assessment of severe civil or criminal liabilities against us and
the need to expend substantial additional capital for compliance or
remediation. in particular, the environmental protection agency
recently issued the clean air interstate rule, which imposes
additional controls over power generation facility emissions and
requires significant reductions of emissions by 2010 (for phasei)
and 2015 (for phaseii). we are assessing the impact of this
legislation, but it may require us to make significant capital
expenditures on our power generation facilities. other legislation,
rules and requirements may be imposed on our power generation
activities by the federal government or one or more states.
insurance covering some of these environmental risks with respect
to our power generation facilities may not be available, and the
proceeds from insurance recovery, if any, may not be adequate to
cover our liabilities in a particular incident. as a result, our
financial condition and results of operations may be adversely
affected by an environmental or a health and safety problem at one
of our facilities.
we are subject to the risk of
unforeseen or catastrophic events, including terrorist attacks,
natural disasters or other hostile or catastrophic events. we may
not have insurance against these risks, and, in cases in which we
do have insurance, the insurance proceeds may be inadequate to
cover our losses.
in conducting our businesses around the world, we are subject to political, economic, legal, operational and other risks that are inherent in operating in many countries.
in conducting our businesses and
maintaining and supporting our global operations, we are subject to
risks of possible nationalization, expropriation, price controls,
capital controls, exchange controls and other restrictive
governmental actions, as well as the outbreak of hostilities. in
many countries, the laws and regulations applicable to the
securities and financial services industries are uncertain and
evolving, and it may be difficult for us to determine the exact
requirements of local laws in every market. our inability to remain
in compliance with local laws in a particular foreign market could
have a significant and negative effect not only on our businesses
in that market but also on our reputation generally. we are also
subject to the enhanced risk that transactions we structure might
not be legally enforceable in all cases.
the emergence of a pandemic or other
widespread health emergency, or concerns over the possibility of
such an emergency, could create economic and financial disruptions
in emerging markets and other areas throughout the world, and could
lead to operational difficulties (including travel limitations)
that could impair our ability to manage our businesses around the
world. in addition, unforeseen or catastrophic events, including
health emergencies, terrorist attacks or natural disasters, could
expose our insurance subsidiaries to significant losses.
our businesses and operations are
increasingly involved in emerging markets throughout the world, and
we expect this trend to continue. in the last several years,
various emerging market countries have experienced severe economic
and financial disruptions, including significant devaluations of
their currencies, capital and currency exchange controls, and low
or negative growth rates in their economies. the possible effects
of any of these conditions include an adverse impact on our
businesses and increased volatility in financial markets generally.
table of contents
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
there are no material unresolved
written comments that were received from the sec staff 180days
or more before the end of our fiscal year relating to our periodic
or current reports under the securities exchange act of 1934.
item2.
properties
our principal executive offices are
located at 85 broad street, new york, new york, and comprise
approximately 1million rentable square feet of leased space,
pursuant to a lease agreement expiring in june2008 (with options
to renew for up to 20
additional years). we also occupy over 680,000rentable
square feet at one new york plaza under lease
agreements expiring primarily in 2009 (with options to renew for up
to five additional years), and we lease space at various other
locations in the new york metropolitan area. in total, we lease
approximately 4.0million rentable square feet in the new york
metropolitan area.
in september2004, we completed the
construction of a new office building at 30 hudson street in jersey
city, new jersey. this building, which includes approximately 1.6million
gross square feet of office space, was constructed to
complement our offices in lower manhattan. the building is being
occupied in phases.
in august2005, we leased from
battery park city authority a parcel of land in lower manhattan,
pursuant to a ground lease. we currently intend to construct a 2.1million
gross-square-foot office building on the site that
will serve as our world headquarters. under the lease, battery park
city authority holds title to all improvements, including the
office building, subject to goldman sachs right of exclusive
possession and use for the 64-year duration of the lease.
under the terms of the ground lease,
we are required to make a lump-sum ground rent payment of $161million
by june2007 and to make additional periodic payments
during the term of the lease. we are obligated under the ground
lease to construct the office building by 2011 (subject to
extensions in the case of force majeure) in accordance with certain
pre-approved design standards. construction began on the building
in november2005, and we expect initial occupancy of the building
by 2009. the building is projected to cost between $2.3billion
and $2.5billion, including acquisition, development, fitout
and furnishings, financing and other related costs.
we are receiving a number of benefits
from the city and state of new york based on our agreement to
construct our world headquarters in lower manhattan. these benefits
are subject to recoupment or recapture if we do not proceed in
accordance with our agreements with the city and state of new york.
we have additional offices in the
united states and elsewhere in the americas. together, these
offices comprise approximately 2.1million rentable square feet
of leased space.
we also have offices in europe, asia
and africa. in europe, we have offices that total approximately 2.0million
rentable square feet, which includes our office space
in frankfurt, approximately 55,000rentable square feet of
which we expect to exit by 2006. our european headquarters is
located in london at peterborough court, pursuant to a lease
expiring in 2026. in total, we lease approximately 1.6million
rentable square feet in london through various leases, relating to
various properties.
in asia, we have offices that total
approximately 900,000rentable square feet. our headquarters in
this region are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in
hong kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently lease
approximately 290,000rentable square feet through a lease that
will expire in 2018. in hong kong, we currently lease approximately
220,000rentable square feet under lease agreements, the
majority of which will expire in fiscal 2012.
our occupancy expenses include costs
associated with office space held in excess of our current
requirements. this excess space, the cost of which is charged to
earnings as incurred, is
table of contents
being held for potential growth or to
replace currently occupied space that we may exit in the future. we
regularly evaluate our current and future space capacity in
relation to current and projected staffing levels. we may incur
exit costs in 2006 and thereafter to the extent we (i)reduce
our space capacity or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties
in the locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of
existing space that had been held for potential growth. these exit
costs may be material to our results of operations in a given
period.
item3.
legal proceedings
we are involved in a number of
judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings (including those
described below) concerning matters arising in connection with the
conduct of our businesses. we believe, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial
condition, but might be material to our operating results for any
particular period, depending, in part, upon the operating results
for such period. given the range of litigation and investigations
presently under way, our litigation expenses can be expected to
remain high.
ipo process matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and
goldman, sachs& co. are among the numerous financial services
companies that have been named as defendants in a variety of
lawsuits alleging improprieties in the process by which those
companies participated in the underwriting of public offerings in
recent years.
certain purported class actions have
been brought in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york, beginning on november3, 1998, by
purchasers of securities in public offerings as well as certain
purported issuers of such offerings, that allege that the
defendants have conspired to fix at 7% the discount that
underwriting syndicates receive from issuers of shares in certain
offerings in violation of federal antitrust laws. on march15,
1999, the purchaser plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended
complaint seeking treble damages as well as injunctive relief. the
defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint on
april29, 1999. on february9, 2001, the federal district
court granted with prejudice the defendants motion to dismiss the
claims asserted by the purchasers of securities on the ground that
they lacked antitrust standing. the plaintiffs in those actions
appealed, and by a decision dated december13, 2002, the u.s.court
of appeals for the second circuit vacated the dismissal
on the ground that the lower court had engaged in improper
fact-finding on the motion and remanded for consideration of other
potential bases for dismissal. on september28, 2001, the
defendants moved to dismiss the complaints filed by the issuer
plaintiffs on statute of limitations grounds. on september25,
2002, the federal district court denied the underwriter defendants
motion to dismiss. on march26, 2003, defendants moved to
dismiss the claims asserted by both the issuers and the purchasers
of securities on preemption grounds, but the motion was denied on
june27, 2003. on june24, 2003, defendants filed a motion
to dismiss the claims asserted by the purchasers of securities on
standing grounds, and on february24, 2004, the district court
granted the motion to dismiss as to the purchasers damages claims.
plaintiffs in both actions moved for class certification on
september16, 2004 and for summary judgment on november16,
2005.
goldman, sachs& co. is one of
numerous financial services firms that have been named as
defendants in purported class actions filed beginning on march9,
2001 in the u.s.district court for the southern district of
new york by purchasers of securities in public offerings, who claim
that the defendants engaged in a conspiracy to tie allocations in
certain offerings to higher customer brokerage commission rates as
well as purchase orders in the aftermarket, in violation of federal
antitrust laws. the plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended
complaint on january2, 2002 seeking treble damages as well as
injunctive relief. the defendants moved to dismiss the consolidated
amended complaint on may24, 2002, and the motion was granted
by a decision dated november3,2003. plaintiffs appealed,
and by a decision dated september28, 2005, the u.s.court
table of contents
of appeals for the second circuit reversed and remanded the action.
goldman, sachs& co. has also, together with other underwriters
in certain offerings as well as the issuers and certain of their
officers and directors, been named as a defendant in a number of
related lawsuits alleging, among other things, that the
prospectuses for the offerings violated the federal securities laws
by failing to disclose the existence of the alleged tying
arrangements. on july1, 2002, the underwriter defendants moved
to dismiss those complaints. by an opinion and order dated february19,
2003, the federal district court denied the motion to
dismiss in all material respects relating to the underwriter
defendants. by a decision dated october13, 2004, the federal
district court generally granted plaintiffs motion for class
certification in six focus cases. the underwriter defendants
petitioned the u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit to
review that certification decision on an interlocutory basis, and
the appellate court agreed to review the decision by order dated
june30,2005. on june10, 2004, plaintiffs entered
into a definitive settlement agreement with respect to their claims
against the issuer defendants and the issuers present or former
officers and directors named in the lawsuits. on june14,2004,
those parties jointly moved for approval of the proposed
settlement, and the district court granted preliminary approval by
a decision dated february15,2005.
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in an action commenced on may15,2002
in new york supreme court, new york county, by an official
committee of unsecured creditors on behalf of etoys, inc., alleging
that the firm intentionally underpriced etoys, inc.s initial
public offering. the action seeks, among other things,
consequential damages resulting from the alleged lower amount of
offering proceeds. on august1, 2002, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the complaint. on may2, 2003, the court
granted goldman, sachs& co.s motion to dismiss as to five of
the claims; plaintiff appealed from the dismissal of the five
claims, and goldman, sachs& co. appealed from the denial of
its motion as to the remaining claim. by a decision dated may20,
2004, the new york appellate division, first department
affirmed in part and reversed in part the lower courts ruling on
the firms motion to dismiss, permitting all claims to proceed
except the claim for fraud, as to which the appellate court granted
leave to replead. the appellate division granted leave to appeal,
and by a decision dated june7, 2005, the new york court of
appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part the appellate
divisions decision, dismissing claims for breach of contract,
professional malpractice and unjust enrichment, but permitting
claims for breach of fiduciary duty and fraud to continue. on
remand to the lower court, goldman, sachs& co. moved to
dismiss the claims that survived the appeal or, in the alternative,
for summary judgment.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and
certain of its affiliates have, together with various underwriters
in certain offerings, received subpoenas and requests for documents
and information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations in connection
with investigations relating to the public offering process.
goldman sachs has cooperated with the investigations. on january25,
2005, in connection with an investigation by the sec of
certain allocation practices employed by goldman, sachs& co.
and other firms, the sec announced a settlement pursuant to which
goldman, sachs& co., without admitting or denying the
allegations, (i)consented to the entry of an order permanently
enjoining goldman, sachs& co. from violating rule101 of
regulationm of the securities exchange act of 1934, by
inducing or attempting to induce customers receiving ipo
allocations to buy additional shares in the aftermarket; and (ii)agreed
to pay a penalty of $40million. in connection with
effectuation of the settlement, the sec filed a civil action
against goldman, sachs& co. in the u.s.district court for
the southern district of new york on january25, 2005, and the
district court entered a final judgment on february7, 2005
approving the settlement and granting the permanent injunctive
relief.
stock options litigation
hull trading co. l.l.c. and spear,
leeds& kellogg, l.p. (now known as goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p.), affiliates of the goldman sachs group, inc., are
among the numerous
table of contents
market makers in listed equity options that have
been named as defendants, together with five national securities
exchanges, in a purported class action brought in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york on behalf of
persons who purchased or sold listed equity options. the
consolidated class action complaint, filed on october4, 1999
(which consolidated certain previously pending actions and added
hull trading co. l.l.c. and other market makers as defendants),
generally alleges that the defendants engaged in a conspiracy to
preclude the multiple listing of certain equity options on the
exchanges and seeks treble damages under the antitrust laws as well
as injunctive relief. certain of the parties, including hull
trading co. l.l.c. and spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p., have
entered into a stipulation of settlement, subject to court
approval, which originally required hull trading co. l.l.c. to pay
an aggregate of $2.48million and spear, leeds& kellogg,
l.p. an aggregate of $19.59million. on february14, 2001,
the federal district court granted the motion of certain
non-settling defendants for summary judgment. by a decision dated
april24, 2001, the district court ruled that in light of that
order granting summary judgment, the court lacked jurisdiction to
entertain the proposed settlement. plaintiffs appealed, and by a
decision dated january9, 2003, the u.s.court of appeals
for the second circuit affirmed the grant of summary judgment, but
held that the decision did not divest the lower court of
jurisdiction to entertain the proposed settlement, and remanded for
further proceedings. by an order dated march17, 2003, the u.s.court
of appeals denied plaintiffs motion for rehearing or
rehearing en banc of the courts january9, 2003 decision. on
october26, 2005, certain defendants, including spear, leeds&
kellogg, l.p. and hull trading co. l.l.c., reached an
agreement to modify and restate the original settlement agreement,
reducing the overall settlement payments by certain market maker
defendants by approximately 25% of the original amounts. the
modified settlement remains subject to court approval.
iridium securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in two purported class action lawsuits
commenced, beginning on may26, 1999, in the u.s.district
court for the district of columbia brought on behalf of purchasers
of classa common stock of iridium world communications, ltd.
in a january1999 underwritten secondary offering of 7,500,000shares
of classa common stock at a price of $33.50per
share, as well as in the secondary market. the defendants in the
actions include iridium, certain of its officers and directors,
motorola, inc. (an investor in iridium) and the lead underwriters
in the offering, including goldman, sachs& co. the complaints
in both actions allege violations of the disclosure requirements of
the federal securities laws and seek compensatory and/or rescissory
damages. on may13, 2002, plaintiffs filed a consolidated
amended complaint alleging substantively identical claims as the
original complaints. on july15, 2002, the defendants moved to
dismiss the consolidated amended complaint, and by a decision dated
august31, 2004, the motion was denied. on september30,
2005, the underwriter defendants moved for summary judgment. on
april15, 2005, plaintiffs moved for class certification, and
the district court granted the motion, certifying two subclasses,
by a decision dated january9, 2006. goldman, sachs& co.
underwrote 996,500shares of common stock and goldman sachs
international underwrote 320,625shares of common stock for a
total offering price of approximately $44million.
on august13, 1999, iridium world
communications, ltd. filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy
laws.
world online litigation
several lawsuits have been commenced
in the netherlands courts based on alleged misstatements and
omissions relating to the initial public offering of world online
in march2000. goldman sachs and abn amro rothschild served as
joint global coordinators of the approximately 2.9billion
offering. goldman sachs international underwrote20,268,846shares
and goldman, sachs& co. underwrote6,756,282shares
for a total offering price of approximately 1.16
billion.
table of contents
on september11, 2000, several
dutch world online shareholders as well as a dutch entity
purporting to represent the interests of certain world online
shareholders commenced a proceeding in amsterdam district court
against abn amro bank n.v., also acting under the name of abn amro
rothschild, alleging misrepresentations and omissions relating to
the initial public offering of world online. the lawsuit seeks,
among other things, the return of the purchase price of the shares
purchased by the plaintiffs or unspecified damages. by a decision
dated may7, 2003, the court held that the claims failed and
dismissed the complaint. the plaintiffs appealed, and by a decision
dated october7, 2004, the amsterdam court of appeal affirmed
dismissal of the complaint.
in march2001, a dutch shareholders
association initiated legal proceedings in amsterdam district court
in connection with the world online offering. goldman sachs
international is named as a defendant in the writ served on its
dutch attorneys on march14, 2001. the amount of damages sought
is not specified in the writ. goldman sachs international filed its
statement of defense on january16, 2002 and a rejoinder on
january14, 2003. by a decision dated december17, 2003,
the court rejected the claims against goldman sachs international,
but found world online liable in an amount to be determined. on
march12, 2004, the dutch shareholders association appealed
from the dismissal of their claims against goldman sachs
international.
owens corning bondholder litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in a purported class action filed on april27,
2001 in the u.s.district court for the district of
massachusetts arising from a 1998 offering by owens corning of two
series of its notes. the defendants include certain of owens
cornings officers and directors and the underwriters for the
offering (including goldman, sachs& co., which was the lead
manager in the offering). the offering included a total of $550million
principal amount of notes, of which goldman, sachs&
co. underwrote $275million.
the lawsuit, brought by certain
institutional purchasers of the notes, alleges that the prospectus
issued in connection with the offering was false and misleading in
violation of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities
laws. the plaintiffs are seeking, among other things, unspecified
damages. the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss the complaint
on november14,2001. by a decision dated august26,
2002, the federal district court denied the underwriter defendants
motion to dismiss, and by a decision dated march9, 2004,
granted plaintiffs motion for class certification. on november4,
2005, the underwriter defendants reached an agreement in
principle to settle all claims against them for an aggregate
payment of $8.25million, of which goldman, sachs& co.
will contribute approximately $2.5million. the settlement
remains subject to, among other things, documentation and court
approval.
on october5, 2000, owens corning
filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
research independence matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and its
affiliates, together with other financial services firms, have
received requests for information from various governmental
agencies and self-regulatory organizations in connection with their review of research independence
issues. goldman sachs has cooperated with the requests.
on april28, 2003, a final global
settlement relating to investment research analysts alleged
conflicts of interest and involving various of the leading
securities firms operating in the united states, including goldman,
sachs& co., was announced. in that connection, without
admitting or denying the allegations, findings or conclusions by
various federal and state regulators, goldman sachs entered into
consents, agreements and other definitive documentation with the
sec, the nyse, the nasd and the utah division of securities, to
resolve their investigations of goldman, sachs& co. relating
to those matters. pursuant to the final arrangements, goldman, sachs&
co.
table of contents
agreed, among other things, to (i)pay an aggregate
of $25million as penalties, (ii)pay an aggregate of $25million
as disgorgement of commissions and other monies, (iii)contribute
an aggregate of $50million over five years to
provide independent third-party research to clients, (iv)contribute
an aggregate of $10million over five years for
investor education, (v)adopt various additional policies,
systems, procedures and other safeguards to ensure further the
integrity of goldman, sachs& co. investment research and (vi)be
permanently restrained and enjoined from violating certain
rules of the nyse and the nasd relating to investment research
activities. in connection with the global settlement, goldman, sachs&
co. and other firms also subscribed to a voluntary
initiative imposing restrictions on the allocation of shares in
initial public offerings to executives and directors of public
companies. in connection with effectuation of the global
settlement, in a civil action brought by the sec in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york against the
settling firms, including goldman, sachs& co., on october31,
2003, the court entered a final judgment imposing the permanent
restraint and injunction. in addition, goldman, sachs& co. has
entered into settlement stipulations with all 50states and
certain u.s.territories in connection with the global
settlement. current or future civil lawsuits implicating investment
research analysts conflicts of interest were not settled as part
of the global settlement. the global settlement also did not
resolve potential charges involving individual employees, including
supervisors.
goldman, sachs& co. is one of
several investment firms that have been named as defendants in
substantively identical purported class actions filed in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york alleging
violations of the federal securities laws in connection with
research coverage of certain issuers and seeking compensatory
damages. in one such action, relating to coverage of rsl
communications, inc. commenced on july5, 2003, goldman, sachs&
co. moved to dismiss the complaint on january13, 2004,
and the motion was denied by a decision dated may21, 2004. on
november9, 2004, plaintiffs moved for class certification, and
the district court granted the motion by a decision dated august15,
2005. defendants petitioned the u.s.court of appeals
for the second circuit to review that certification decision on an
interlocutory basis and, by an order dated december22, 2005,
the appellate court denied the petition in part and otherwise held
the petition in abeyance for consideration by the panel assigned to
review the certification decision in the action described under
ipo process matters above. goldman, sachs& co. is also a
defendant in several actions relating to research coverage of
exodus communications, inc. that commenced beginning in may2003.
the actions were consolidated, and on march15, 2004, goldman,
sachs& co. moved to dismiss.
a purported shareholder derivative
action was filed in new york supreme court, new york county on june13,
2003 against the goldman sachs group, inc. and its board
of directors, which, as amended, alleges that the directors
breached their fiduciary duties in connection with the firms
research as well as the firms ipo allocations practices. an
amended complaint was filed on march3, 2004, which was further
amended on june14, 2005.
the goldman sachs group, inc.,
goldman, sachs& co. and henry m. paulson,jr. have been
named as defendants in a purported class action filed originally on
july18, 2003 in the u.s.district court for the district
of nevada on behalf of purchasers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
stock from july1, 1999 through may7, 2002. the complaint
alleges that defendants breached their fiduciary duties and
violated the federal securities laws in connection with the firms
research activities. the complaint seeks, among other things,
unspecified compensatory damages and/or rescission. the action was
transferred on consent to the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york, defendants moved to dismiss the
amended complaint on august30,2004, and the district court
granted the motion with leave to amend by order dated february17,
2005. plaintiffs filed a second amended complaint on february25,
2005, and defendants filed a motion to dismiss on march24,
2005.
table of contents
enron litigation matters
goldman sachs affiliates are
defendants in certain actions arising relating to enron corp.,
which filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on
december2, 2001.
goldman, sachs& co. and
co-managing underwriters have been named as defendants in certain
purported securities class and individual actions commenced
beginning on december14,2001 in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of texas and california superior
court brought by purchasers of $222,500,000 of exchangeable notes
of enron corp. in august1999. the notes were mandatorily
exchangeable in 2002 into shares of enron oil& gas company
held by enron corp. or their cash equivalent. the complaints also
name as defendants the goldman sachs group, inc. as well as certain
past and present officers and directors of enron corp. and the
companys outside accounting firm. the complaints generally allege
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities
laws and/or state law, and seek compensatory damages. goldman, sachs&
co. underwrote $111,250,000 principal amount of the notes.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co. moved to
dismiss the class action complaint in the texas federal court on
march15, 2004, and by a decision dated december5, 2005,
the motion was granted as to the goldman sachs group, inc. but
denied as to goldman, sachs& co. plaintiffs in various
consolidated actions relating to enron entered into a settlement
with banc of america securities llc on july2, 2004 and with
citigroup, inc. on june10, 2005, including with respect to
claims relating to the exchangeable notes offering, as to which
affiliates of those settling defendants were two of the three
underwriters (together with goldman, sachs& co.). the settling
parties have yet to announce what portion of the settlement will
apply to the exchangeable notes offering.
several funds which allegedly
sustained investment losses of approximately $125million in
connection with secondary market purchases of the exchangeable
notes as well as zero coupon convertible notes of enron corp.
commenced an action in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york on january16, 2002. as amended, the
lawsuit names as defendants the underwriters of the august1999
offering, the companys outside accounting firm, various former
officers and directors of enron corp., as well as other financial
services firms, and alleges violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws, fraud and
misrepresentation. by an order dated june24, 2002, the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation entered an order
transferring that action to the texas federal district court for
purposes of coordinated or consolidated pretrial proceedings with
other matters relating to enron corp. on march20, 2002,
goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the complaint. by a
decision dated december10, 2003, the motion was granted in
part and denied in part. goldman, sachs& co. sought
clarification and reconsideration of the decision, and on june13,
2005, the federal district court granted goldman, sachs&
co.s motion for reconsideration and provided for further briefing
on goldman, sachs& co.s motion to dismiss.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and
goldman, sachs& co. have been named as defendants in two
substantively identical purported class actions filed on june5,
2003 in oregon circuit court, multnomah county, on behalf of
former shareholders of portland general corporation. the complaints
generally allege that defendants breached their fiduciary duties in
connection with portland generals 1997 merger with enron corp., in
respect of which goldman, sachs& co. acted as financial
advisor to portland general. the defendants also include arthur
andersen, llp, andersen-u.s., and certain former officers and
directors of portland general. the complaints seek unspecified
compensatory damages. in july2003, defendants removed the actions
to the u.s.district court for the district of oregon, and the
actions were transferred by the judicial panel on multidistrict
litigation to the u.s.district court for the southern district
of texas for coordinated proceedings with other actions relating to
enron corp. on february25, 2004, the goldman sachs group, inc.
and goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the action, and on
august5,2004, the federal district court granted the motion
to dismiss and denied plaintiffs motion to remand the actions to
statecourt.on october14, 2004, plaintiffs moved for
reconsideration, and on november10, 2004, the motion was
denied.
table of contents
goldman, sachs& co. is among
numerous defendants in two substantively identical actions filed in
the u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york
beginning in november2003 seeking to recover as fraudulent
transfers and/or preferences payments made by enron corp. in
repurchasing its commercial paper shortly before its bankruptcy
filing. goldman, sachs& co., which had acted as a commercial
paper dealer for enron corp., resold to enron corp. approximately
$30million of commercial paper as principal, and as an agent
facilitated enron corp.s repurchase of additional commercial paper
from various customers who have also been named as defendants.
goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the complaints on february19,
2004, but the bankruptcy court denied the motion as well
as similar motions by other defendants by a decision dated june15,2005.
on august1, 2005, various defendants including
goldman, sachs& co. petitioned to have the denial of their
motion to dismiss reviewed by the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york.
exodus securities litigation
by an amended complaint dated july11,
2002, goldman, sachs& co. and the other lead
underwriters for the february2001 offering of 13,000,000shares
of common stock and $575,000,000 of 51/4%convertible
subordinated notes of exodus communications, inc. were added as
defendants in a purported class action pending in the u.s.district
court for the northern district of california. the
complaint, which also names as defendants certain officers and
directors of exodus communications, inc., alleges violations of the
disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and seeks
compensatory damages. on october23, 2002, the underwriter
defendants moved to dismiss the complaint. by a decision dated
august19, 2003, the district court granted the defendants
motion to dismiss with leave to replead, and the plaintiffs filed a
third amended complaint on january15, 2004. on march12,
2004, the underwriter defendants moved to dismiss the third amended
complaint, and by a decision dated august5, 2005, the district
court denied the motion. the underwriter defendants moved for
reconsideration and clarification on august30, 2005, but the
motion was denied by an order dated september12, 2005.
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote5,200,000shares of
common stock for a total offering price of approximately
$96,200,000, and$230,000,000 principal amount of the notes.
on september26, 2001, exodus
communications, inc. filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy
laws.
montana power litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and the
goldman sachs group, inc. have been named as defendants in a
purported class action commenced originally on october1, 2001
in montana district court, second judicial district on behalf of
former shareholders of montana power company. the complaint
generally alleges that montana power company violated montana law
by failing to procure shareholder approval of certain corporate
strategies and transactions, that the companys board breached its
fiduciary duties in pursuing those strategies and transactions, and
that goldman, sachs& co. aided and abetted the boards
breaches and rendered negligent advice in its role as financial
advisor to the company. the complaint seeks, among other things,
compensatory damages. in addition to goldman, sachs& co. and
the goldman sachs group, inc., the defendants include montana power
company, certain of its officers and directors, an outside law firm
for the montana power company, and certain companies that purchased
assets from montana power company and its affiliates. the montana
state court denied motions to dismiss by a decision dated august1,
2002. on july18, 2003, following the bankruptcies of
certain defendants in the action, defendants removed the action to
federal court, the u.s.district court for the district of
montana, butte division.
on october26, 2004, a creditors
committee of touch america holdings, inc. brought an action against
goldman, sachs& co., the goldman sachs group, inc., and a
former outside law firm for montana power company in montana
district court, second judicial district. the complaint asserts
that touch america holdings, inc. is the successor to montana power
corporation and alleges
table of contents
substantially the same claims as in the
purported class action. defendants removed the action to federal
court on november19,2004. on january14, 2005, defendants
moved to dismiss the complaint, but the motion was denied by a
decision dated june10,2005.
worldcom bondholders litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and other
underwriters of worldcom, inc. bonds have been named as defendants
in certain purported securities class and individual actions
commenced beginning on july19, 2002 alleging that the offering
materials issued in connection with certain securities offerings
were false and misleading. certain of the lawsuits (some of which
were originally filed in various state courts and removed to
federal court) have been transferred by order of the judicial panel
on multidistrict litigation to the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york. goldman, sachs& co. underwrote
$75,000,000 principal amount out of a total principal amount of
$5,000,000,000 of notes in a may24, 2000 offering. among the
defendants in these actions in addition to the underwriters are
certain of worldcom, inc.s former officers and/or directors,
and/or worldcom, inc.s former outside accounting firm. each of
these actions seeks, among other things, compensatory damages. the
district court denied the underwriter defendants motion to dismiss
by a decision dated may19,2003 and granted plaintiffs
motion for class certification by an order dated october24,
2003. on august20, 2004, the underwriter defendants moved for
summary judgment and plaintiffs cross-moved for partial summary
judgment as to liability. by a decision dated december15,
2004, the district court granted in part and denied in part the
motions. all defendants, including goldman, sachs& co., have
since entered into agreements to settle the class action claims,
with goldman, sachs& co. contributing approximately $12.5million,
and the settlement was approved by the district court by a
decision dated september21, 2005, but several class members
have appealed from certain aspects of the approval. that settlement
did not resolve claims brought by certain investors who opted out
of the class. on june22, october27 and december28,
2005, respectively, the underwriter defendants in certain of the
remaining individual actions agreed to settle certain of these
actions, and goldman, sachs& co. contributed approximately
$1.94million toward those settlements.
on july21, 2002, worldcom, inc.
filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
global crossing and asia global crossing securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in a consolidated class action lawsuit in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
relating to various securities offerings by global crossing, ltd.
and asia global crossing ltd. in which goldman, sachs& co.
acted as an underwriter. the claims had originally been asserted in
separate actions, reflected in an amended complaint filed on january28,
2003 as to global crossing, ltd. and in a complaint filed
on november8, 2002 as to asia global crossing ltd., but the
claims were consolidated into a single amended complaint on august11,
2003, which was further amended on march22, 2004
(including to drop the goldman sachs group, inc. as a defendant).
the consolidated action includes claims relating to global
crossing, ltd.s concurrent april2000 offerings of 43million
shares of common stock at $33per share and 4.6million
shares of 6 3/4% cumulative preferred stock at $250per share,
as well as asia global crossing ltd.s october2000 initial public
offering of 68,500,000shares of common stock at a price of $7per
share. goldman, sachs& co. acted as a co-lead
underwriter of both global crossing, ltd. offerings, underwriting
12.9million shares of common stock and 1,840,000shares of
convertible preferred stock for a total offering price of
approximately $886million. goldman, sachs& co. underwrote20,670,000shares
of common stock in the asia global
crossing ltd. offering for a total offering price of approximately
$145million. the claims assert violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws as to such offerings
and seek compensatory and/or rescissory damages. in addition to the
lead and other underwriters in the offerings, the defendants as to
such claims originally included certain officers and directors of
table of contents
global crossing, ltd. and asia global crossing ltd. as well as the
companies former outside auditors.
on april21, 2003, the
underwriter defendants as to the global crossing, ltd. offerings
moved to dismiss the claims relating to such offerings; the motion
was denied in significant part by a decision dated december18,
2003. on july23, 2004, the underwriter defendants as to the
asia global crossing ltd. offering moved to dismiss the claims
relating to that offering. on march1, 2005, plaintiffs entered
into a definitive settlement agreement with citigroup, inc. and
certain related parties, including as to claims asserted against
such parties in respect of the various offerings in which goldman,
sachs& co. participated. the settlement, pursuant to which the
citigroup defendants have agreed to pay $75million, does not
resolve claims against the other members of the underwriting
syndicates, including goldman, sachs& co. the various officer
and director defendants as well as the former auditors separately
entered into settlement agreements.
global crossing, ltd. filed for
protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on january28,
2002, and asia global crossing ltd. filed for such protection on
november17, 2002.
adelphia communications fraudulent conveyance litigations
goldman, sachs& co. is among
numerous entities named as defendants in two adversary proceedings
commenced in the u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern
district of new york, one on july6, 2003 by a creditors
committee, and the second on or about july31, 2003 by an
equity committee of adelphia communications, inc. the nearly
identical complaints seek, among other things, to recover, as
fraudulent conveyances, payments made allegedly by adelphia
communications, inc. and its affiliates to certain brokerage firms,
including approximately $62.9million allegedly paid to
goldman, sachs& co., in respect of margin calls made in the
ordinary course of business on accounts owned by members of the
family that formerly controlled adelphia communications, inc.
specialist matters
spear, leeds& kellogg
specialists llc (slks)and certain affiliates have received
requests for information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations as part of
an industry-wide investigation relating to activities of floor
specialists in recent years. goldman sachs has cooperated with the
requests.
on march30, 2004, a final global
settlement with the sec and the nyse was announced covering certain
activities during the years 1999 through 2003 of certain specialist
firms on the nyse, including slks. without admitting or denying the
allegations, slks and the other specialist firms entered into
settlements to resolve these sec and nyse investigations of the
firms with respect to those activities. the slks settlement
involves, among other things, (i)findings by the sec and the
nyse that slks violated certain federal securities laws and nyse
rules, and in some cases failed to supervise certain individual
specialists, in connection with trades that allegedly disadvantaged
customer orders, (ii)a cease and desist order against slks,
(iii)a censure of slks, (iv)slks agreement to pay an
aggregate of $45.3million in disgorgement and a penalty to be
used to compensate customers, (v)certain undertakings with
respect to slks systems and procedures, and (vi)slks
retention of an independent consultant to review and evaluate
certain of slks compliance systems, policies and procedures.
comparable findings were made and sanctions imposed in the
settlements with other specialist firms. the settlement did not
resolve the related private civil actions against slks and other
firms or regulatory investigations involving individuals.
slks, spear, leeds& kellogg,
l.p. and the goldman sachs group, inc. are among numerous
defendants named in purported class actions brought beginning in
october2003 on behalf of investors in the u.s.district court
for the southern district of new york alleging violations
table of contents
of the
federal securities laws and state common law in connection with
nyse floor specialist activities. the actions seek unspecified
compensatory damages, restitution and disgorgement on behalf of
purchasers and sellers of unspecified securities between october17,
1998 and october15, 2003. plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint on september16, 2004,
defendants moved to dismiss the amended complaint on november16,
2004, and the motion was granted in part and denied in part by
a decision dated december13, 2005.
treasury matters
on september4, 2003, the sec
announced that goldman, sachs& co. had settled an
administrative proceeding arising from certain trading in u.s.treasury
bonds over an approximately eight-minute period after
goldman, sachs& co. received an october31, 2001 telephone
call from a washington,d.c.-based political consultant
concerning a forthcoming treasury refunding announcement. the
administrative complaint alleged that goldman, sachs& co. (i)violated
section15(c)(1) and rule15c1-2 of the
securities exchange act of 1934 as a result of the trading and (ii)violated
section 15(f) of the securities exchange act of
1934 by failing to maintain policies and procedures specifically
addressed to the possible misuse of information obtained by
consultants from confidential government sources. without admitting
or denying the allegations, goldman, sachs& co. consented to
the entry of an order that, among other things, (i)censured
goldman, sachs& co.; (ii)directed goldman, sachs&
co. to cease and desist from committing or causing any violations
of section15(c)(1)(a) and (c)and 15(f) of, and rule15c1-2
under, the securities exchange act of 1934; (iii)ordered
goldman, sachs& co. to pay disgorgement and
prejudgment interest in the amount of $1,742,642, and a civil
monetary penalty of $5million; and (iv)directed goldman,
sachs& co. to conduct a review of its policies and procedures
and adopt, implement and maintain policies and procedures
consistent with the order and that review. goldman, sachs& co.
also undertook to pay $2,562,740 in disgorgement and interest
relating to certain trading in u.s.treasury bond futures
during the same eight-minute period.
goldman, sachs& co. has been
named as a defendant in a purported class action filed on march10,
2004 in the u.s.district court for the northern district
of illinois on behalf of holders of short positions in 30-year u.s.treasury
futures and options on the morning of october31,
2001. the complaint alleges that the firm purchased 30-year bonds
and futures prior to the treasurys refunding announcement that
morning based on non-public information about that announcement,
and that such purchases increased the costs of covering such short
positions. the complaint also names as defendants the washington,d.c.-based
political consultant who allegedly was the source
of the information, a former goldman, sachs& co. economist who
allegedly received the information, and another company and one of
its employees who also allegedly received and traded on the
information prior to its public announcement. the complaint alleges
violations of the federal commodities and antitrust laws, as well
as illinois statutory and common law, and seeks, among other
things, unspecified damages including treble damages under the
antitrust laws. on june28,2004, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the complaint, and by a decision dated march28,2005,
the district court dismissed the antitrust and
illinois state law claims but permitted the federal commodities law
claims to proceed.
mutual fundmatters
goldman, sachs& co. and certain
mutual fund affiliates have received subpoenas and requests for
information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations including the sec as part of
the industry-wide investigation relating to the practices of mutual
funds and their customers. goldman, sachs& co. and its
affiliates have cooperated with such requests.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.,
goldman, sachs& co. and various asset management affiliates
and employees have been named as defendants in several putative
consolidated class and derivative actions commenced in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york beginning in
april2004 by purported shareholders of certain goldman sachs
mutual funds. the consolidated complaint also names as nominal
defendants certain of the goldman sachs family of mutual funds. the
cases are brought on behalf of all persons or entities that held
shares in these mutual funds between april2, 1999 and january9,
2004, and allege violations of the investment company act
of 1940, the investment advisers act of 1940 and common law
breaches of fiduciary duty. the complaint alleges, among other
things, that goldman sachs charged the mutual funds improper rule12b-1
fees, paid excessive brokerage commissions and made
other undisclosed payments to brokers in exchange for selling
shares of the mutual funds, and made untrue statements of material
fact in registration statements and reports filed pursuant to the
investment company act. the complaint further alleges that the
funds trustees, officers and directors breached their fiduciary
duties by, among other things, failing to prevent such violations.
the complaint seeks compensatory and punitive damages; rescission
of the funds investment advisory agreements with goldman sachs and
recovery of fees paid; an accounting of all fund-related fees,
commissions and other payments; restitution of all unlawfully or
discriminatorily-obtained fees and charges; and costs and expenses
incurred in connection with these lawsuits. defendants moved to
dismiss the complaint on may2, 2005, and the motion was
granted by a memorandum and order dated january13, 2006.
refco securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and the
other lead underwriters for the august2005 initial public offering
of 26,500,000shares of common stock of refco inc. are among
the defendants in various putative class actions commenced beginning
in october 2005 by refco inc.
investors and derivative actions filed on behalf of refco inc. in
response to certain publicly reported events that culminated in the
october17, 2005 filing by refco inc. and certain affiliates for
protection under u.s.bankruptcy laws. the actions are pending
in the u.s.district court for the southern district of new
york. the putative class actions allege violations of the
disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and seek
compensatory damages, while the derivative complaints allege that
refco inc.s board breached its fiduciary duties and that the
underwriters aided and abetted that breach. in addition to the
underwriters, the actions name as defendants refco inc. and certain of
its affiliates, certain officers and directors of refco inc., thomas h.
lee partners, l.p. (which held a majority of refco inc.s equity through
certain funds it manages) and grant thornton (refco inc.s outside
auditor). goldman, sachs& co. underwrote 5,639,200shares
of common stock at a price of $22per share for a total
offering price of approximately $124million.
goldman,
sachs& co. and the other lead underwriters for refco inc.s
initial public offering are also among the defendants in a putative
class action filed in january 2006 on behalf of customers that held
securities custodied with certain refco inc. affiliates. the
complaint alleges that the defendants violated federal securities
laws by publishing financial statements of refco
inc., including in the initial public offering prospectus, that were
false and misleading and that
misled such customers with respect to custodying their securities.
a purported shareholder derivative
action was filed in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york on november2, 2005 on behalf of the
goldman sachs group, inc. against certain of its officers and
directors. the complaint alleges that the individual defendants
breached their fiduciary duties by failing to ensure that adequate
due diligence was conducted in connection with the refco inc. initial
public offering. on october17, 2005, refco inc. filed for
protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
goldman, sachs& co. has,
together with other underwriters of the refco inc. initial public
offering, received requests for information from various
governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations. goldman,
sachs& co. is cooperating with those requests.
table of contents
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
there were no matters submitted to a
vote of security holders during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year ended november25, 2005.
table of contents
executive officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
set forth below are the name, age,
present title, principal occupation and certain biographical
information for our executive officers as of february1, 2006,
all of whom have been appointed by and serve at the pleasure of our
board of directors.
henry m. paulson,jr., 59
mr.paulson has been our chairman
and chief executive officer since may1999, and a director since
august1998. he was co-chairman and chief executive officer or
co-chief executive officer of the goldman sachs group, l.p., our
predecessor, from june1998 to may1999, and served as chief
operating officer from december1994 to june1998. mr.paulson
is not on the board of any public company other than goldman sachs.
he is currently the chairman of the financial services forum. he is
affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including as a
member of the board of directors of catalyst. he also serves on the
advisory board of the tsinghua university school of economics and
management. he is chairman of the board of directors of the nature
conservancy, co-chairman of the asia/pacific council of the nature
conservancy and chairman emeritus of the peregrine fund, inc.
lloyd c. blankfein, 51
mr.blankfein has been our
president and chief operating officer since january2004, and a
director since april2003. prior to that, from april2002 until
january2004, he was a vice chairman of goldman sachs, with
management responsibility for the fixed income, currency and
commodities division (ficc)and the equities division. prior to
becoming a vice chairman, he had served as co-head of ficc since
its formation in 1997. from 1994 to 1997, he headed or co-headed
the currency and commodities division. mr.blankfein is not on
the board of any public company other than goldman sachs. he is
affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including as a
member of the harvard university committee on university resources,
as a trustee of the new york historical society, as an overseer of
the weill medical college of cornell university, as a director of
the partnership for new york city and as a director of the robin
hood foundation.
alan m. cohen, 55
mr.cohen has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our global head of compliance
since february2004. from 1991 until january2004, he was a partner
in the law firm of omelveny& myers llp. mr.cohen is also
affiliated with the chelsea piers scholarship fund, a non-profit
organization.
edward c. forst, 45
mr.forst has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our chief administrative
officer since february2004. prior to that, he was our chief of
staff for ficc from november2003 to february2004 (after having
served in that position earlier from july2000 to march2002), our
chief of staff for the equities division from august2003 to
february2004, and co-head of global credit markets in ficc from
march2002 to august2003. prior to july2000, mr.forst served
as co-head of our global bank debt business. mr.forst serves
as chairman of the board of directors of the bond market
association. he also serves as a trustee of the woods hole
oceanographic institution, a non-profit organization, and as
co-chairman of the harvard university committee on student
excellence and opportunity.
table of contents
kevin w. kennedy, 57
mr.kennedy has been our
executive vice president human capital management since
december2001. from 1999 until 2001, he served as a member of the
executive office. from 1994 to 1999, he served as head of the
americas group, in the investment banking division, and, from 1988
to 1994, as head of corporate finance. mr.kennedy is a life
trustee and a former chairman of the board of hamilton college, a
managing director and secretary and treasurer of the board of the
metropolitan opera, a trustee of the new york public library, a
member of the board of directors of the wallace foundation and an
honorary trustee of the chewonki foundation.
suzanne m. nora johnson, 48
ms.nora johnson has been a vice
chairman of goldman sachs since november2004. she has served as
chairman of the global markets institute since april2004 and has
headed our global investment research division since february2002.
ms.nora johnson served as head of our global healthcare
business in the investment banking division from 1994 to 2002. she
also serves on the boards of the goldman sachs foundation, the
carnegie institution of washington, the university of southern
california, rand health, technoserve, children now and womens
world banking, and is a trustee of the brookings institution and
the council for excellence in government.
gregory k. palm, 57
mr.palm has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs since may1999, and our general
counsel and head or co-head of the legal department since may1992.
esta e. stecher, 48
ms.stecher has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our general counsel and co-head
of the legal department since december2000. from 1994 to 2000, she
was head of the firms tax department, over which she continues to
have senior oversight responsibility. she is also a trustee of
columbia university and a member of the board of directors of the
securities industry association.
david a. viniar, 50
mr.viniar has been an executive
vice president of goldman sachs and our chief financial officer
since may1999. he has been the head of operations, technology and
finance division since december2002. he was head of the finance
division and co-head of credit risk management and advisory and
firmwide risk from december2001 to december2002. mr.viniar
was co-head of operations, finance and resources from march1999 to
december2001. he was chief financial officer of the goldman sachs
group, l.p. from march1999 to may1999. from july1998 until
march1999, he was deputy chief financial officer and from 1994
until july1998, he was head of finance, with responsibility for
controllers and treasury. from 1992 to 1994, he was head of
treasury and prior to that was in the structured finance department
of investment banking. he also serves on the board of trustees of
union college.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market on which our
common stock is traded is the nyse. information relating to the
high and low sales prices per share of our common stock, as
reported by the consolidated tape association, for each full
quarterly period during fiscal 2004 and 2005 is set forth under the
heading supplemental financial information common stock
price range in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
as of january30, 2006, there were 6,159 holders
of record of
our common stock.
during fiscal 2004 and 2005,
dividends of $0.25per share of common stock were declared on
december17, 2003, march22, 2004, june21, 2004,
september20, 2004, december15, 2004, march16, 2005,
june15, 2005 and september19,2005. the holders of our
common stock share proportionately on a per share basis in all
dividends and other distributions on common stock declared by our
board of directors.
the declaration of dividends by
goldman sachs is subject to the discretion of our board of
directors. our board of directors will take into account such
matters as general business conditions, our financial results,
capital requirements, contractual, legal and regulatory
restrictions on the payment of dividends by us to our shareholders
or by our subsidiaries to us, the effect on our debt ratings and
such other factors as our board of directors may deem relevant. see
business regulation in parti, item1 of the annual
report on form10-k for a discussion of potential regulatory
limitations on our receipt of funds from our regulated subsidiaries.
table of contents
the table below sets forth the
information with respect to purchases made by or on behalf of the
goldman sachs group, inc. or any affiliated purchaser (as defined
in rule10b-18(a)(3) under the securities exchange act of
1934), of our common stock during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year ended november25, 2005.
total number of
maximum number
average
shares purchased
of shares that may
total number
price
as part of publicly
yet be purchased
of shares
paid per
announced plans
under the plans or
period
purchased(2)
share
or programs(3)
programs(3)
month#1
(august27, 2005 to
september30, 2005)
4,745,300
$
119.48
4,745,300
58,426,179
month#2
(october1, 2005 to
october 28, 2005)
13,184,100
$
119.22
13,184,100
45,242,079
month#3
(october29, 2005 to
november25, 2005)
2,528,700
$
128.65
2,528,700
42,713,379
total(1)
20,458,100
$
120.45
20,458,100
(1)
goldman sachs did not repurchase shares of
its common stock as part of the repurchase program
during a self-imposed black-out period from the
last two weeks of the fiscal quarter through the date
of the earnings release for the quarter.
(2)
no shares were purchased other than through
our publicly announced repurchase program during the
fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended november25,
2005.
(3)
on march21, 2000, we announced that our
board of directors had approved a repurchase program,
pursuant to which up to 15million shares of our
common stock may be repurchased. this repurchase
program was increased by an aggregate of 160million shares by resolutions of our board of
directors adopted on june18,2001, march18,2002,
november20,2002,
january30,2004, january25,2005
and september16,2005. the repurchase
program is intended to help maintain our total
shareholders equity at appropriate levels and to
substantially offset increases in share count over
time resulting from employee equity-based
compensation. the repurchase program has been
effected primarily through regular open-market
purchases, and is influenced by, among other factors,
the level of our common shareholders equity, our
overall capital position, employee equity awards
granted and exercises of employee stock options, the
prevailing market price of our common stock and
general market conditions. the total remaining
authorization under the repurchase program was
29,495,079shares as of january30, 2006. the
repurchase program has no set expiration or
termination date.
information relating to compensation
plans under which equity securities of the registrant are
authorized for issuance is set forth in partiii, item12
of the annual report on form10-k.
item6.
selected financial data
the selected financial data table is
set forth under partii, item8 of the annual report on form
10-k.
table of contents
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
index
page
no.
introduction
executive overview
business environment
certain risk factors that may affect our business
critical accounting policies
fair value
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
use of estimates
results of operations
financial overview
segment operating results
geographic data
off-balance-sheet arrangements
capital and funding
capital
short-term borrowings
credit ratings
contractual obligations and contingent commitments
regulation
risk management
risk management structure
market risk
credit risk
derivatives
liquidity risk
operational risk
recent accounting developments
table of contents
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global
investment banking, securities and investment management firm that
provides a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals.
our activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking. we provide a broad range of investment banking services to a
diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals.
trading and principal investments. we facilitate client transactions with a
diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals
and take proprietary positions through market making in, trading of and investing in
fixed income and equity products, currencies, commodities and derivatives on such
products. in addition, we engage in specialist and market-making activities on
equities and options exchanges and we clear client transactions on major stock,
options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection with our merchant banking and
other investing activities, we make principal investments directly and through funds
that we raise and manage.
asset management and securities services. we provide investment advisory and
financial planning services and offer investment products across all major asset
classes to a diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide, and provide
prime brokerage services, financing services and securities lending services to
mutual funds, pension funds, hedge funds, foundations and high-net-worth individuals
worldwide.
unless specifically stated otherwise,
all references to 2005, 2004 and 2003 refer to our fiscal years
ended, or the dates, as the context requires, november25,
2005, november26, 2004 and november28, 2003, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman
sachs, we, us and our, we mean the goldman sachs group, inc.
(group inc.), a delaware corporation, and its consolidated
subsidiaries. references herein to the annual report on form10-k
are to our annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year
ended november25, 2005.
in this discussion, we have included
statements that may constitute forward-looking statements within
the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995. these forward-looking statements are
not historical facts but instead represent only our beliefs
regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are
inherently uncertain and beyond our control. these statements
relate to our future plans and objectives, among other things. by
identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are
alerting you to the possibility that our actual results may differ,
possibly materially, from the results indicated in these
forward-looking statements. important factors, among others, that
could cause our results to differ, possibly materially, from those
indicated in the forward-looking statements are discussed below
under certain risk factors that may affect our business as
well as risk factors in parti, item1a of the annual
report on form10-k and cautionary statement pursuant to the
private securities litigation reform act of 1995 in parti,
item1 of the annual report on form10-k.
table of contents
executive overview
our diluted earnings per common share
were $11.21 for 2005, a 26% increase compared with 2004. return on
average tangible common shareholders equity was 27.6%(1)
and return on average common shareholders equity was 21.8%.
our results in 2005 reflected strong growth in net revenues from
trading and principal investments and asset management and
securities services as well as higher net revenues in investment
banking. the increase in trading and principal investments
reflected significantly higher net revenues in fixed income,
currency and commodities (ficc), as all major businesses performed
well. during 2005, ficc operated in an environment generally
characterized by strong customer-driven activity, tight, but
volatile, credit spreads, higher energy prices and a flatter yield
curve. net revenues in equities also improved significantly
compared with the prior year, reflecting strong performance across
the business. equities operated in an environment characterized by
generally higher equity prices, improved customer-driven activity
and continued low levels of market volatility. net revenues in our
principal investments business also increased significantly,
primarily reflecting a gain on our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)as
well as gains from real estate principal investments. the strong
net revenue growth in asset management and securities services
primarily reflected higher assets under management and higher
customer balances in securities services. the increase in
investment banking net revenues was due to significantly higher net
revenues in debt underwriting and improved results in financial
advisory, primarily reflecting an increase in industry-wide
corporate activity, partially offset by lower net revenues in
equity underwriting. our investment banking backlog at the end of
2005 was significantly higher than at the end of 2004.(2)
our operating results for 2005
reflected generally favorable market conditions and strong
customer-driven activity levels. we continued to see favorable
trading and investing opportunities for our clients and ourselves,
particularly during the second half of our fiscal year.
consequently, during the second half of 2005 we increased our
market risk, particularly in equities and interest rate products,
to capitalize on these opportunities. net revenues in our equities
and ficc businesses surpassed previous peak levels. our investment
banking net revenues reflected our best performance in four years
as corporate activity continued to recover, particularly in
announced and completed mergers and acquisitions and debt
underwriting, although competitive pressures remained. we also
continued to focus on managing our capital base, with the goal of
optimizing our returns while, at the same time, growing our
businesses. during 2005, we repurchased 63.7million shares of
our stock at a cost of $7.11billion. with respect to the
regulatory environment, financial services firms continued to be
under intense scrutiny, with the volume and amount of claims
against financial institutions and other related costs remaining
significant. given the range of litigation and investigations
presently under way, our litigation expenses can be expected to
remain high.
though our operating results were
strong in 2005, our business, by its nature, does not produce
predictable earnings. our results in any given period can be
materially affected by conditions in global financial markets and
economic conditions generally. for a further discussion of these
trends and other factors affecting our businesses, see certain
risk factors that may affect our business below as well as
risk factors in parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
(1)
return on average tangible common shareholders equity is computed by
dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by average monthly
tangible common shareholders equity. see  results of operations
financial overview below for further information regarding our calculation
of return on average tangible common shareholders equity.
(2)
our investment banking backlog represents an estimate of our future net
revenues from investment banking transactions where we believe that future
revenue realization is more likely than not.
table of contents
business environment
as an investment banking, securities
and investment management firm, our businesses are materially
affected by conditions in the financial markets and economic
conditions generally, both in the united states and elsewhere
around the world. a favorable business environment is generally
characterized by low inflation, low or declining interest rates,
and strong equity markets. over the business cycle, these factors
provide a positive climate for our investment banking activities,
for many of our trading businesses and for wealth creation, which
contributes to growth in our asset management business. although
short-term interest rates, particularly in the united states,
continued to rise and the yield curve continued to flatten,
economic conditions remained generally favorable during 2005, as
global interest rates remained at historically low levels, core
inflation was broadly contained, global equity prices generally
rose and corporate activity continued to improve. for a further
discussion of how market conditions can affect our businesses, see
"certain risk factors that may affect our business below as
well as risk factors in parti, item1a of the annual
report on form10-k. a further discussion of the business
environment in 2005 is set forth below.
global. after strong growth in 2004,
the global economy remained solid in 2005, despite a brief period
of weakness during our fiscal second quarter. worldwide real gross
domestic product growth for the calendar year, although lower than
the prior year, was slightly above the average of the past 20years.
energy prices rose significantly during the first nine
months of our fiscal year, peaking at the beginning of our fourth
quarter, but the sharp increase did not appear to have a
significant impact on global growth. in addition, the u.s.economy
performed well and the japanese economy continued to grow
at a moderate pace, particularly in the first half of the calendar
year. the u.s.federal reserve continued to raise rates in
2005, increasing its federal funds rate target by a total of 200basis
points during our fiscal year. despite the increase in
u.s.short-term rates, fixed income markets generally performed
well, as long-term bond yields remained generally low and corporate
credit spreads remained generally tight. in the currency markets,
the u.s.dollar strengthened against the major currencies,
although it weakened against a number of emerging market currencies
such as the brazilian real, mexican peso, chinese yuan and korean
won. global equity markets generally rose during the year, with
significant increases in many markets around the world. corporate
activity continued to improve during the year. although equity and
equity-related volumes were essentially unchanged from 2004, debt
underwriting volumes improved and industry-wide announced and
completed mergers and acquisitions increased significantly.
united states. the u.s.economy
grew at a strong pace during the year. real gross domestic product
rose by approximately 3.5% in the 2005 calendar year, driven
principally by continued strength in the housing market and
consumer spending. despite hurricane-related disruptions, consumer
spending reached its highest rate of growth during the third
calendar quarter. after slowing modestly in the first quarter of
2005, the rate of inflation increased, particularly in the third
quarter, as energy prices rose significantly. however, measures of
core inflation remained broadly contained. in response to the
improving environment and rising inflation, the u.s.federal
reserve raised its federal funds rate target by 25basis points
in each of its meetings, bringing the rate to 4.00% by the end of
our fiscal year. despite the sharp rise in short-term interest
rates, the 10-year u.s.treasury note yield ended the year only
19basis points higher. although the u.s.dollar generally
strengthened throughout the year, financial conditions remained
generally supportive of economic activity. the dow jones industrial
average, s&p 500 index and nasdaq composite index increased by 4%,
7% and 8%, respectively, during our fiscal year.
europe. the pace of economic growth
in europe remained slow as real gross domestic product in the
eurozone economies grew by approximately 1.5% in the 2005 calendar
year. economic conditions in the eurozone economies softened in the
first half of the year as business sentiment deteriorated and
energy prices rose. however, conditions improved modestly later in
the year as continued strength in the global economy and the
weakening of the euro supported higher growth in exports and
investment spending. the european central bank left interest rates
unchanged through our fiscal year. in the u.k., real gross domestic
product growth appeared to slow
table of contents
sharply, declining to approximately
1.8% in the 2005 calendar year, reflecting softer growth in
consumption and investment spending. the bank of england reduced
interest rates by 25basis points and long-term bond yields in
both the eurozone and the u.k. ended the year lower. despite the
modest economic growth, the ftse100 index increased by 16% and
continental european equity markets also increased significantly
during our fiscal year.
asia. japans economy grew at its
strongest pace since 2000, with real gross domestic product growing
by over 2% for the second consecutive calendar year. the recovery
in domestic demand and private investment drove much of the
improvement, while exports improved in the second half of the
calendar year. the unemployment rate fell to 4.4% in 2005 from 4.7%
in 2004. the bank of japan continued to provide substantial
liquidity to the market and continued to hold short-term interest
rates at zero percent through the year and long-term bond yields
ended the year slightly lower. with short-term interest rates
rising in the u.s., the yen weakened and financial conditions
remained generally supportive of economic activity. the nikkei225
index increased 36% during our fiscal year.
elsewhere in asia, chinas real gross
domestic product growth remained robust, with growth particularly
reliant on higher net exports, as demonstrated by chinas large
current account surplus. chinas modest currency revaluation in
july did not result in further significant exchange rate
developments in the region. growth in india remained very strong,
which, together with china, supported growth throughout the region.
equity markets across the region generally rose, with markets in
south korea and india posting significant gains during our fiscal
year.
certain risk factors that may affect our business
we face a variety of risks that are
substantial and inherent in our businesses, including market,
liquidity, credit, operational, legal and regulatory risks. for a
discussion of how management seeks to manage some of these risks,
see risk management below. a summary of the more important
factors that could affect our business follows below. for a further
discussion of these and other important factors that could affect
our business, see risk factors in parti, item1a of the
annual report on form10-k.
market conditions and market risk.
our businesses are materially affected by conditions in the global
financial markets and economic conditions generally and these
conditions may change suddenly and dramatically. unfavorable or
uncertain economic and market conditions have adversely affected,
and may in the future adversely affect, our business and
profitability in many ways, including the following:
we have been operating in a low interest rate market for the past several years.
increasing or high interest rates and/or widening credit spreads, especially if such
changes are rapid, may create a less favorable environment for certain of our
businesses.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of our businesses
and generally maintain large trading, specialist and investing positions. market
fluctuations and volatility may adversely affect the value of those positions,
including, but not limited to, our interest rate and credit products, currency,
commodity and equity positions and our merchant banking investments, or may reduce
our willingness to enter into new transactions. from time to time, we have incurred
significant trading losses in periods of market turbulence. conversely, certain of
our trading businesses depend on market volatility to provide trading and arbitrage
opportunities, and decreases in volatility may reduce these opportunities and
adversely affect the results of these businesses.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings and mergers and
acquisitions may have an adverse effect on our revenues and, because we may be
unable to reduce expenses correspondingly, our profit margins. in particular,
because a significant portion of our investment banking revenues are derived from
our participation in large transactions, a
table of contents
decrease in the number of large
transactions due to uncertain or unfavorable market conditions may adversely affect
our investment banking business.
pricing and other competitive pressures have continued, even as the volume and
number of investment banking transactions have increased. in addition, the trend in
the underwriting business toward multiple book runners and co-managers handling
transactions, where previously there would have been a single book runner, may
adversely affect our business and reduce our revenues.
reductions in the level of the equity markets also tend to reduce the value of our
clients portfolios, which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for managing assets.
even in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or market conditions,
investment performance by our asset management business below the performance of
benchmarks or competitors could result in a decline in assets under management and
in the incentive and management fees we receive.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, proprietary trading and investing, block trading, merchant banking,
underwriting and lending businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand
our proprietary trading and investing businesses or commit capital to facilitate
customer-driven business. for example, large blocks of securities are increasingly
being sold in block trades rather than on a marketed basis, which increases the risk
that goldman sachs may be unable to resell the purchased securities at favorable
prices and may incur significant losses as a result. moreover, because of
concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic and market conditions
are generally favorable for others in the industry. we also regularly enter into
large transactions as part of our trading businesses. the number and size of such
transactions may affect our results of operations in a given period.
the volume of transactions that we execute for our clients and as a specialist or
market maker may decline, which would reduce the revenues we receive from
commissions and spreads. in addition, competitive pressures and other industry
factors, including the increasing use by our clients of low-cost electronic trading,
could cause a reduction in commissions and spreads. in our specialist businesses, we
are obligated by stock exchange rules to maintain an orderly market, including by
purchasing shares in a declining market. this may result in trading losses and an
increased need for liquidity. weakness in global equity markets and the trading of
securities in multiple markets and on multiple exchanges could adversely impact our
trading businesses and impair the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets. in addition, competitive pressures have been particularly intense in the
context of block trades. for a further discussion of our goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, see  critical accounting policies goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets below.
while we employ a broad and diversified set of risk monitoring and risk mitigation
techniques, those techniques and the judgments that accompany their application
cannot anticipate every economic and financial outcome or the specifics and timing
of such outcomes. thus, we may, in the course of our activities, incur losses.
liquidity risk. liquidity is
essential to our businesses. our liquidity could be impaired by an
inability to access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an
inability to access funds from our subsidiaries, an inability to
sell assets or unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this
situation may arise due to circumstances that we are unable to
control, such as a general market disruption or an operational
problem that affects third parties or us. further, our ability to
sell assets may be impaired if other market participants are
seeking to sell similar assets at the same time.
table of contents
our credit ratings are important to
our liquidity. a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely
affect our liquidity and competitive position, increase our
borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or trigger
our obligations under certain bilateral provisions in some of our
trading and collateralized financing contracts. under these
provisions, counterparties could be permitted to terminate
contracts with goldman sachs or require us to post additional
collateral. termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our liquidity
by requiring us to find other sources of financing or to make
significant cash payments or securities movements. for a discussion
of the potential impact on goldman sachs of a reduction in our
credit ratings, see capital and funding credit
ratings below.
credit risk. we are exposed to the
risk that third parties that owe us money, securities or other
assets will not perform their obligations. these parties may
default on their obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of
liquidity, operational failure or other reasons. we are also
subject to the risk that our rights against third parties may not
be enforceable in all circumstances. in addition, a deterioration
in the credit quality of third parties whose securities or
obligations we hold could result in losses and/or adversely affect
our ability to rehypothecate or otherwise use those securities or
obligations for liquidity purposes. the amount and duration of our
credit exposures have been increasing over the past several years,
as has the breadth of the entities to which we have credit
exposures. the scope of our lending businesses has also been
expanding and includes loans to small and mid-size businesses,
which are not traditional goldman sachs clients. as a clearing
member firm, we finance our client positions and we could be held
responsible for the defaults or misconduct of our clients. in
addition, we have experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure
to extend and price credit at levels that may not always fully
compensate us for the risks we take. in particular, corporate
clients sometimes seek to require credit commitments from us in
connection with investment banking and other assignments. although
we regularly review credit exposures to specific clients and
counterparties and to specific industries, countries and regions
that we believe may present credit concerns, default risk may arise
from events or circumstances that are difficult to detect or
foresee. in addition, concerns about, or a default by, one
institution could lead to significant liquidity problems, losses or
defaults by other institutions, which in turn could adversely
affect goldman sachs.
operational risk. shortcomings or
failures in our internal processes, people or systems, or external
events could lead to impairment of our liquidity, financial loss,
disruption of our businesses, liability to clients, regulatory
intervention or reputational damage. for example, our businesses
are highly dependent on our ability to process, on a daily basis, a
large number of transactions across numerous and diverse markets in
many currencies. the transactions we process have become
increasingly complex and often must adhere to client-specific
guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory standards. despite the
contingency plans and facilities we have in place, our ability to
conduct business may be adversely impacted by a disruption in the
infrastructure that supports our businesses and the communities in
which we are located. this may include a disruption involving
electrical, communications, transportation or other services used
by goldman sachs or third parties with which we conduct business.
legal and regulatory risk. we are
subject to extensive and evolving regulation in jurisdictions
around the world. substantial legal liability or a significant
regulatory action against goldman sachs could have material adverse
financial effects or cause significant reputational harm to goldman
sachs, which in turn could seriously harm our business prospects.
firms in the financial services industry have been operating in a
difficult regulatory environment. we face significant legal risks
in our businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of damages
and penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory proceedings
against financial institutions remain high. for a discussion of how
we account for our legal and regulatory exposures, see useof estimates below.
table of contents
critical accounting policies
fair value
the use of fair value to measure our
financial instruments, with related unrealized gains and losses
recognized immediately in our results of operations, is fundamental
to our financial statements and is our most critical accounting
policy. the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at
which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction
between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale.
in determining fair value, we
separate our financial instruments into three categories cash
(i.e., nonderivative) trading instruments, derivative contracts and
principal investments, as set forth in the following table:
financial instruments by category
(in millions)
as of november
financial
financial
financial
instruments sold,
financial
instruments sold,
instruments
but not yet
instruments
but not yet
owned, at
purchased, at
owned, at
purchased, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
cash trading instruments
$
210,042
$
89,735
$
143,376
$
68,096
derivative contracts
58,532
57,829
62,495
64,001
principal investments
6,526
(1)
1,507
(2)
4,654
(1)
total
$
275,100
$
149,071
$
210,525
$
132,097
(1)
excludes assets for which goldman sachs is not at
risk (e.g., assets related to consolidated employee-owned
merchant banking funds) of $1.93billion and $1.28billion
as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively.
(2)
represents an economic hedge on the unrestricted
shares of common stock underlying our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg. for a further
discussion of our investment in smfg, see principal
investments below.
table of contents
cash trading instruments. the
following table sets forth the valuation of our cash trading
instruments by level of price transparency:
cash trading instruments by price transparency
(in millions)
as of november
financial
financial
financial
instruments sold,
financial
instruments sold,
instruments
but not yet
instruments
but not yet
owned, at
purchased, at
owned, at
purchased, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
quoted prices or alternative pricing sources with reasonable price
transparency
$
198,233
$
89,565
$
130,908
$
67,948
little or no price transparency
11,809
12,468
total
$
210,042
$
89,735
$
143,376
$
68,096
fair values of our cash trading
instruments are generally obtained from quoted market prices in
active markets, broker or dealer price quotations, or alternative
pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. the
types of instruments valued in this manner include u.s. government
and agency securities, other sovereign government obligations,
liquid mortgage products, investment-grade corporate bonds, listed
equities, money market securities, state, municipal and provincial
obligations, and physical commodities.
certain cash trading instruments
trade infrequently and have little or no price transparency. such
instruments may include certain high-yield debt, corporate bank
loans, mortgage whole loans and distressed debt. we value these
instruments initially at cost and generally do not adjust
valuations unless there is substantive evidence supporting a change
in the value of the underlying instrument or valuation assumptions
(such as similar market transactions, changes in financial ratios
or changes in the credit ratings of the underlying companies).
where there is evidence supporting a change in the value, we use
valuation methodologies such as the present value of known or
estimated cash flows.
cash trading instruments we own (long
positions) are marked to bid prices and instruments we have sold
but not yet purchased (short positions) are marked to offer prices.
if liquidating a position is expected to affect its prevailing
market price, our valuation is adjusted generally based on market
evidence or predetermined policies. in certain circumstances, such
as for highly illiquid positions, managements estimates are used
to determine this adjustment.
table of contents
derivative contracts. derivative
contracts consist of exchange-traded and over-the-counter (otc)derivatives.
the following table sets forth the fair value of our
exchange-traded and otc derivative assets and liabilities:
derivative assets and liabilities
(in millions)
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
exchange-traded derivatives
$
10,869
$
9,083
$
5,464
$
5,905
otc derivatives
47,663
48,746
57,031
58,096
total
$
58,532
(1)
$
57,829
(2)
$
62,495
(1)
$
64,001
(2)
(1)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support
agreements of $22.61billion and $18.65billion
as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
(2)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit support
agreements of $16.10billion and $5.45billion as
of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
fair values of our exchange-traded
derivatives are generally determined from quoted market prices. otc
derivatives are valued using valuation models. we use a variety of
valuation models including the present value of known or estimated
cash flows and option-pricing models. the valuation models that we
use to derive the fair values of our otc derivatives require inputs
including contractual terms, market prices, yield curves, credit
curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates and correlations
of such inputs. the selection of a model to value an otc derivative
depends upon the contractual terms of, and specific risks inherent
in, the instrument as well as the availability of pricing
information in the market. we generally use similar models to value
similar instruments. where possible, we verify the values produced
by our pricing models to market transactions. for otc derivatives
that trade in liquid markets, such as generic forwards, swaps and
options, model selection does not involve significant judgment
because market prices are readily available. for otc derivatives
that trade in less liquid markets, model selection requires more
judgment because such instruments tend to be more complex and
pricing information is less available in these markets. price
transparency is inherently more limited for more complex structures
because they often combine one or more product types, requiring
additional inputs such as correlations and volatilities. as markets
continue to develop and more pricing information becomes available,
we continue to review and refine the models that we use.
at the inception of an otc derivative
contract (day one), we value the contract at the model value if we
can verify all of the significant model inputs to observable market
data and verify the model to market transactions. when appropriate,
valuations are adjusted to reflect various factors such as
liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations. these
adjustments are generally based on market evidence or predetermined
policies. in certain circumstances, such as for highly illiquid
positions, managements estimates are used to determine these
adjustments.
where we cannot verify all of the
significant model inputs to observable market data and verify the
model to market transactions, we value the contract at the
transaction price at inception and, consequently, record no day one
gain or loss in accordance with emerging issues task force (eitf)
issue no.02-3, issues involved in accounting for derivative
contracts held for trading purposes and contracts involved in
energy trading and risk management activities.
following day one, we adjust the
inputs to our valuation models only to the extent that changes in
these inputs can be verified by similar market transactions,
third-party pricing services and/or broker quotes, or can be
derived from other substantive evidence such as empirical market
data. in circumstances where we cannot verify the model to market
transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model could
produce a materially different estimate of fair value.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the
fair values of our otc derivative assets and liabilities by product
and by remaining contractual maturity:
otc derivatives
(in millions)
as of november 2005
assets
0- 6
6- 12
1- 5
5- 10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
1,898
$
$
4,634
$
5,310
$
5,221
$
17,530
currencies
5,825
1,031
1,843
1,046
10,664
commodities
3,772
1,369
8,130
1,374
14,765
equities
1,168
1,171
1,403
4,704
total
$
12,663
$
4,038
$
15,439
$
9,006
$
6,517
$
47,663
liabilities
0- 6
6- 12
1- 5
5- 10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
1,956
$
$
5,327
$
3,142
$
4,970
$
15,985
currencies
6,295
3,978
12,208
commodities
3,852
2,080
5,904
1,865
13,863
equities
1,308
1,068
2,079
1,993
6,690
total
$
13,411
$
4,313
$
17,288
$
7,436
$
6,298
$
48,746
as of november 2004
assets
0- 6
6- 12
1- 5
5- 10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
1,475
$
$
5,682
$
4,250
$
12,743
$
24,601
currencies
9,570
1,499
3,670
2,320
1,198
18,257
commodities
2,943
1,164
5,581
1,108
10,956
equities
1,311
3,217
total
$
15,299
$
3,927
$
15,390
$
8,312
$
14,103
$
57,031
liabilities
0- 6
6- 12
1- 5
5- 10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
1,854
$
$
7,366
$
7,136
$
5,658
$
22,803
currencies
9,577
1,580
4,456
2,755
1,184
19,552
commodities
3,791
1,425
4,522
10,659
equities
1,409
1,304
1,114
1,084
5,082
total
$
16,631
$
5,098
$
17,458
$
11,789
$
7,120
$
58,096
we enter into certain otc option
transactions that provide us or our counterparties with the right
to extend the maturity of the underlying contract. the fair value
of these option contracts is not material to the aggregate fair
value of our otc derivative portfolio. in the tables above, for
option contracts that require settlement by delivery of an
underlying derivative instrument, the remaining contractual
maturity is generally classified based upon the maturity date of
the underlying derivative instrument. in those instances where the
underlying instrument does not have a maturity date or either
counterparty has the right to settle in cash, the remaining
contractual maturity is generally based upon the option expiration
date.
table of contents
principal investments. in valuing our
corporate and real estate principal investments, we separate our
portfolio into investments in private companies, investments in
public companies (excluding our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg) and our investment in smfg.
the following table sets forth the
carrying value of our principal investments portfolio:
principal investments
(in millions)
as of november
corporate
real estate
total
corporate
real estate
total
private
$
1,538
$
$
2,254
$
$
$
1,704
public
subtotal (1)
1,723
2,468
1,278
2,098
smfg
convertible preferredstock (2)
4,058
4,058
(3)
2,556
2,556
total
$
5,781
$
$
6,526
$
3,834
$
$
4,654
(1)
excludes assets for which goldman sachs is not at
risk (e.g., assets related to consolidated employee-owned
merchant banking funds) of $1.93billion and $1.28billion
as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively.
(2)
the fair value of our japanese yen-denominated
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg
includes the effect of foreign exchange revaluation. we
hedge our economic exposure to exchange rate movements on
our investment in smfg by borrowing japanese yen. foreign
exchange revaluation on the investment and the related
borrowing are generally equal and offsetting. for
example, if the japanese yen appreciates against the u.s.dollar,
the u.s.dollar carrying value of our
smfg investment will increase and the u.s.dollar
carrying value of the related borrowing will also
increase by an amount that is generally equal and
offsetting.
(3)
excludes an economic hedge on the unrestricted
shares of common stock underlying our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg. as of november25,
2005, the fair value of this hedge was $1.51billion
and is reflected in financial instruments sold,
but not yet purchased, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition. for a further
discussion of the restrictions on our ability to hedge or
sell the common stock underlying our investment in smfg,
see below.
our private principal investments, by
their nature, have little or no price transparency. such
investments are initially carried at cost as an approximation of
fair value. adjustments to carrying value are made if there are
third-party transactions evidencing a change in value. downward
adjustments are also made, in the absence of third-party
transactions, if we determine that the expected realizable value of
the investment is less than the carrying value. in reaching that
determination, we consider many factors including, but not limited
to, the operating cash flows and financial performance of the
companies or properties relative to budgets or projections, trends
within sectors and/or regions, underlying business models, expected
exit timing and strategy, and any specific rights or terms
associated with the investment, such as conversion features and
liquidation preferences.
our public principal investments,
which tend to be large, concentrated holdings that result from
initial public offerings or other corporate transactions, are
valued using quoted market prices discounted based on predetermined
written policies for nontransferability and illiquidity.
our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg is carried at fair value, which is derived
from a model that incorporates smfgs common stock price and credit
spreads, the impact of nontransferability and illiquidity, and the
downside protection on the conversion strike price. the fair value
of our investment is particularly sensitive to movements in the
smfg common stock price. as a result of transfer restrictions and
the downside protection on the conversion strike price, the
relationship between changes in the fair value of our investment
and changes in smfgs common
table of contents
stock price is nonlinear. during our
fiscal year, the fair value of our investment (excluding the
economic hedge on the unrestricted shares of common stock
underlying one-third of our investment) increased 85% (expressed in
japanese yen), primarily due to an increase in the smfg common
stock price and, to a lesser extent, the impact of passage of time
in respect of the transfer restrictions on the underlying common
stock.
our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg is generally nontransferable, but is freely
convertible into smfg common stock. restrictions on our ability to
hedge or sell one-third of the common stock underlying our
investment in smfg lapsed in february2005. as of november2005,
we were fully hedged with respect to these unrestricted
shares. under our initial agreement with smfg, restrictions on our
ability to hedge or sell the remaining shares of common stock
underlying our investment in smfg lapse in equal installments on
february7, 2006 and february7,2007. in connection
with a public offering by smfg of its common stock, we have
separately agreed with smfg that the restrictions that were to
lapse on february7, 2006 will instead lapse on march9,2006.
effective february1, 2006, the conversion price of
our smfg preferred stock into shares of smfg common stock is
320,900. this price is subject to downward adjustment if the price
of smfg common stock at the time of conversion is less than the
conversion price (subject to a floor of 105,800).
controls over valuation of financial
instruments. a control infrastructure, independent of the trading
and investing functions, is fundamental to ensuring that our
financial instruments are appropriately valued and that fair value
measurements are reliable. this is particularly important in
valuing instruments with lower levels of price transparency.
we employ an oversight structure that
includes appropriate segregation of duties. senior management,
independent of the trading functions, is responsible for the
oversight of control and valuation policies and for reporting the
results of these policies to our audit committee. we seek to
maintain the necessary resources to ensure that control functions
are performed to the highest standards. we employ procedures for
the approval of new transaction types and markets, price
verification, review of daily profit and loss, and review of
valuation models by personnel with appropriate technical knowledge
of relevant products and markets. these procedures are performed by
personnel independent of the revenue-producing units. for trading
and principal investments with little or no price transparency, we
employ, where possible, procedures that include comparisons with
similar observable positions, analysis of actual to projected cash
flows, comparisons with subsequent sales and discussions with
senior business leaders. for a further discussion of how we manage
the risks inherent in our trading and principal investing
businesses, see risk management below.
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
as a result of our acquisitions,
principally slk llc (slk)in fiscal 2000, the ayco company,
l.p. (ayco) in fiscal 2003, cogentrix energy, inc. (cogentrix) in
fiscal 2004 and national energy& gas transmission, inc. (negt)in
fiscal 2005, we have acquired goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets. goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in
excess of the fair value of net assets, including identifiable
intangible assets, at the acquisition date.
goodwill. we test the goodwill in
each of our operating segments for impairment at least annually in
accordance with statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)no.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets, by
comparing the estimated fair value of each operating segment with
its estimated net book value. we derive the fair value of each of
our operating segments primarily based on price-earnings multiples.
we derive the net book value of our operating segments by
estimating the amount of shareholders equity required to support
the assets of each operating segment. our last annual impairment
test was performed during our fiscal 2005 fourth quarter and no
impairment was identified.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
carrying value of our goodwill by operating segment:
goodwill by operating segment
(in millions)
as of november
investment banking
financial advisory
$
$
underwriting
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities (1)
2,390
2,382
principal investments
asset management and securities services
asset management (2)
securities services
total
$
3,148
$
3,182
(1)
primarily related to slk.
(2)
primarily related to ayco.
identifiable intangible assets. we
amortize our identifiable intangible assets over their estimated
useful lives in accordance with sfasno.142, and test for
potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying value may not be
fully recoverable in accordance with sfasno.144,
accounting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets.
an impairment loss, calculated as the difference between the
estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset or asset
group, is recognized if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash
flows relating to the asset or asset group is less than the
corresponding carrying value.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
carrying value and range of remaining useful lives of our
identifiable intangible assets by major asset class:
identifiable intangible assets by asset class
($ in millions)
as of november
range of remaining
carrying
useful lives
carrying
value
(in years)
value
customer lists(1)
$
$
new york stock exchange (nyse)specialist rights
power contracts(2)
exchange-traded fund (etf)and option specialist rights
other(3)
2 9
total
$
2,055
$
1,689
(1)
primarily includes our clearance and execution
and nasdaq customer lists related to slk and financial
counseling customer lists related to ayco.
(2)
primarily relates to above-market power contracts
of consolidated power generation facilities related to
cogentrix and negt. we closed on our acquisition of negt
and recorded purchase price allocation adjustments for
negt and cogentrix in fiscal 2005. substantially all of
these power contracts have been pledged as collateral to
counterparties in connection with certain of our secured
short-term and long-term borrowings.
(3)
primarily includes technology-related assets
related to slk.
a prolonged period of weakness in
global equity markets and the trading of securities in multiple
markets and on multiple exchanges could adversely impact our
businesses and impair the value of our goodwill and/or identifiable
intangible assets. in addition, certain events could indicate a
potential impairment of our identifiable intangible assets,
including (i)changes in market structure that could adversely
affect our specialist businesses, (ii)an adverse action or
assessment by a regulator or (iii)a default event under a
power contract or physical damage or other adverse events impacting
the underlying power generation facilities.
use of estimates
the use of generally accepted
accounting principles requires management to make certain
estimates. in addition to the estimates we make in connection with
fair value measurements and the accounting for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, the use of estimates is also
important in determining provisions for potential losses that may
arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings and tax audits.
we estimate and provide for potential
losses that may arise out of litigation and regulatory proceedings
and tax audits to the extent that such losses are probable and can
be estimated, in accordance with sfasno.5, accounting
for contingencies. significant judgment is required in making
these estimates and our final liabilities may ultimately be
materially different. our total liability in respect of litigation
and regulatory proceedings is determined on a case-by-case basis
and represents an estimate of probable losses after considering,
among other factors, the progress of each case or proceeding, our
experience and the experience of others in similar cases or
proceedings, and the opinions and views of legal counsel. given the
inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of our litigation and
regulatory matters, particularly in cases or proceedings in which
table of contents
substantial or indeterminate damages or fines are sought, we cannot
estimate losses or ranges of losses for cases or proceedings where
there is only a reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred.
see legal proceedings in parti, item3 of the annual
report on form10-k, for information on our judicial,
regulatory and arbitration proceedings.
results of operations
the composition of our net revenues
has varied over time as financial markets and the scope of our
operations have changed. the composition of net revenues can also
vary over the shorter term due to fluctuations in u.s. and global
economic and market conditions. for a further discussion of the
impact of economic and market conditions on our results of
operations, see business environment and certain
risk factors that may affect our business above, and risk
factors in parti, item1a of the annual report on form10-k.
financial overview
the following table sets forth an
overview of our financial results:
financial overview
($ in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended november
net revenues
$
24,782
$
20,550
$
16,012
pre-tax earnings
8,273
6,676
4,445
net earnings
5,626
4,553
3,005
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
5,609
4,553
3,005
diluted earnings per common share
11.21
8.92
5.87
return on average common shareholders equity(1)
21.8
%
19.8
%
15.0
%
return on average tangible common shareholders equity(2)
27.6
%
25.2
%
19.9
%
(1)
return on average common shareholders equity is computed by dividing net earnings
applicable to common shareholders by average monthly common shareholders equity.
(2)
tangible common shareholders equity equals total shareholders equity less preferred stock
and goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. we believe that return on average tangible
common shareholders equity is a meaningful measure of performance because it excludes the
portion of our common shareholders equity attributable to goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets. as a result, this calculation measures corporate performance in a manner
that treats underlying businesses consistently, whether they were acquired or developed
internally. return on average tangible common shareholders equity is computed by dividing
net earnings applicable to common shareholders by average monthly tangible common
shareholders equity. the following table sets forth the reconciliation of average total
shareholders equity to average tangible common shareholders equity:
average for the
year ended november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
26,264
$
22,975
$
20,031
deduct: preferred stock
(538
)
common shareholders equity
$
25,726
$
22,975
$
20,031
deduct: goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(5,418
)
(4,918
)
(4,932
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$
20,308
$
18,057
$
15,099
table of contents
net revenues
2005 versus 2004. our net revenues
were $24.78billion in 2005, an increase of 21% compared with
2004, reflecting strong growth in trading and principal investments
and asset management and securities services as well as higher net
revenues in investment banking. the increase in trading and
principal investments reflected significantly higher net revenues
in ficc, as all major businesses performed well. during 2005, ficc
operated in an environment generally characterized by strong
customer-driven activity, tight, but volatile, credit spreads,
higher energy prices and a flatter yield curve. net revenues in
equities also improved significantly compared with the prior year,
reflecting strong performance across the business. equities
operated in an environment characterized by generally higher equity
prices, improved customer-driven activity and continued low levels
of market volatility. net revenues in our principal investments
business also increased significantly, primarily reflecting a gain
on our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg as
well as gains from real estate principal investments. the strong
net revenue growth in asset management and securities services
primarily reflected higher assets under management and higher
customer balances in securities services. the increase in
investment banking net revenues was due to significantly higher net
revenues in debt underwriting and improved results in financial
advisory, primarily reflecting an increase in industry-wide
corporate activity, partially offset by lower net revenues in
equity underwriting.
2004 versus 2003. our net revenues
were $20.55billion in 2004, an increase of 28% compared with
2003, reflecting strong growth in trading and principal
investments, asset management and securities services, and
investment banking. the increase in trading and principal
investments reflected significantly higher net revenues in ficc, as
all major businesses and regions performed well in a generally
favorable environment. net revenues in our principal investments
business also increased significantly, due to an unrealized gain on
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg, as well
as gains from other corporate principal investments. in addition,
equities net revenues improved, primarily reflecting higher
customer-driven activity and favorable market conditions early in
2004. equities operated in a less favorable environment after our
first fiscal quarter of 2004, as volatility levels continued to
decline and markets generally lacked direction before moving higher
in the last several weeks of our fiscal year. asset management and
securities services generated strong revenue growth, primarily
reflecting higher assets under management, increased incentive fees
and significantly higher customer balances in securities services.
in investment banking, net revenues also increased, highlighted by
strong growth in both our financial advisory and equity
underwriting businesses, primarily reflecting an increase in
industry-wide corporate activity.
table of contents
operating expenses
our operating expenses are primarily
influenced by compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity. a substantial portion of our compensation expense
represents discretionary bonuses, with our overall compensation and
benefits expenses generally targeted at 50% (plus or minus a few
percentage points) of consolidated net revenues. in addition to the
level of net revenues, our compensation expense in any given year
is influenced by, among other factors, prevailing labor markets,
business mix and the structure of our equity-based compensation
programs.
the following table sets forth our
operating expenses and number of employees:
operating expenses and employees
($ in millions)
year ended november
compensation and benefits(1) (2) (3)
$
11,688
$
9,652
$
7,515
brokerage, clearing and exchange fees
1,109
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
other expenses
1,016
total non-compensation expenses
4,821
4,222
4,052
total operating expenses
$
16,509
$
13,874
$
11,567
employees at year end(2) (3)
22,425
20,722
19,476
(1)
includes the amortization of employee initial
public offering and acquisition awards of $19million,
$61million and $122million for the
years ended november2005, november2004 and november
2003, respectively.
(2)
excludes 1,437, 1,206 and 1,228 employees as of
november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively, of goldman sachs consolidated property
management and loan servicing subsidiaries. compensation
and benefits includes $182million, $164million
and $134million for the years ended november2005,
november2004 and november2003, respectively,
attributable to these subsidiaries, the majority of which
is reimbursed to goldman sachs by the investment funds
for which these subsidiaries manage properties and
perform loan servicing. such reimbursements are recorded
in net revenues.
(3)
excludes 7,143, 293 and 279 employees as of
november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively, of consolidated entities held for
investment purposes. compensation and benefits includes
$128million, $11million and $3million for
the years ended november2005, november2004 and november
2003, respectively, attributable to these consolidated
entities. consolidated entities held for investment
purposes includes entities that are held strictly for
capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and
are engaged in activities that are not closely related to
our principal businesses.
table of contents
the following table sets forth
non-compensation expenses of consolidated entities held for
investment purposes and our remaining non-compensation expenses by
line item:
non-compensation expenses
(in millions)
year ended november
non-compensation expenses of consolidated investments(1)
$
$
$
non-compensation expenses excluding consolidated investments
brokerage, clearing and exchange fees
1,109
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
other expenses
subtotal
4,556
4,201
4,045
total non-compensation expenses, as reported
$
4,821
$
4,222
$
4,052
(1)
consolidated entities held for investment
purposes includes entities that are held strictly for
capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and
are engaged in activities that are not closely related to
our principal businesses. for example, these investments
include consolidated entities that hold real estate
assets such as golf courses and hotels in asia, but
exclude investments in entities that primarily hold
financial assets. we believe that it is meaningful to
review non-compensation expenses excluding expenses
related to these consolidated entities in order to
evaluate trends in non-compensation expenses related to
our principal business activities. revenues related to
such entities are included in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings.
2005 versus 2004. operating expenses
were $16.51billion for 2005, 19% above 2004. compensation and
benefits expenses of $11.69billion increased 21% compared with
2004, resulting from higher discretionary compensation, reflecting
higher net revenues, and increased levels of employment. the ratio
of compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2005 was 47.2%
compared with 46.7%(2) for 2004. employment levels
increased 8% compared with november2004.
non-compensation expenses of $4.82billion
for 2005 increased 14% compared with 2004. excluding
non-compensation expenses related to consolidated entities held for
investment purposes, non-compensation expenses were 8% higher than
2004, primarily due to higher brokerage, clearing and exchange
fees, reflecting higher transaction volumes in ficc and equities,
increased professional fees, reflecting higher legal and consulting
fees, and higher other expenses, primarily reflecting increased
levels of business activity and higher charitable contributions.
non-compensation expenses in 2005
included $37million of net provisions for litigation and
regulatory proceedings (included in other expenses) and $36million
of real estate costs associated with the relocation of
office space (included in occupancy). non-compensation expenses in
2004 included $103million of net provisions for litigation and
regulatory proceedings, $62million in connection with the
establishment of our joint venture in china (included in market
development) and $41million of real estate exit costs
associated with reductions in our office space (included in
occupancy and depreciation and amortization).
(2)
for the year ended november2004, including the amortization of employee initial public offering and
acquisition awards of $61million, the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues was
47.0%.
table of contents
2004 versus 2003. operating expenses
were $13.87billion for 2004, 20% above 2003. compensation and
benefits expenses of $9.65billion increased 28% compared with
2003, due to higher discretionary compensation, reflecting higher
net revenues, and increased employment levels. the ratio of
compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2004 was 46.7%
compared with 46.2% for 2003.(1) employment levels
increased 6% compared with november2003.
non-compensation expenses of $4.22billion
for 2004 increased 4% compared with 2003. other
expenses included net provisions for litigation and regulatory
proceedings of $103million for 2004 compared with $159million
for 2003. excluding these provisions, other expenses
increased $258million, primarily due to the acquisition of
consolidated investments, increased levels of business activity and
higher charitable contributions. brokerage, clearing and exchange
fees increased, reflecting higher transaction volumes in certain of
our businesses, and market development expenses were higher,
primarily reflecting $62million in connection with the
establishment of our joint venture in china, as well as higher
levels of business activity. in addition, professional fees were
higher, primarily due to higher legal and consulting fees. these
increases were partially offset by decreased amortization of
identifiable intangible assets (2003 included impairment charges of
$188million, primarily in respect of option specialist rights)
as well as lower occupancy and depreciation and amortization
expenses. total exit costs associated with reductions in our global
office space (included in occupancy and depreciation and
amortization) were $41million for 2004 compared with $153million
for 2003.
provision for taxes
the effective income tax rate for
2005 was 32.0% compared with 31.8% for 2004. excluding the impact
of audit settlements in 2005, the effective income tax rate for
2005 would have been 33.3%.(2) excluding the impact of
audit settlements, the increase in the effective income tax rate
for 2005 compared with 2004 was primarily due to a lower benefit
from tax credits in 2005. the effective income tax rate for 2004
was 31.8%, down from 32.4% for 2003. the decrease in the effective
income tax rate for 2004 as compared with 2003 reflected lower
state and local taxes and the effect of audit settlements.
our effective income tax rate can
vary from period to period depending on, among other factors, the
geographic and business mix of our earnings, the level of our tax
credits and the effect of tax audits. certain of these and other
factors, including our history of pre-tax earnings, are taken into
account in assessing our ability to realize our net deferred tax
assets. see note14 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k for
further information regarding our provision for taxes.
(1)
for the years ended november2004 and november2003, including the amortization of employee initial public offering and
acquisition awards of $61million and $122million, respectively, the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues was
47.0% and 46.9%, respectively.
(2)
the effective income tax rate excluding the impact of audit settlements is calculated by dividing the provision for taxes,
adjusted to exclude the impact of audit settlements, by pre-tax earnings. the impact of audit settlements decreased the
effective income tax rate by 1.3% for 2005. we believe that the effective income tax rate excluding the impact of
audit settlements provides a meaningful basis for period-to-period comparisons of our effective income tax rates.
table of contents
segment operating results
the following table sets forth the
net revenues, operating expenses and pre-tax earnings of our
segments:
segment operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking
net revenues
$
3,671
$
3,374
$
2,711
operating expenses
3,258
2,973
2,504
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
net revenues
$
16,362
$
13,327
$
10,443
operating expenses
10,144
8,287
6,938
pre-tax earnings
$
6,218
$
5,040
$
3,505
asset management and securities services
net revenues
$
4,749
$
3,849
$
2,858
operating expenses
3,070
2,430
1,890
pre-tax earnings
$
1,679
$
1,419
$
total
net revenues
$
24,782
$
20,550
$
16,012
operating expenses(1)
16,509
13,874
11,567
pre-tax earnings
$
8,273
$
6,676
$
4,445
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to our segments: (i)the amortization
of employee initial public offering awards, net of
forfeitures, of $19million and $80million for
the years ended november2004 and november2003,
respectively; (ii)net provisions for a number of
litigation and regulatory proceedings of $37million,
$103million and $155million for the years ended
november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively; and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of our joint venture in
china for the year ended november2004.
net revenues in our segments include
allocations of interest income and interest expense to specific
securities, commodities and other positions in relation to the cash
generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying
positions. see note16 to the consolidated financial statements
in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding our segments.
the cost drivers of goldman sachs
taken as a whole compensation, headcount and levels of
business activity are broadly similar in each of our business
segments. compensation expenses within our segments reflect, among
other factors, the overall performance of goldman sachs as well as
the performance of individual business units. consequently, pre-tax
margins in one segment of our business may be significantly
affected by the performance of our other business segments. a
discussion of segment operating results follows.
table of contents
investment banking
our investment banking segment is
divided into two components:
financial advisory. financial advisory includes advisory assignments with respect
to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities,
restructurings and spin-offs.
underwriting. underwriting includes public offerings and private placements of
equity, equity-related and debt instruments.
the following table sets forth the
operating results of our investment banking segment:
investment banking operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
financial advisory
$
1,905
$
1,737
$
1,202
equity underwriting
debt underwriting
1,062
total underwriting
1,766
1,637
1,509
total net revenues
3,671
3,374
2,711
operating expenses
3,258
2,973
2,504
pre-tax earnings
$
$
$
the following table sets forth our
financial advisory and underwriting transaction volumes:
goldman sachs global investment banking volumes(1)
(in billions)
year ended november
announced mergers and acquisitions
$
$
$
completed mergers and acquisitions
equity and equity-related offerings(2)
debt offerings(3)
(1)
source: thomson financial. announced and
completed mergers and acquisitions volumes are based on
full credit to each of the advisors in a transaction.
equity and equity-related offerings and debt offerings
are based on full credit for single book managers and
equal credit for joint book managers. transaction volumes
may not be indicative of net revenues in a given period.
(2)
includes public common stock offerings and
convertible offerings.
(3)
includes non-convertible preferred stock,
mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and
taxable municipal debt. includes publicly registered and
rule144a issues.
2005 versus 2004. net revenues in
investment banking of $3.67billion for 2005 increased 9%
compared with 2004. net revenues in financial advisory of $1.91billion
increased 10% compared with 2004, primarily reflecting an
increase in industry-wide completed mergers and acquisitions. net
revenues in our underwriting business of $1.77billion
increased 8% compared with 2004, reflecting higher net revenues in
debt underwriting, primarily due to an increase in leveraged
finance and mortgage activity, partially offset by lower net
revenues in equity underwriting. our investment banking backlog at
the end of 2005 was significantly higher than at the end of 2004.(4)
(4)
our investment banking backlog represents an estimate of our future net revenues from investment banking transactions
where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than not.
table of contents
operating expenses of $3.26billion
for 2005 increased 10% compared with 2004, primarily due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
levels of discretionary compensation and increased amortization
expense related to prior year equity awards. in addition, other
expenses increased principally due to higher levels of business
activity, and professional fees were higher driven by increased
legal and consulting fees. pre-tax earnings of $413million in
2005 increased 3% compared with 2004.
2004 versus 2003. net revenues in
investment banking of $3.37billion for 2004 increased 24%
compared with 2003. net revenues in financial advisory of $1.74billion
increased 45% compared with 2003, primarily reflecting a
significant increase in industry-wide completed mergers and
acquisitions. net revenues in our underwriting business of $1.64billion
increased 8% compared with 2003, reflecting a
significant increase in industry-wide public common stock offerings
and industry-wide initial public offerings. the increase in
investment banking net revenues primarily reflects higher levels of
activity in the industrial and consumer sectors. our investment
banking backlog at the end of 2004 was higher than at the end of
2003.(1)
operating expenses of $2.97billion
for 2004 increased 19% compared with 2003, primarily due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment.
these increases were partially offset by lower occupancy expenses,
primarily reflecting lower exit costs associated with reductions in
our global office space, and reduced amortization of identifiable
intangible assets, as 2003 included impairment charges in respect
of certain distribution rights. depreciation and amortization
expenses were also lower. pre-tax earnings of $401million in
2004 increased 94% compared with 2003.
trading and principal investments
our trading and principal investments
segment is divided into three components:
ficc. we make markets in and trade interest rate and credit products,
mortgage-backed securities and loans, currencies, and commodities, structure and
enter into a wide variety of derivative transactions and engage in proprietary
trading and investing.
equities. we make markets in, trade and act as a specialist for equities and
equity-related products, structure and enter into equity derivative transactions and
engage in proprietary trading. we also execute and clear client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide.
principal investments. we generate net revenues from our corporate and real estate
merchant banking investments, including the increased share of the income and gains
derived from our merchant banking funds when the return on a funds investments
exceeds certain threshold returns (merchant banking overrides), as well as gains or
losses related to our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg.
substantially all of our inventory is
marked-to-market daily and, therefore, its value and our net
revenues are subject to fluctuations based on market movements. in
addition, net revenues derived from our principal investments in
privately held concerns and in real estate may fluctuate
significantly depending on the revaluation or sale of these
investments in any given period. we also regularly enter into large
transactions as part of our trading businesses. the number and size
of such transactions may affect our results of operations in a
given period.
net revenues from principal
investments do not include management fees generated from our
merchant banking funds. these management fees are included in the
net revenues of the asset management and securities services
segment.
(1)
our investment banking backlog represents an
estimate of our future net revenues from investment
banking transactions where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than not.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
operating results of our trading and principal investments segment:
trading and principal investments operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
ficc
$
8,484
$
7,322
$
5,596
equities trading
2,675
1,969
1,738
equities commissions
2,975
2,704
2,543
total equities
5,650
4,673
4,281
smfg
1,475
gross gains
gross losses
(198
)
(399
)
(437
)
net other corporate and real estate investments
overrides
total principal investments
2,228
1,332
total net revenues
16,362
13,327
10,443
operating expenses
10,144
8,287
6,938
pre-tax earnings
$
6,218
$
5,040
$
3,505
2005 versus 2004. net revenues in
trading and principal investments of $16.36billion for 2005
increased 23% compared with 2004. net revenues in ficc of $8.48billion
increased 16% compared with 2004, primarily reflecting
significantly higher net revenues in credit products (which
includes distressed investing) and, to a lesser extent, interest
rate products and currencies. net revenues in commodities and
mortgages were strong, but essentially unchanged compared with
2004. during 2005, ficc operated in an environment generally
characterized by strong customer-driven activity, tight, but
volatile, credit spreads, higher energy prices and a flatter yield
curve. net revenues in equities of $5.65billion increased 21%
compared with 2004, reflecting significantly higher net revenues in
our customer franchise and principal strategies businesses. the
increase in our customer franchise businesses reflected improved
results in derivatives and shares, particularly in europe and asia,
as well as in convertibles. in addition, results in principal
strategies reflected strength across all regions. during 2005,
equities operated in an environment characterized by generally
higher equity prices, improved customer-driven activity and
continued low levels of market volatility. principal investments
recorded net revenues of $2.23billion, due to a $1.48billion
gain related to our investment in the convertible preferred
stock of smfg and $753million in gains and overrides from
other corporate and, to a lesser extent, real estate principal
investments.
operating expenses of $10.14billion
for 2005 increased 22% compared with 2004, primarily due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses, reflecting higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment and,
to a lesser extent, higher non-compensation expenses related to
consolidated entities held for investment purposes. excluding
non-compensation expenses related to consolidated entities held for
investment purposes, the increase in non-compensation expenses was
primarily attributable to higher brokerage, clearing and exchange
fees, principally due to increased transaction volumes in ficc and
equities, and higher professional fees, due to increased legal and
consulting fees. pre-tax earnings of $6.22billion in 2005
increased 23% compared with 2004.
table of contents
2004 versus 2003. net revenues in
trading and principal investments of $13.33billion for 2004
increased 28% compared with 2003. net revenues in ficc of $7.32billion
increased 31% compared with 2003, primarily due to
significantly higher net revenues in credit products and
commodities, as well as improved performances in currencies and
mortgages. in addition, net revenues in interest rate products were
strong, but were lower compared with 2003. during 2004, ficc
operated in an environment generally characterized by strong
customer-driven activity, rising energy prices, narrow corporate
credit spreads and low, although rising, interest rates. the yield
curve remained steep in 2004, but flattened in the second half of
the year. net revenues in equities of $4.67billion increased
9% compared with 2003, reflecting higher net revenues in our
customer franchise business, primarily due to increased activity in
shares and derivatives. in addition, net revenues were higher in
our principal strategies business. during 2004, equities operated
in an environment characterized by improved customer-driven
activity, particularly early in the year, and generally higher
equity prices. however, volatility levels continued to decline
during 2004. principal investments recorded net revenues of $1.33billion,
primarily due to an unrealized gain related to our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg of $771million,
as well as gains and overrides from other corporate
principal investments.
operating expenses of $8.29billion
for 2004 increased 19% compared with 2003, primarily due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment.
other expenses also increased, principally due to the acquisition
of consolidated investments and increased levels of business
activity. in addition, brokerage, clearing and exchange fees were
higher, reflecting higher transaction volumes in certain of our
businesses, professional fees increased, primarily due to higher
consulting and legal fees, and market development expenses
increased, primarily due to higher levels of business activity.
these increases were partially offset by lower amortization of
identifiable intangible assets, as 2003 included impairment charges
in respect of option specialist rights. in addition, occupancy
expenses decreased, primarily reflecting lower exit costs
associated with reductions in our global office space, and
depreciation and amortization expenses were lower. pre-tax earnings
of $5.04billion in 2004 increased 44% compared with 2003.
asset management and securities services
our asset management and securities
services segment is divided into two components:
asset management. asset management provides investment advisory and financial
planning services and offers investment products across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and primarily generates
revenues in the form of management and incentive fees.
securities services. securities services provides prime brokerage services,
financing services and securities lending services to mutual funds, pension funds,
hedge funds, foundations and high-net-worth individuals worldwide, and generates
revenues primarily in the form of interest rate spreads or fees.
assets under management typically
generate fees as a percentage of asset value. in certain
circumstances, we are also entitled to receive asset management
incentive fees based on a percentage of a funds return or when the
return on assets under management exceeds specified benchmark
returns or other performance targets. incentive fees are recognized
when the performance period ends and they are no longer subject to
adjustment. we have numerous incentive fee arrangements, many of
which have annual performance periods that end on december31
and are not subject to adjustment thereafter. for that reason,
incentive fees are seasonally weighted each year to our first
fiscal quarter. depending on the level of net revenues in our first
fiscal quarter of 2006, these incentive fees may be material to the
results of operations in that quarter.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
operating results of our asset management and securities services
segment:
asset management and securities services operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
asset management
$
2,956
$
2,553
$
1,853
securities services
1,793
1,296
1,005
total net revenues
4,749
3,849
2,858
operating expenses
3,070
2,430
1,890
pre-tax earnings
$
1,679
$
1,419
$
assets under management include our
mutual funds, alternative investment funds and separately managed
accounts for institutional and individual investors. substantially
all assets under management are valued as of calendar month end.
the following table sets forth our
assets under management by asset class:
assets under management by asset class
(in billions)
as of november30
money markets
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity (1)
alternative investments (2)
total
$
$
$
(1)
includes both our fundamental equity and
quantitative equity strategies.
(2)
primarily includes private equity funds, hedge
funds, real estate funds, certain currency and asset
allocation strategies and other assets allocated to
external investment managers.
table of contents
the following table sets forth a
summary of the changes in our assets under management:
changes in assets under management
(in billions)
year ended november30
2003(1)
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
net asset inflows/(outflows)
money markets
(19
)
fixed income and currency
equity
(1
)
alternative investments
total net asset inflows/(outflows)
(4
)
net market appreciation/(depreciation)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
(1)
includes $4billion in non-money market
assets from our acquisition of ayco and $16billion
in non-money market net asset outflows resulting from
british coal pension schemes planned program of
diversification among its asset managers.
2005 versus 2004. net revenues in
asset management and securities services of $4.75billion for
2005 increased 23% compared with 2004. asset management net
revenues of $2.96billion increased 16% compared with 2004,
primarily due to higher management fees, driven by growth in assets
under management. during 2005, assets under management increased
18% to $532billion, reflecting net asset inflows of $63billion
across all asset classes as well as market appreciation of
$17billion, primarily in equity assets. securities services
net revenues of $1.79billion for 2005 increased 38% compared
with 2004, primarily reflecting significantly higher global
customer balances in securities lending and margin lending.
operating expenses of $3.07billion
for 2005 increased 26% compared with 2004, primarily due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment.
other expenses also increased and professional fees were higher,
principally due to increased consulting and legal fees. pre-tax
earnings of $1.68billion increased 18% compared with 2004.
2004 versus 2003. net revenues in
asset management and securities services of $3.85billion for
2004 increased 35% compared with 2003. asset management net
revenues of $2.55billion increased 38% compared with 2003,
primarily due to higher assets under management, significantly
higher incentive fees and a full year contribution from ayco.
during 2004, assets under management increased 21% to $452billion,
reflecting net asset inflows of $52billion across all
asset classes, as well as market appreciation of $27billion,
primarily in equity and fixed income assets. securities services
net revenues of $1.30billion increased 29% compared with 2003,
primarily due to significantly higher customer balances in
securities lending and margin lending.
operating expenses of $2.43billion
for 2004 increased 29% compared with 2003, primarily due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses resulting from higher
discretionary compensation and increased levels of employment. in
addition, other expenses increased, principally due to higher
levels of business activity, including increased asset management
distribution costs. professional fees were also higher, primarily
reflecting increased legal and consulting fees. these increases
were partially offset by lower depreciation and amortization and
occupancy expenses, primarily reflecting lower exit costs
associated with reductions in our global office space. pre-tax
earnings of $1.42billion increased 47% compared with 2003.
table of contents
geographic data
for a
summary of the net revenues and pre-tax earnings of goldman sachs by
geographic region, see note16 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
off-balance-sheet arrangements
we have various types of
off-balance-sheet arrangements that we enter into in the ordinary
course of business. our involvement in these arrangements can take
many different forms, including purchasing or retaining residual
and other interests in mortgage-backed and other asset-backed
securitization vehicles; holding senior and subordinated debt,
interests in limited and general partnerships, and preferred and
common stock in other nonconsolidated vehicles; entering into
interest rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit
derivatives; entering into operating leases; and providing
guarantees, indemnifications, loan commitments, letters of credit,
representations and warranties.
we enter into these arrangements for
a variety of business purposes, primarily related to the
securitization of commercial and residential mortgages, home equity
and auto loans, government and corporate bonds, and other types of
financial assets. other reasons for entering into these
arrangements include underwriting client securitization
transactions; providing secondary market liquidity; making
investments in performing and nonperforming debt, equity, real
estate and other assets; providing investors with credit-linked and
asset-repackaged notes; and receiving or providing letters of
credit to satisfy margin requirements and to facilitate the
clearance and settlement process.
variable interest entities (vies) and
qualifying special-purpose entities (qspes) are critical to the
functioning of several significant investor markets, including the
mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities markets, since
they provide market liquidity to financial assets by offering
investors access to specific cash flows and risks created through
the securitization process. our financial interests in, and
derivative transactions with, such nonconsolidated entities are
accounted for at fair value, in the same manner as our other
financial instruments, except in cases where we exert significant
influence over an entity and apply the equity method of accounting.
table of contents
the following table sets forth where
a discussion of these and other off-balance-sheet arrangements may
be found in partii, items7 and 8 of the annual report on
form10-k:
type of off-balance-sheet arrangement
disclosure in annual report on form10-k
retained interests or contingent interests in assets transferred by
us to nonconsolidated entities
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
other obligations, including contingent obligations, arising out of
variable interests we have in nonconsolidated entities
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
derivative contracts
see
critical accounting policies above
andrisk
management below and note3 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
guarantees
see note6 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
leases, letters of credit, and loans and other commitments
see capital and funding below and note6 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k.
in addition, see note2 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k for a discussion of our
consolidation policies.
capital and funding
capital
the amount of capital we hold is
principally determined by regulatory capital requirements, rating
agency guidelines, subsidiary capital requirements and our overall
risk profile, which is largely driven by the size and composition
of our trading and investing positions. goldman sachs total
capital (total shareholders equity and long-term borrowings)
increased 21% to $128.01billion as of november2005 compared
with $105.78billion as of november2004. see risk
management liquidity risk cash flows below for a
discussion of how we deployed capital raised as part of our
financing activities.
the increase in total capital
resulted primarily from an increase in long-term borrowings to
$100.01billion as of november2005 from $80.70billion as
of november2004. the weighted average maturity of our long-term
borrowings as of november2005 was approximately seven years. we
swap a substantial portion of our long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar
obligations with short-term floating interest rates in
order to minimize our exposure to interest rates and foreign
exchange movements. see note5 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding our long-term
borrowings.
over the past several years, our
ratio of long-term borrowings to total shareholders equity has
been increasing. the growth in our long-term borrowings has been
driven primarily by (i)our ability to replace a portion of our
short-term borrowings with long-term borrowings and pre-fund
near-term refinancing requirements, in light of the favorable debt
financing environment, and (ii)the need to increase total
capital in response to growth in our trading and investing
businesses.
table of contents
total shareholders equity increased
by 12% to $28.00billion (common equity of $26.25billion
and preferred stock of $1.75billion) as of november2005 from
$25.08billion as of november2004. during 2005, goldman sachs
issued 70,000shares of preferred stock in three series as set
forth in the following table:
preferred stock by series
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
description
date issued
issued
authorized
redemption date
(in millions)
a
perpetual floating rate
april25, 2005
30,000
50,000
april25, 2010
$
non-cumulative
b
perpetual 6.20%
october31, 2005
32,000
50,000
october31, 2010
non-cumulative
c
perpetual floating rate
october31, 2005
8,000
25,000
october31, 2010
non-cumulative
70,000
125,000
$
1,750
each share of preferred stock has a
par value of $0.01, has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is
represented by1,000 depositary shares and is redeemable at our
option at a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus declared and
unpaid dividends. our ability to declare or pay dividends on, or
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, our common stock is subject
to certain restrictions in the event we fail to pay or set aside
full dividends on our preferred stock for the latest completed
dividend period. all preferred stock also has a preference over our
common stock upon liquidation.
our stock repurchase program is
intended to help maintain our total shareholders equity at
appropriate levels and to substantially offset increases in share
count over time resulting from employee equity-based compensation.
the repurchase program has been effected primarily through regular
open-market purchases and is influenced by, among other factors,
the level of our common shareholders equity, our overall capital
position, employee equity awards granted and exercises of employee
stock options, the prevailing market price of our common stock and
general market conditions.
during 2005, we repurchased 63.7million
shares of our common stock at a total cost of $7.11billion,
and during 2004, we repurchased 18.7million shares of
our common stock at a total cost of $1.81billion. the average
price paid per share for repurchased shares was $111.57 and $96.29
for the years ended november2005 and november2004, respectively.
the increase in the level of repurchases in 2005 compared with 2004
primarily reflects our decision to manage the growth of our common
shareholders equity. in addition, to satisfy minimum statutory
employee tax withholding requirements related to the delivery of
shares underlying restricted stock units, we cancelled 1.6million
restricted stock units at a total cost of $163million
in 2005 and we cancelled 9.1million restricted stock units at
a total cost of $870million in 2004. as of november2005, we
were authorized to repurchase up to 42.7million additional
shares of stock pursuant to our repurchase program. for additional
information on our repurchase program, see market for registrants
common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of
equity securities in partii, item5 of the annual report
on form10-k.
table of contents
the following table sets forth
information on our assets, shareholders equity, leverage ratios
and book value per common share:
as of november
($ in millions, except per
share amounts)
total assets
$
706,804
$
531,379
adjusted assets(1)
466,019
347,082
total shareholders equity
28,002
25,079
tangible equity capital(2)
25,549
22,958
leverage ratio(3)
25.2x
21.2x
adjusted leverage ratio(4)
18.2x
15.1x
debt to equity ratio(5)
3.6x
3.2x
common shareholders equity
26,252
25,079
tangible common shareholders equity(6)
21,049
20,208
book value per common share(7)
$
57.02
$
50.77
tangible book value per common share(8)
45.72
40.91
(1)
adjusted assets excludes (i)low-risk
collateralized assets generally associated with our
matched book and securities lending businesses (which we
calculate by adding our securities purchased under
agreements to resell and securities borrowed, and then
subtracting our nonderivative short positions), (ii)cash
and securities we segregate for regulatory and other
purposes and (iii)goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets. the following table sets forth a
reconciliation of total assets to adjusted assets:
as of november
(in millions)
total assets
$
706,804
$
531,379
deduct:
securities purchased under agreements to resell
(83,619
)
(44,257
)
securities borrowed
(191,800
)
(155,086
)
add:
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
149,071
132,097
less derivative liabilities
(57,829
)
(64,001
)
subtotal
91,242
68,096
deduct:
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(51,405
)
(48,179
)
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(5,203
)
(4,871
)
adjusted assets
$
466,019
$
347,082
(2)
tangible equity capital equals total
shareholders equity and junior subordinated debt issued
to a trust less goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets. we consider junior subordinated debt issued to a
trust to be a component of our tangible equity capital
base due to the inherent characteristics of these
securities, including the long-term nature of the
securities, our ability to defer coupon interest for up
to ten consecutive semiannual periods and the
subordinated nature of the obligations in our capital
structure. the following table sets forth the
reconciliation of total shareholders equity to tangible
equity capital:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
28,002
$
25,079
add:
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust
2,750
2,750
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(5,203
)
(4,871
)
tangible equity capital
$
25,549
$
22,958
table of contents
(3)
leverage ratio equals total assets divided by
total shareholders equity.
(4)
adjusted leverage ratio equals adjusted assets
divided by tangible equity capital. we believe that the
adjusted leverage ratio is a more meaningful measure of
our capital adequacy than the leverage ratio because it
excludes certain low-risk collateralized assets that are
generally supported with little or no capital and
reflects the tangible equity capital deployed in our
businesses.
(5)
debt to equity ratio equals long-term borrowings
divided by total shareholders equity.
(6)
tangible common shareholders equity equals total
shareholders equity less preferred stock and goodwill
and identifiable intangible assets. the following table
sets forth a reconciliation of total shareholders equity
to tangible common shareholders equity:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
28,002
$
25,079
deduct:
preferred stock
(1,750
)
common shareholders equity
$
26,252
$
25,079
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(5,203
)
(4,871
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$
21,049
$
20,208
(7)
book value per common share is based on common
shares outstanding, including restricted stock units
granted to employees with no future service requirements,
of 460.4million and 494.0million as of november
2005 and november2004, respectively.
(8)
tangible book value per common share is computed
by dividing tangible common shareholders equity by the
number of common shares outstanding, including restricted
stock units granted to employees with no future service
requirements.
short-term borrowings
goldman sachs obtains secured and
unsecured short-term borrowings primarily through the issuance of
promissory notes, commercial paper and bank loans. short-term
borrowings also include the portion of long-term borrowings
maturing within one year of our financial statement date and
certain long-term borrowings that are redeemable within one year of
our financial statement date at the option of the holder.
the following table sets forth our
short-term borrowings by product:
short-term borrowings
(in millions)
as of november
promissory notes
$
17,339
$
19,513
commercial paper
5,154
4,355
bank loans and other
15,975
13,474
current portion of long-term borrowings
16,751
17,617
total
$
55,219
$
54,959
our liquidity depends to an important
degree on our ability to refinance these borrowings on a continuous
basis. investors who hold our outstanding promissory notes
(short-term unsecured debt that is nontransferable and in which
goldman sachs does not make a market) and commercial paper have no
obligation to purchase new instruments when the outstanding
instruments mature.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our
secured and unsecured short-term borrowings:
as of november
(in millions)
secured short-term borrowings
$
7,972
$
8,558
unsecured short-term borrowings
47,247
46,401
total short-term borrowings
$
55,219
$
54,959
a large portion of our secured
short-term borrowings are similar in nature to our other
collateralized financing sources such as securities sold under
agreements to repurchase. these secured short-term borrowings
provide goldman sachs with a more stable source of liquidity than
unsecured short-term borrowings, as they are less sensitive to
changes in our credit ratings due to underlying collateral. our
unsecured short-term borrowings include extendible debt if the
earliest maturity occurs within one year of our financial statement
date. extendible debt is debt that allows the holder the right to
extend the maturity date at predetermined periods during the
contractual life of the instrument. these borrowings can be, and in
the past generally have been, extended. see risk management
liquidity risk below for a discussion of the principal
liquidity policies we have in place to manage the liquidity risk
associated with our short-term borrowings. for a discussion of
factors that could impair our ability to access the capital
markets, see certain risk factors that may affect our
business above. see note4 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding our short-term
borrowings.
credit ratings
we rely upon the short-term and
long-term debt capital markets to fund a significant portion of our
day-to-day operations. the cost and availability of debt financing
is influenced by our credit ratings. credit ratings are important
when we are competing in certain markets and when we seek to engage
in longer term transactions, including otc derivatives. we believe
our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit rating
agencies assessment of our liquidity, market, credit and
operational risk management practices, the level and variability of
our earnings, our capital base, our franchise, reputation and
management, our corporate governance and the external operating
environment. see certain risk factors that may affect our
business above for a discussion of the risks associated with a
reduction in our credit ratings.
the following table sets forth our
unsecured credit ratings as of november2005:
short-term debt
long-term debt
preferred stock
dominion bond rating service limited (1)
r-1 (middle)
a (high)
n/a
fitch, inc.
f1+
aa-
a+
moodys investors service
p-1
aa3
a2
standard& poors (2)
a-1
a+
a-
(1)
on november22, 2005, dominion bond rating
service limited placed goldman sachs long-term debt
issuer rating under review with positive implications.
(2)
on october11, 2005, standard& poors
affirmed goldman sachs long-term debt rating and revised
its outlook from stable to positive.
table of contents
as of november2005, collateral or
termination payments pursuant to bilateral agreements with certain
counterparties of approximately $384million would have been
required in the event of a one-level reduction in our long-term
credit ratings. in evaluating our liquidity requirements, we
consider additional collateral or termination payments that would
be required in the event of further reductions in our long-term
credit ratings, as well as collateral that has not been called by
counterparties, but is available to them. for a further discussion
of our excess liquidity policies, see risk management
liquidity risk excess liquidity maintenance of a pool
of highly liquid securities below.
contractual obligations and contingent commitments
goldman sachs has contractual
obligations to make future payments under long-term debt and
long-term noncancelable lease agreements and has contingent
commitments under a variety of commercial arrangements.
the following table sets forth our
contractual obligations as of november2005:
contractual obligations
(in millions)
2007-
2009-
2011-
thereafter
total
long-term
borrowings by contractmaturity (1) (2)
$
$
23,613
$
26,444
$
49,950
$
100,007
minimum rental payments
2,134
4,002
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year of
our financial statement date and certain long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of our
financial statement date at the option of the holder are
included as short-term borrowings in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
(2)
long-term borrowings repayable at the option of
goldman sachs are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. certain long-term borrowings that are redeemable
prior to maturity at the option of the holder are
reflected at the dates such options become exercisable.
as of november2005, our long-term
borrowings were $100.01billion and consisted principally of
senior borrowings with maturities extending to 2035. these
long-term borrowings consisted of $15.67billion in secured
long-term borrowings and $84.34billion in unsecured long-term
borrowings. as of november2005, long-term borrowings included
nonrecourse debt of $13.63billion, consisting of $5.11billion
issued by william street funding corporation (a wholly
owned subsidiary of groupinc. formed to raise funding to
support loan commitments to investment-grade clients made by
another wholly owned william street entity), and $8.52billion
issued by other consolidated entities, of which $1.33billion
was related to our power generation facilities. nonrecourse debt is
debt that only the issuing subsidiary or, if applicable, a
subsidiary guaranteeing the debt is obligated to repay. see note5
to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on form10-k for further
information regarding our long-term borrowings.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our
quarterly long-term borrowings maturity profile through fiscal2011:
long-term borrowings maturity profile
($ in millions)
(1)
our long-term borrowings include extendible debt
if the earliest maturity is one year or greater from our
financial statement date. extendible debt is categorized
in the maturity profile at the earliest possible maturity
date even though the debt can be, and in the past
generally has been, extended.
as of november2005, our future
minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals, under
noncancelable leases were $4.00billion. these lease
commitments, principally for office space, expire on various dates
through 2069. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation
provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges.
during our third fiscal quarter of
2005, we announced plans for a new world headquarters in new york
city, with initial occupancy scheduled for 2009, at an expected
cost of $2.3billion to $2.5billion. goldman sachs will
partially finance the project with tax-exempt liberty bonds. as of
november2005, we borrowed approximately $1.4billion through
the issuance of liberty bonds and may borrow up to an additional
$250million through the issuance of additional liberty bonds before 2010. as of november2005, we had
outstanding construction-related commitments of $47million in
connection with this project. included in our future minimum rental
payments under noncancelable lease agreements is $309million
related to a 64-year ground lease for the land on which our world
headquarters will be constructed, of which $161million is a
lump-sum payment due by june2007. see note6 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k for further information regarding
our leases.
our occupancy expenses include costs
associated with office space held in excess of our current
requirements. this excess space, the cost of which is charged to
earnings as incurred, is being held for potential growth or to
replace currently occupied space that we may exit in the future. we
regularly evaluate our current and future space capacity in
relation to current and projected staffing levels. we may incur
exit costs in 2006 and thereafter to the extent we (i)reduce
our space capacity or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties
in the locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of
existing space that had been held for potential growth. these exit
costs may be material to our results of operations in a given
period.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our
contingent commitments as of november2005:
contingent commitments
(in millions)
commitment amount by period of expiration
2007-
2009-
2011-
thereafter
total
commitments to extend credit
william street program
$
1,811
$
1,788
$
9,385
$
1,521
$
14,505
other commercial lending:
investment-grade
9,592
5,893
1,008
1,099
17,592
non-investment-grade
1,783
1,361
3,569
11,823
18,536
warehouse financing
7,614
2,746
10,489
total commitments to extend credit
20,800
11,788
13,972
14,562
61,122
commitments under letters of credit issued by banks to counterparties
9,205
9,234
other commercial commitments(1)
1,069
3,127
4,758
total
$
31,074
$
12,129
$
17,111
$
14,800
$
75,114
(1)
includes our corporate and real estate investment
fund commitments, construction-related commitments and
other purchase commitments.
our commitments to extend credit are
agreements to lend to counterparties that have fixed termination
dates and are contingent on the satisfaction of all conditions to
borrowing set forth in the contract. in connection with our lending
activities, we had outstanding commitments of $61.12billion as
of november2005 compared with $27.72billion as of november
2004. the increase primarily related to our commercial lending
activities outside the william street credit extension program, and
such commitments were generally extended in connection with
contingent acquisition financing and other types of corporate
lending. since these commitments may expire unused, the total
commitment amount does not necessarily reflect the actual future
cash flow requirements. we may reduce our credit risk on these
commitments by syndicating all or substantial portions of
commitments to other investors. in addition, commitments that are
extended for contingent acquisition financing are often short-term
in nature, as borrowers often replace them with other funding
sources. with respect to the william street credit extension
program, substantially all of the commitments extended are to
investment-grade corporate borrowers. with respect to these
commitments, we have credit loss protection provided to us by smfg,
which is generally limited to 95% of the first loss we realize on
approved loan commitments, subject to a maximum of $1.00billion.
in addition, subject to the satisfaction of certain
conditions, upon our request, smfg will provide protection for 70%
of the second loss on such commitments, subject to a maximum of
$1.13billion. we also use other financial instruments to hedge
certain william street commitments not covered by smfg.
as of november2005, we had
commitments to enter into forward secured financing transactions,
including certain repurchase and resale agreements and secured
borrowing and lending arrangements, of $49.93billion.
see note6 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k for further information regarding our
commitments, contingencies and guarantees.
table of contents
regulation
during our second fiscal quarter of
2005, goldman sachs became regulated by the u.s.securities and
exchange commission (sec)as a consolidated supervised entity
(cse). as such, goldman sachs is subject to group-wide supervision
and examination by the sec and is subject to minimum capital
requirements on a consolidated basis. as of november2005, goldman
sachs was in compliance with the cse capital requirements.
the european unions european
financial groups directive (directive 2002/87/ec) introduced
certain changes to the way financial conglomerates and other
financial services organizations operating in europe are regulated.
as a result of these changes, activities that are conducted in
otherwise unregulated entities are now subject to certain forms of
regulation, including consolidated supervision and capital adequacy
requirements. the measures we have taken to comply with the
directive include becoming regulated as a cse.
in addition, many of our principal
subsidiaries are subject to separate regulation in the united
states and/or elsewhere. goldman, sachs& co. and goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. are registered u.s.broker-dealers
and futures commissions merchants, and their primary
regulators include the sec, the commodity futures trading
commission, the chicago board of trade, the nyse, the national
association of securities dealers, inc. and the national futures
association. goldman sachs international, a regulated u.k.
broker-dealer, is subject to regulation primarily by the financial
services authority. goldman sachs (japan) ltd., a regulated
broker-dealer based in tokyo, is subject to regulation by the
financial services agency, the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka
securities exchange, the tokyo international financial futures
exchange, the japan securities dealers association, the tokyo
commodity exchange, and the ministry of economy, trade and
industry. several other subsidiaries of goldman sachs are regulated
by securities, investment advisory, banking, and other regulators
and authorities around the world, such as the federal financial
supervisory authority (bafin) and the bundesbank in germany, the
autorit des marchs financiers and banque de france in france,
banca ditalia and the commissione nazionale per le societ e la
borsa (consob)in italy, the swiss federal banking commission,
the securities and futures commission in hong kong, the monetary
authority of singapore and the china securities regulatory
commission. see note15 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding our regulated
subsidiaries. for a discussion of our potential inability to access
funds from our regulated entities, see risk management
liquidity risk intercompany funding below.
risk management
management believes that effective
risk management is of primary importance to the success of goldman
sachs. accordingly, we have a comprehensive risk management process
to monitor, evaluate and manage the principal risks we assume in
conducting our activities. these risks include market, credit,
liquidity, operational, legal and reputational exposures.
risk management structure
we seek to monitor and control our
risk exposure through a variety of separate but complementary
financial, credit, operational, compliance and legal reporting
systems. in addition, a number of committees are responsible for
monitoring risk exposures and for general oversight of our risk
management process. these committees, whose responsibilities are
described below, meet regularly and consist of senior members of
both our revenue-producing units and departments that are
independent of our revenue-producing units.
table of contents
segregation of duties and management
oversight are fundamental elements of our risk management process.
in addition to the committees described below, functions that are
independent of the revenue-producing units, such as compliance,
finance, legal, management controls (internal audit) and
operations, perform risk management functions, which
include monitoring, analyzing and evaluating risk.
management committee. all risk
control functions ultimately report to our management committee.
through both direct and delegated authority, the management
committee approves all of our operating activities, trading risk
parameters and customer review guidelines.
risk committees. the firmwide risk
committee reviews the activities of existing businesses, approves
new businesses and products, approves firmwide and divisional
market risk limits, reviews business unit market risk limits,
approves market risk limits for selected sovereign markets and
business units, approves sovereign credit risk limits and credit
risk limits by ratings group, and reviews scenario analyses based
on abnormal or catastrophic market movements.
the divisional risk committee sets
market risk limits for our trading activities subject to overall
firmwide risk limits, based on a number of measures, including
value-at-risk (var), stress tests and scenario analyses. several
other committees oversee various risk, valuation, operational,
credit and business practice issues related to our asset management
business.
business unit risk limits are
established by the various risk committees and may be further
allocated by the business unit managers to individual trading
desks. trading desk managers have the first line of responsibility
for managing risk within prescribed limits. these managers have
in-depth knowledge of the primary sources of risk in their
respective markets and the instruments available to hedge their
exposures.
market risk limits are monitored by
the finance division and are reviewed regularly by the appropriate
risk committee. limit violations are reported to the appropriate
risk committee and business unit managers and addressed, as
necessary. credit risk limits are also monitored by the finance
division and reviewed by the appropriate risk committee.
business practices committee. the
business practices committee assists senior management in its
oversight of compliance, legal and operational risks and related
reputational concerns, such as potential conflicts of interest. the
business
practices committee also reviews the firms business practices, policies, and
procedures for consistency with our business principles. the
business
practices committee reviews these areas and makes recommendations for
improvements as necessary to mitigate potential risks and assist in
achieving adherence to our business principles.
capital committee. the capital
committee reviews and approves transactions involving commitments
of our capital. such capital commitments include extensions of
credit, alternative liquidity commitments, certain bond
underwritings, certain distressed debt and principal finance
activities, and certain equity-linked structured products. the
capital committee is also responsible for ensuring that business
and reputational standards for capital commitments are maintained
on a global basis.
commitments committee. the
commitments committee reviews and approves underwriting and
distribution activities, primarily with respect to offerings of
equity and equity-related securities, and sets and maintains
policies and procedures designed to ensure that legal,
reputational, regulatory and business standards are maintained in
conjunction with these activities. in addition to reviewing
specific transactions, the commitments committee periodically
conducts strategic reviews of industry sectors and products and
establishes policies in connection with transaction practices.
credit policy committee. the credit
policy committee establishes and reviews broad credit policies and
parameters that are implemented by the credit department.
table of contents
finance committee. the finance
committee establishes and ensures compliance with our liquidity
policies, approves balance sheet limits and has oversight
responsibility for liquidity risk, the size and composition of our
balance sheet and capital base, and our credit ratings. the finance
committee regularly reviews our balance sheet, funding position and
capitalization and makes adjustments in light of current events,
risks and exposures.
new products committee. the new
products committee, under the oversight of the firmwide risk
committee, is responsible for reviewing and approving new products
and businesses globally.
operational risk committee. the
operational risk committee provides oversight of the ongoing
development and implementation of our operational risk policies,
framework and methodologies, and monitors the effectiveness of
operational risk management.
structured products committee. the
structured products committee reviews and approves structured
product transactions entered into with our clients that raise
legal, regulatory, tax or accounting issues or present reputational
risk to goldman sachs.
market risk
the potential for changes in the
market value of our trading and investing positions is referred to
as market risk. such positions result from market-making,
specialist, proprietary trading and investing, and underwriting
activities.
categories of market risk include
exposures to interest rates, equity prices, currency rates and
commodity prices. a description of each market risk category is set
forth below:
interest rate risks primarily result from exposures to changes in the level, slope
and curvature of the yield curve, the volatility of interest rates, mortgage
prepayment speeds and credit spreads.
equity price risks result from exposures to changes in prices and volatilities of
individual equities, equity baskets and equity indices.
currency rate risks result from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward
prices and volatilities of currency rates.
commodity price risks result from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward
prices and volatilities of commodities, such as electricity, natural gas, crude oil,
petroleum products, and precious and base metals.
we seek to manage these risks by
diversifying exposures, controlling position sizes and establishing
hedges in related securities or derivatives. for example, we may
hedge a portfolio of common stocks by taking an offsetting position
in a related equity-index futures contract. the ability to manage
an exposure may, however, be limited by adverse changes in the
liquidity of the security or the related hedge instrument and in
the correlation of price movements between the security and related
hedge instrument.
table of contents
in addition to applying business
judgment, senior management uses a number of quantitative tools to
manage our exposure to market risk. these tools include:
risk limits based on a summary measure of market risk exposure referred to as var,
which are updated and monitored on a daily basis;
scenario analyses, stress tests and other analytical tools that measure the
potential effects on our net revenues of various market events, including, but not
limited to, a large widening of credit spreads, a substantial decline in equity
markets and significant moves in selected sovereign markets;and
inventory position limits for selected business units.
var
var is the potential loss in value of
goldman sachs trading positions due to adverse market movements
over a defined time horizon with a specified confidence level.
for the var numbers reported below, a
one-day time horizon and a 95% confidence level were used. this
means that there is a 1 in 20 chance that daily trading net
revenues will fall below the expected daily trading net revenues by
an amount at least as large as the reported var. thus, shortfalls
from expected trading net revenues on a single trading day greater
than the reported var would be anticipated to occur, on average,
about once a month. shortfalls on a single day can exceed reported
var by significant amounts. shortfalls can also accumulate over a
longer time horizon such as a number of consecutive trading days.
the var numbers below are shown
separately for interest rate, equity, currency and commodity
products, as well as for our overall trading positions. the var
numbers in each risk category include the underlying product
positions and related hedges that may include positions in other
product areas. for example, the hedge of a foreign exchange forward
may include an interest rate futures position, and the hedge of a
long corporate bond position may include a short position in the
related equity.
the modeling of the risk
characteristics of our trading positions involves a number of
assumptions and approximations. while management believes that
these assumptions and approximations are reasonable, there is no
standard methodology for estimating var, and different assumptions
and/or approximations could produce materially different var
estimates.
we use historical data to estimate
our var and, to better reflect current asset volatilities, we
generally weight historical data to give greater importance to more
recent observations. given its reliance on historical data, var is
most effective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which
there are no sudden fundamental changes or shifts in market
conditions. an inherent limitation of var is that the distribution
of past changes in market risk factors may not produce accurate
predictions of future market risk. different var methodologies and
distributional assumptions could produce a materially different
var. moreover, var calculated for a one-day time horizon does not
fully capture the market risk of positions that cannot be
liquidated or offset with hedges within one day. changes in var
between reporting periods are generally due to changes in levels of
exposure, volatilities and/or correlations among asset classes.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the
daily var:
average daily var(1)
(in millions)
year ended november
risk categories
interest rates
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect(2)
(44
)
(41
)
(43
)
total
$
$
$
(1)
during the second quarter of 2004, we began to
exclude from our calculation other debt portfolios that
cannot be properly measured in var. the effect of
excluding these portfolios was not material to prior
periods and, accordingly, such periods have not been
adjusted. for a further discussion of the market risk
associated with these portfolios, see other debt
portfolios below.
(2)
equals the difference between total var and the
sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this effect
arises because the four market risk categories are not
perfectly correlated.
our average daily var increased to $70million
in 2005 from $67million in 2004. the increase was
primarily due to higher levels of exposure to commodity prices,
equity prices and interest rates, partially offset by reduced
exposures to currency rates, as well as reduced volatilities,
particularly in interest rate and equity assets.
our average daily var increased to
$67million in 2004 from $58million in 2003, primarily
due to higher levels of exposure to equity prices, currency rates
and commodity prices, partially offset by reduced exposures to
interest rates, as well as reduced volatilities, particularly in
interest rate and equity assets.
daily var
(in millions)
year ended
asofnovember
november 2005
risk categories
high
low
interest rates
$
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect(1)
(44
)
(40
)
total
$
$
$
$
(1)
equals the difference between total var and the
sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this effect
arises because the four market risk categories are not
perfectly correlated.
our daily var increased to $83million
as of november2005 from $66million as of november2004.
the increase was primarily due to higher levels of exposure
to equity prices and interest rates, partially offset by reduced
exposures to commodity prices and currency rates, as well as
reduced volatilities in equity, currency and commodity assets.
table of contents
the following chart presents our
daily var during 2005:
daily var
($ in millions)
trading net revenues distribution
substantially all of our
inventory positions are marked-to-market on a daily basis and
changes are recorded in net revenues. the following chart sets
forth the frequency distribution of our daily trading net
revenues for substantially all inventory positions included in
var for the year ended november2005:
daily trading net revenues
($ in millions)
daily trading net
revenues
as part of our overall risk
control process, daily trading net revenues are compared with
var calculated as of the end of the prior business day. trading
losses incurred on a single day did not exceed our 95% one-day
var during 2005.
table of contents
other debt portfolios
the market risk associated with
portfolios in our credit products business that cannot be properly
measured in var (primarily due to inadequate historical data on the
underlying assets in the aggregate) is measured based on a
potential 10% decline in the asset value of such portfolios. the
market values of the underlying positions are sensitive to changes
in a number of factors, including discount rates and the projected
timing and amount of future cash flows. as of november2005, the
potential impact of a 10% decline in the asset value of these
portfolios was $669million compared with $416million as
of november2004. the increase in 2005 is primarily due to new
investments in the americas and asia.
nontrading risk
smfg. the market risk of our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg, net of the
economic hedge on the unrestricted shares of common stock
underlying a portion of our investment, is measured using a
sensitivity analysis that estimates the potential reduction in our
net revenues associated with a 10% decline in the smfg common stock
price. as of november2005, the sensitivity of our investment to a
10% decline in the smfg common stock price was $262million
compared with $236million as of november2004. the change is
primarily due to an increase in the smfg common stock price and, to
a lesser extent, the impact of the passage of time in respect of
the transfer restrictions on the underlying common stock, partially
offset by the effect of hedging the unrestricted shares of common
stock underlying our investment. this sensitivity should not be
extrapolated to other movements in the smfg common stock price, as
the relationship between the fair value of our investment and the
smfg common stock price is nonlinear.
other principal investments. the
market risk for financial instruments in our nontrading portfolio,
including our merchant banking investments but excluding our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg, is measured
using a sensitivity analysis that estimates the potential reduction
in our net revenues associated with a 10% decline in equity
markets. this sensitivity analysis is based on certain assumptions
regarding the relationship between changes in stock price indices
and changes in the fair value of the individual financial
instruments in our nontrading portfolio. different assumptions
could produce materially different risk estimates. as of november2005,
the sensitivity of our nontrading portfolio (excluding
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg) to a 10%
equity market decline was $181million compared with $118million
as of november2004, primarily reflecting new private
investments.
credit risk
credit risk represents the loss that
we would incur if a counterparty or an issuer of securities or
other instruments we hold fails to perform under its contractual
obligations to us, or upon a deterioration in the credit quality of
third parties whose securities or obligations we hold. to reduce
our credit exposures, we seek to enter into netting agreements with
counterparties that permit us to offset receivables and payables
with such counterparties. in addition, we attempt to further reduce
credit risk with certain counterparties by (i)entering into
agreements that enable us to obtain collateral from a counterparty
or to terminate or reset the terms of transactions after specified
time periods or upon the occurrence of credit-related events, (ii)seeking
third-party guarantees of the counterpartys
obligations, and/or (iii)using credit derivatives and other
structures and techniques.
for most businesses, counterparty
credit limits are established by the credit department, which is
independent of the revenue-producing departments, based on
guidelines set by the firmwide risk committee and the credit policy
committee. for most products, we measure and limit credit exposures
by reference to both current and potential exposure. we typically
measure potential exposure based on projected worst-case market
movements over the life of a transaction within a 95% confidence
interval. for collateralized transactions, we also evaluate
potential exposure over a shorter collection period, and give
effect to the value of collateral received. we further seek to
measure credit exposure through the use of scenario analyses,
stress tests and other quantitative
table of contents
tools. our global credit
management systems monitor current and potential credit exposure to
individual counterparties and on an aggregate basis to
counterparties and their affiliates. these systems also provide
management, including the firmwide risk and credit policy
committees, with information regarding overall credit risk by
product, industry sector, country and region.
as of both november2005 and november
2004, we held u.s.government and federal agency obligations
that represented 7% and 5% of our total assets, respectively. in
addition, most of our securities purchased under agreements to
resell are collateralized by u.s.government, federal agency
and other sovereign obligations. as of november2005 and november
2004, we did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty
that exceeded 5% of our total assets. however, over the past
several years, the amount and duration of our credit exposures have
been increasing, due to, among other factors, the growth of our
lending and otc derivative activities. a further discussion of our
derivative activities follows below.
derivatives
derivative contracts are instruments,
such as futures, forwards, swaps or option contracts, that derive
their value from underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a
combination of these factors. derivative instruments may be
privately negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
substantially all of our derivative
transactions are entered into for trading purposes, to facilitate
client transactions, to take proprietary positions or as a means of
risk management. in addition to derivative transactions entered
into for trading purposes, we enter into derivative contracts to
hedge our net investment in non-u.s.operations and to manage
the interest rate and currency exposure on our long-term borrowings
and certain short-term borrowings.
derivatives are used in many of our
businesses, and we believe that the associated market risk can only
be understood relative to all of the underlying assets or risks
being hedged, or as part of a broader trading strategy.
accordingly, the market risk of derivative positions is managed
together with our nonderivative positions.
fair values of our derivative
contracts are reflected net of cash paid or received pursuant to
credit support agreements and are reported on a net-by-counterparty
basis in our consolidated statements of financial condition when
management believes a legal right of setoff exists under an
enforceable netting agreement. for an otc derivative, our credit
exposure is directly with our counterparty and continues until the
maturity or termination of such contract.
the following table sets forth the
distribution, by credit rating, of substantially all of our
exposure with respect to otc derivatives as of november2005, after
taking into consideration the effect of netting agreements. the
categories shown reflect our internally determined public rating
agency equivalents.
over-the-counter derivative credit exposure
($ in millions)
exposure
percentage of
collateral
net of
total exposure
credit rating equivalent
exposure(1)
held
collateral
net of collateral
aaa/aaa
$
4,332
$
$
4,110
%
aa/aa2
9,721
1,801
7,920
a/a2
13,166
3,332
9,834
bbb/baa2
10,209
2,809
7,400
bb/ba2 or lower
8,859
3,330
5,529
unrated
1,376
total
$
47,663
$
12,076
$
35,587
%
(1)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support
agreements of $22.61billion.
table of contents
the following tables set forth our
otc derivative credit exposure, net of collateral, by remaining
contractual maturity:
exposure net of collateral
(in millions)
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
credit rating equivalent
months
months
years
years
or greater
total (1)
aaa/aaa
$
$
$
1,053
$
1,074
$
$
4,110
aa/aa2
1,897
1,954
2,228
1,245
7,920
a/a2
3,049
1,009
2,542
1,841
1,393
9,834
bbb/baa2
2,151
2,700
1,519
7,400
bb/ba2 or lower
1,558
2,850
5,529
unrated
total
$
9,806
$
3,069
$
11,292
$
6,228
$
5,192
$
35,587
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total(1)
interest rates
$
1,591
$
$
3,212
$
4,237
$
3,946
$
13,332
currencies
4,395
1,506
1,022
8,271
commodities
3,381
1,240
6,082
11,530
equities
2,454
total
$
9,806
$
3,069
$
11,292
$
6,228
$
5,192
$
35,587
(1)
where we have obtained collateral from a
counterparty under a master trading agreement that covers
multiple products and transactions, we have allocated the
collateral ratably based on exposure before giving effect
to such collateral.
derivative transactions may also
involve legal risks including the risk that they are not authorized
or appropriate for a counterparty, that documentation has not been
properly executed or that executed agreements may not be
enforceable against the counterparty. we attempt to minimize these
risks by obtaining advice of counsel on the enforceability of
agreements as well as on the authority of a counterparty to effect
the derivative transaction. in addition, certain derivative
transactions involve the risk that we may have difficulty
obtaining, or be unable to obtain, the underlying security or
obligation in order to satisfy any physical settlement requirement
or that the derivative may have been assigned to a different
counterparty without our knowledge or consent.
liquidity risk
liquidity is of critical importance
to companies in the financial services sector. most failures of
financial institutions have occurred in large part due to
insufficient liquidity resulting from adverse circumstances.
accordingly, goldman sachs has in place a comprehensive set of
liquidity and funding policies that are intended to maintain
significant flexibility to address both firm-specific and broader
industry or market liquidity events. our principal objective is to
be able to fund goldman sachs and to enable our core businesses to
continue to generate revenue even under adverse circumstances.
management has implemented a number
of policies according to the following liquidity risk management
framework:
excess liquidity maintain substantial excess liquidity to meet a broad range
of potential cash outflows in a stressed environment including financing obligations.
asset-liability management ensure we fund our assets with appropriate
financing.
intercompany funding maintain parent company liquidity and manage the
distribution of liquidity across the group structure.
crisis planning ensure all funding and liquidity management is based on
stress-scenario planning and feeds into our liquidity crisis plan.
table of contents
excess liquidity
maintenance of a pool of highly
liquid securities. our most important liquidity policy is to
pre-fund what we estimate will be our likely cash needs during a
liquidity crisis and hold such excess liquidity in the form of
unencumbered, highly liquid securities that may be sold or pledged
to provide same-day liquidity. this global core excess liquidity
is intended to allow us to meet immediate obligations without
needing to sell other assets or depend on additional funding from
credit-sensitive markets. we believe that this pool of excess
liquidity provides us with a resilient source of funds and gives us
significant flexibility in managing through a difficult funding
environment. our global core excess reflects the following
principles:
the first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most critical to a companys
survival.
focus must be maintained on all potential cash and collateral outflows, not just
disruptions to financing flows. goldman sachs businesses are diverse, and its cash
needs are driven by many factors, including market movements, collateral
requirements and client commitments, all of which can change dramatically in a
difficult funding environment.
during a liquidity crisis, credit-sensitive funding, including unsecured debt and
some types of secured financing agreements, may be unavailable and the terms or
availability of other types of secured financing may change.
as a result of our policy to pre-fund liquidity that we estimate may be needed in
a crisis, we hold more unencumbered securities and larger unsecured debt balances
than our businesses would otherwise require. we believe that our liquidity is
stronger with greater balances of highly liquid unencumbered securities, even though
it increases our unsecured liabilities.
the following table sets forth the
average loan value (the estimated amount of cash that would be
advanced by counterparties against these securities) of our global
core excess:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.dollar-denominated
$
35,310
$
33,858
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
11,029
8,135
total global core excess
$
46,339
$
41,993
the u.s.dollar-denominated
excess is comprised of only unencumbered u.s.government and
agency securities and highly liquid mortgage securities, all of
which are federal reserve repo-eligible, as well as overnight cash
deposits. our non-u.s.dollar-denominated excess is comprised
of only unencumbered french, german, united kingdom and japanese
government bonds and euro, british pound and japanese yen overnight
cash deposits. we strictly limit our global core excess to this
narrowly defined list of securities and cash that we believe are
highly liquid, even in a difficult funding environment.
the majority of our global core
excess is structured such that it is available to meet the
liquidity requirements of our parent company, group inc., and all
of its subsidiaries. the remainder is held in our principal non-u.s.operating
entities, primarily to better match the currency and
timing requirements for those entities potential liquidity
obligations.
table of contents
the size of our global core excess is
determined by an internal liquidity model together with a
qualitative assessment of the condition of the financial markets
and of goldman sachs. our liquidity model identifies and estimates
cash and collateral outflows over a short-term horizon in a
liquidity crisis, including, but not limited to:
upcoming maturities of unsecured debt and letters of credit;
potential buybacks of a portion of our outstanding negotiable unsecured debt;
adverse changes in the terms or availability of secured funding;
derivatives and other margin and collateral outflows, including those due to
market moves or increased requirements;
additional collateral that could be called in the event of a downgrade in our
credit ratings;
draws on our unfunded commitments not supported by william street funding
corporation(1);and
upcoming cash outflows, such as tax and other large payments.
other unencumbered assets. in
addition to our global core excess described above, we have a
significant amount of other unencumbered securities as a result of
our business activities. these assets, which are located in the
united states, europe and asia, include other government bonds,
high-grade money market securities, corporate bonds and marginable
equities. we do not include these securities in our global core
excess.
we maintain global core excess and
other unencumbered assets in an amount that, if pledged or sold,
would provide the funds necessary to replace at least 110% of our
unsecured obligations that are scheduled to mature (or where
holders have the option to redeem) within the next 12months.
this implies that we could fund our positions on a secured basis
for one year in the event we were unable to issue new unsecured
debt or liquidate assets. we assume conservative loan values that
are based on stress-scenario borrowing capacity and we regularly
review these assumptions asset-by-asset. the estimated aggregate
loan value of our global core excess and our other unencumbered
assets averaged $125.36billion in 2005 and $100.51billion
in 2004.
asset-liability management
asset quality and balance sheet
composition. we seek to maintain a highly liquid balance sheet and
substantially all of our inventory is marked-to-market daily. we
utilize aged inventory limits for certain financial instruments as
a disincentive to our businesses to hold inventory over longer
periods of time. we believe that these limits provide a
complementary mechanism for ensuring appropriate balance sheet
liquidity in addition to our standard position limits. in addition,
we periodically reduce the size of certain parts of our balance
sheet to comply with period end limits set by management. because
of these periodic reductions and certain other factors including
seasonal activity, market conventions and periodic market
opportunities in certain of our businesses that result in larger
positions during the middle of our reporting periods, our balance
sheet fluctuates between financial statement dates and is lower at
fiscal period end than would be observed on an average basis. over
the last six quarters, our total assets and adjusted assets at
quarter end have been, on average, 9% and 11% lower, respectively,
than amounts that would have been observed, based on a weekly
average, over that period. these differences, however, have not
resulted in material changes to our credit risk, market risk or
liquidity position because they are generally in highly liquid
assets that are typically financed on a secured basis.
(1)
the global core excess excludes liquid assets held separately to support
the william street credit extension program.
table of contents
certain financial instruments may be
more difficult to fund on a secured basis during times of market
stress and, accordingly, we generally hold higher levels of capital
for these assets than more liquid types of financial instruments.
the table below sets forth our aggregate holdings in these
categories of financial instruments:
as of november
(in millions)
mortgage whole loans and collateralized debt obligations (1)
$
31,459
$
18,346
bank loans(2)
13,843
8,900
high-yield securities
8,822
6,057
emerging market debt securities
1,789
1,653
smfg convertible preferred stock
4,058
2,556
other corporate principal investments(3)
1,723
1,278
real estate principal investments(3)
(1)
includes certain mortgage-backed interests held
in qspes. see note3 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k for further information regarding
our securitization activities.
(2)
includes funded commitments and inventory held in
connection with our origination and secondary trading
activities.
(3)
excludes assets for which goldman sachs is not at
risk (e.g., assets related to consolidated employee-owned
merchant banking funds) of $1.93billion and $1.28billion
as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively.
a large portion of these assets are
funded on a secured basis through secured funding markets or
nonrecourse financing. we focus on demonstrating a consistent
ability to fund these assets on a secured basis for extended
periods of time to reduce refinancing risk and to help ensure that
these assets have an established amount of loan value in order that
they can be funded in periods of market stress.
see note3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k for further information regarding the
financial instruments we hold.
appropriate financing of asset base.
we seek to manage the maturity profile of our funding base such
that we should be able to liquidate our assets prior to our
liabilities coming due, even in times of prolonged or severe
liquidity stress. we generally do not rely on immediate sales of
assets (other than our global core excess) to maintain liquidity in
a distressed environment. however, we recognize that orderly asset
sales may be prudent and necessary in a persistent liquidity crisis.
in order to avoid reliance on asset
sales, our goal is to ensure that we have sufficient total capital
(long-term borrowings plus total shareholders equity) to fund our
balance sheet for at least one year. we seek to maintain total
capital in excess of the aggregate of the following long-term
financing requirements:
the portion of financial instruments owned that we believe could not be funded on
a secured basis in periods of market stress, assuming conservative loan values;
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, property, leasehold improvements and
equipment, and other illiquid assets;
derivative and other margin and collateral requirements;
anticipated draws on our unfunded loan commitments;and
capital or other forms of financing in our regulated subsidiaries that is in
excess of their long-term financing requirements. see intercompany funding
below for a further discussion of how we fund our subsidiaries.
our total capital of $128.01billion
and $105.78billion as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively, exceeded the aggregate of these
requirements.
table of contents
conservative liability structure. we
structure our liabilities conservatively to reduce refinancing risk
as well as the risk that we may redeem or repurchase certain of our
borrowings prior to their contractual maturity. for example, we may
repurchase goldman sachs commercial paper through the ordinary
course of business as a market maker. as such, we emphasize the use
of promissory notes (in which goldman sachs does not make a market)
over commercial paper in order to improve the stability of our
short-term unsecured financing base. we have also created internal
guidelines regarding the principal amount of debt maturing on any
one day or during any single week or year and have average maturity
targets for our unsecured debt programs.
we seek to maintain broad and
diversified funding sources globally for both secured and unsecured
funding. we have imposed various internal guidelines, including the
amount of our commercial paper that can be owned and letters of
credit that can be issued by any single investor or group of
investors. we benefit from distributing our debt issuances through
our own sales force to a large, diverse global creditor base and we
believe that our relationships with our creditors are critical to
our liquidity.
we access funding in a variety of
markets in the united states, europe and asia. we issue debt
through syndicated u.s.registered offerings, u.s.registered
and 144a medium-term note programs, offshore medium-term
note offerings and other bond offerings, u.s. and non-u.s.commercial
paper and promissory note issuances, and other methods.
we make extensive use of the repurchase agreement and securities
lending markets and arrange for letters of credit to be issued on
our behalf.
additionally, unsecured debt issued
by group inc. does not contain provisions that would, based solely
upon an adverse change in our credit ratings, financial ratios,
earnings, cash flows or our stock price, trigger a requirement for
an early payment, collateral support, change in terms, acceleration
of maturity or the creation of an additional financial obligation.
intercompany funding
subsidiary funding policies.
substantially all of our unsecured funding is raised by our parent
company, group inc. the parent company then lends the necessary
funds to its subsidiaries, some of which are regulated, to meet
their asset financing and capital requirements. in addition, the
parent company provides its regulated subsidiaries with the
necessary capital to meet their regulatory requirements. the
benefits of this approach to subsidiary funding include enhanced
control and greater flexibility to meet the funding requirements of
our subsidiaries.
our intercompany funding policies are
predicated on an assumption that, unless legally provided for,
funds or securities are not freely available from a subsidiary to
its parent company or other subsidiaries. in particular, many of
our subsidiaries are subject to laws that authorize regulatory
bodies to block or limit the flow of funds from those subsidiaries
to group inc. regulatory action of that kind could impede access to
funds that group inc. needs to make payments on obligations,
including debt obligations. as such, we assume that capital or
other financing provided to our regulated subsidiaries is not
available to our parent company or other subsidiaries. in addition,
we assume that the global core excess held in our principal non-u.s.operating
entities will not be available to our parent company
or other subsidiaries and therefore is available only to meet the
potential liquidity requirements of those entities.
we also manage our intercompany
exposure by requiring senior and subordinated intercompany loans to
have maturities equal to or shorter than the maturities of the
aggregate borrowings of the parent company. this policy ensures
that the subsidiaries obligations to the parent company will
generally mature in advance of the parent companys third-party
borrowings. in addition, many of our subsidiaries and affiliates
pledge collateral at loan value to the parent company to cover
their intercompany borrowings (other than subordinated debt) in
order to mitigate parent company liquidity risk.
table of contents
equity investments in subsidiaries
are generally funded with parent company equity capital. as of
november2005, groupinc.s equity investment in subsidiaries was
$25.26billion compared with its total shareholders equity of
$28.00billion.
group inc. has provided substantial
amounts of equity and subordinated indebtedness, directly or
indirectly, to its regulated subsidiaries; for example, as of
november2005, group inc. had $17.04billion of such equity and
subordinated indebtedness invested in goldman, sachs& co., its
principal u.s.registered broker-dealer; $16.06billion
invested in goldman sachs international, a regulated u.k.
broker-dealer; $2.41billion invested in goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p., a u.s.registered broker-dealer; and
$1.98billion invested in goldman sachs (japan) ltd., a
regulated broker-dealer based in tokyo. group inc. also had $44.52billion
of unsubordinated loans to these entities as of
november2005, as well as significant amounts of capital invested
in and loans to its other regulated subsidiaries.
subsidiary foreign exchange policies.
our capital invested in non-u.s.subsidiaries is generally
exposed to foreign exchange risk, substantially all of which is
hedged. in addition, we generally hedge the nontrading exposure to
foreign exchange risk that arises from transactions denominated in
currencies other than the transacting entitys functional currency.
crisis planning
in order to be prepared for a
liquidity event, or a period of market stress, we base our
liquidity risk management framework and our resulting funding and
liquidity policies on conservative stress-scenario planning.
in addition, we maintain a liquidity
crisis plan that specifies an approach for analyzing and responding
to a liquidity-threatening event. the plan provides the framework
to estimate the likely impact of a liquidity event on goldman sachs
based on some of the risks identified above and outlines which and
to what extent liquidity maintenance activities should be
implemented based on the severity of the event. it also lists the
crisis management team and internal and external parties to be
contacted to ensure effective distribution of information.
cash flows
as a global financial institution,
our cash flows are complex and interrelated and bear little
relation to our net earnings and net assets and, consequently, we
believe that traditional cash flow analysis is less meaningful in
evaluating our liquidity position than the excess liquidity and
asset-liability management policies described above. cash flow
analysis may, however, be helpful in highlighting certain macro
trends and strategic initiatives in our business.
year ended november2005. our cash
and cash equivalents increased by $5.90billion to $10.26billion
at the end of 2005. we raised $19.37billion in net
cash from financing activities, primarily in long-term debt, in
light of the favorable debt financing environment, partially offset
by common stock repurchases. we used net cash of $13.48billion
in our operating and investing activities, primarily to capitalize
on trading and investing opportunities for ourselves and our
clients.
year ended november2004. our cash
and cash equivalents decreased by $2.72billion to $4.37billion
at the end of 2004. we raised $31.75billion in net
cash from financing activities, primarily in long-term debt, in
light of the favorable debt financing environment. we used net cash
of $34.47billion in our operating and investing activities,
primarily to capitalize on trading and investing opportunities for
ourselves and our clients, to meet additional collateral
requirements at securities exchanges and clearing organizations and
to provide additional funding support for our william street loan
commitments program.
table of contents
year ended november2003. our cash
and cash equivalents increased by $2.27billion to $7.09billion
at the end of 2003. we raised $20.58billion in net
cash from financing activities, primarily in long-term debt. we
used net cash of $18.32billion in our operating and investing
activities primarily to capitalize on opportunities in our trading
and principal investing businesses, including the purchase of
investments that could be difficult to fund in periods of market
stress. we also increased our global core excess, provided funding
support for our william street loan commitments program, invested
in the convertible preferred stock of smfg and financed the
acquisition of east coast power l.l.c.
operational risk
operational risk relates to the risk
of loss arising from shortcomings or failures in internal
processes, people or systems, and from external events. operational
risk can arise from many factors ranging from routine processing
errors to potentially costly incidents arising, for example, from
major systems failures. operational risk may also cause
reputational harm. thus, efforts to identify, manage and mitigate
operational risk must be equally sensitive to the risk of
reputational damage as well as the risk of financial loss.
we manage operational risk through
the application of long-standing, but continuously evolving,
firmwide control standards: the training, supervision and
development of our people; the active participation and commitment
of senior management in a continuous process of identifying and
mitigating key operational risks across the firm; and a framework
of strong and independent control departments that monitor
operational risk on a daily basis. together, these elements form a
strong firmwide control culture that serves as the foundation of
our efforts to minimize events that create operational risk and the
damage they can cause.
the operational risk department, an
independent risk management function, is responsible for developing
and implementing a standardized framework to identify, measure,
monitor and manage operational risk across the firm. this
framework, which evolves with the changing needs of our businesses
and regulatory guidance, takes into account internal and external
operational risk events, business environment and internal control
factors, the ongoing analysis of business-specific risk metrics and
the use of scenario analysis. while individual business units have
direct responsibility for the control and mitigation of operational
risk, this framework provides a consistent methodology for
identifying and monitoring operational risk factors at the business
unit and firmwide level.
recent accounting developments
in december2004, the financial
accounting standards board (fasb)issued a revision to sfasno.123,
accounting for stock-based compensation, sfasno.123-r,
share-based payment. sfasno.123-r
establishes standards of accounting for transactions in which an
entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods and services. sfasno.123-r
focuses primarily on accounting for transactions
in which an entity obtains employee services in share-based payment
transactions. two key differences between sfasno.123 and
sfasno.123-r relate to attribution of compensation costs
to reporting periods and accounting for award forfeitures. sfasno.123-r
generally requires the immediate expensing of
equity-based awards granted to retirement-eligible employees.
however, awards granted subject to a substantive non-compete
agreement are generally expensed over the non-compete period. sfasno.123-r
also requires expected forfeitures to be
included in determining stock-based employee compensation expense.
see note2 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k, significant
accounting policies stock-based compensation for a
discussion of how we currently account for equity-based awards
granted to retirement-eligible employees and forfeitures. we will
adopt sfasno.123-r in the first quarter of fiscal 2006.
management is currently evaluating the effect of adoption of sfasno.123-r
on our results of operations with respect to
awards granted to retirement-eligible employees that are subject to
a non-compete agreement.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the
pro forma net earnings that would have been reported for each year
if equity-based awards granted to retirement-eligible employees had
been expensed over the non-compete period and if expected
forfeitures had been accrued as required by sfasno.123-r:
year ended november
(in millions)
net earnings applicable to common shareholders, as reported
$
5,609
$
4,553
$
3,005
add:
stock-based employee compensation
expense, net of related tax effects, included in reported net earnings
1,133
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense, net of
related tax effects, determined under sfasno.123-r
(1,106
)
(802
)
(503
)
pro forma net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
5,636
$
4,541
$
2,960
in june2005, the eitf reached
consensus on issue no.04-5, determining whether a general
partner, or the general partners as a group, controls a limited
partnership or similar entity when the limited partners have
certain rights, which requires general partners (or managing
members in the case of limited liability companies) to consolidate
their partnerships or to provide limited partners with rights to
remove the general partner or to terminate the partnership. goldman
sachs, as the general partner of numerous merchant banking and
asset management partnerships, is required to adopt the provisions
of eitf04-5 (i)immediately for partnerships formed or
modified after june29, 2005 and (ii)in the first quarter
of fiscal 2007 for partnerships formed on or before june29,
2005 that have not been modified. we generally expect to provide
limited partners in these funds with rights to remove goldman sachs
or rights to terminate the partnerships and, therefore, do not
expect that eitf04-5 will have a material effect on our
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
quantitative and qualitative
disclosure about market risk is set forth under managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations risk management in partii, item7 of the
annual report on form10-k.
table of contents
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
index
pageno.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1 description of business
note2 significant accounting policies
note3 financial instruments
note4 short-term borrowings
note5 long-term borrowings
note6 commitments, contingencies and guarantees
note7 shareholders equity
note8 earnings per common share
note9 goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
note10 other assets and other liabilities
note11 employee benefit plans
note12 employee incentive plans
note13 affiliated funds
note14 income taxes
note15 regulation
note16 business segments
note17 subsequent event
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
selected financial data
financial statement schedule
report of independent registered public accounting firm
schedulei condensed nonconsolidated financial information of registrant (parent company only)
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
f-3
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
f-4
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
f-5
table of contents
managements report on internal control over
financial reporting
management of the goldman sachs
group, inc., together with its consolidated subsidiaries (the
firm), is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate
internal control over financial reporting. the firms internal
control over financial reporting is a process designed under the
supervision of the firms principal executive and principal
financial officers to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the
firms financial statements for external reporting purposes in
accordance with u.s.generally accepted accounting principles.
as of the end of the firms 2005
fiscal year, management conducted an assessment of the
effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial
reporting based on the framework established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this
assessment, management has determined that the firms internal
control over financial reporting as of november25, 2005 was
effective.
our internal control over financial
reporting includes policies and procedures that pertain to the
maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and
fairly reflect transactions and dispositions of assets; provide
reasonable assurances that transactions are recorded as necessary
to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with
u.s.generally accepted accounting principles, and that
receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and the directors of the firm; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the
firms assets that could have a material effect on our financial
statements.
managements assessment of the
effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial
reporting as of november25,2005 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing on pages100
and 101, which expresses unqualified opinions on managements
assessment and on the effectiveness of the firms internal control
over financial reporting as of november25, 2005.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and the shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
we have completed integrated audits
of the goldman sachs group, inc.s 2005 and 2004 consolidated
financial statements and of its internal control over financial
reporting as of november25,2005 and an audit of its 2003
consolidated financial statements in accordance with the standards
of the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
our opinions on the goldman sachs group, inc.s 2005, 2004, and 2003
consolidated financial statements and on its internal control over
financial reporting as of november25, 2005, based on our
audits, are presented below.
consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule
in our opinion, the consolidated
financial statements listed in the accompanying index present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
goldman sachs group, inc. and its subsidiaries (the company) at
november25, 2005 and november26, 2004, and the results of
its operations and its cash flows for each of the three fiscal
years in the period ended november25, 2005 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement
schedule listed in the accompanying index presents fairly, in all
material respects, the information set forth therein when read in
conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
these financial statements and financial statement schedule are the
responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is
to express an opinion on these financial statements and financial
statement schedule based on our audits. we conducted our audits of
these statements in accordance with the standards of the public
company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement. an audit of financial statements includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, and
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. we believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
internal control over financial reporting
also, in our opinion, managements
assessment, included in managements report on internal control
over financial reporting appearing on page99, that the company
maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as
of november25, 2005 based on criteria established in internal
control integrated framework issued by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso), is
fairly stated, in all material respects, based on those criteria.
furthermore, in our opinion, the company maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of november25, 2005, based on criteria
established in internal control integrated framework issued
by the coso. the companys management is responsible for
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and
for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting. our responsibility is to express opinions on
managements assessment and on the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. we
conducted our audit of internal control over financial reporting in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting
oversight board (united states). those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. an audit of internal control
over financial reporting includes obtaining an understanding of
internal control over financial reporting, evaluating managements
assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating
effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other
procedures as we consider necessary in the circumstances. we
believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.
table of contents
a companys internal control over
financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a
companys internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that
receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a material
effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations,
internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect
misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness
to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february3, 2006
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
revenues
investment banking
$
3,599
$
3,286
$
2,400
trading and principal investments
15,452
11,984
8,555
asset management and securities services
3,090
2,655
1,917
interest income
21,250
11,914
10,751
total revenues
43,391
29,839
23,623
interest expense
18,153
8,888
7,600
cost of power generation
revenues, net of interest expense and cost of power generation
24,782
20,550
16,012
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
11,688
9,652
7,515
brokerage, clearing and exchange fees
1,109
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
other expenses
1,016
total non-compensation expenses
4,821
4,222
4,052
total operating expenses
16,509
13,874
11,567
pre-tax earnings
8,273
6,676
4,445
provision for taxes
2,647
2,123
1,440
net earnings
5,626
4,553
3,005
preferred stock dividend
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
5,609
$
4,553
$
3,005
earnings per common share
basic
$
11.73
$
9.30
$
6.15
diluted
11.21
8.92
5.87
average common shares outstanding
basic
478.1
489.5
488.4
diluted
500.2
510.5
511.9
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of financial condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
10,261
$
4,365
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
51,405
48,179
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
15,150
14,458
receivables from customers and counterparties
60,231
38,087
securities borrowed
191,800
155,086
securities purchased under agreements to resell
83,619
44,257
financial instruments owned, at fair value
238,043
183,880
financial instruments owned and pledged as collateral, at fair value
38,983
27,924
total financial instruments owned, at fair value
277,026
211,804
other assets
17,312
15,143
total assets
$
706,804
$
531,379
liabilities and shareholders equity
secured short-term borrowings
$
7,972
$
8,558
unsecured short-term borrowings
47,247
46,401
total short-term borrowings, including the current portion of
long-term borrowings
55,219
54,959
payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
10,014
8,000
payables to customers and counterparties
178,304
153,221
securities loaned
23,331
19,394
securities sold under agreements to repurchase
149,026
47,573
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
149,071
132,097
other liabilities and accrued expenses
13,830
10,360
secured long-term borrowings
15,669
12,087
unsecured long-term borrowings
84,338
68,609
total long-term borrowings
100,007
80,696
total liabilities
678,802
506,300
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01per share; 150,000,000shares
authorized, 70,000shares issued and outstanding as of
november2005 with liquidation preference of $25,000per share
1,750
common stock, par value $0.01per share; 4,000,000,000shares
authorized, 573,970,935 and 554,063,234shares issued as
of november2005 and november2004, respectively, and 437,170,695 and
480,959,660shares outstanding as of november2005 and november
2004, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
3,415
2,013
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01per share; 200,000,000shares
authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
17,159
15,501
retained earnings
19,085
13,970
unearned compensation
(117
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
common stock held in treasury, at cost, par value $0.01 per
share; 136,800,240 and 73,103,574shares as of november2005 and
november2004, respectively
(13,413
)
(6,305
)
total shareholders equity
28,002
25,079
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
706,804
$
531,379
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
preferred stock
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
issued
1,750
balance, end of year
1,750
common stock, par value $0.01per share
balance, beginning of year
issued
balance, end of year
restricted stock units and employee stock options
balance, beginning of year
2,013
2,984
3,517
issued
1,871
1,050
delivered
(423
)
(1,948
)
(714
)
forfeited
(37
)
(62
)
(156
)
options exercised
(9
)
(11
)
(2
)
balance, end of year
3,415
2,013
2,984
additional paid-in capital
balance, beginning of year
15,501
13,562
12,750
issuance of common stock
1,417
1,609
preferred stock issuance costs
(31
)
excess net tax benefit related to delivery of stock-based awards
balance, end of year
17,159
15,501
13,562
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year
13,970
9,914
7,259
net earnings
5,626
4,553
3,005
dividends declared on common stock
(494
)
(497
)
(350
)
dividends declared on preferred stock
(17
)
balance, end of year
19,085
13,970
9,914
unearned compensation
balance, beginning of year
(117
)
(339
)
(845
)
restricted stock units granted
(6
)
restricted stock units forfeited
amortization of restricted stock units
balance, end of year
(117
)
(339
)
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
balance, beginning of year
(122
)
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax
(11
)
net gains on cash flow hedges, net of tax
net unrealized holdings gain, net of tax
balance, end of year
common stock held in treasury, at cost
balance, beginning of year
(6,305
)
(4,500
)
(3,561
)
repurchased
(7,108
)
(1,805
)
(939
)
balance, end of year
(13,413
)
(6,305
)
(4,500
)
total shareholders equity
$
28,002
$
25,079
$
21,632
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
5,626
$
4,553
$
3,005
noncash items included in net earnings
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
deferred income taxes
(450
)
1,040
stock-based compensation
1,756
1,224
changes in operating assets and liabilities
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(3,226
)
(18,437
)
(9,311
)
net receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
1,322
(776
)
(1,797
)
net payables to customers and counterparties
2,953
36,669
7,826
securities borrowed, net of securities loaned
(32,777
)
(24,102
)
(10,249
)
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, net of securities
purchased under agreements to resell
62,269
(12,912
)
2,081
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(66,899
)
(52,366
)
(30,264
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
16,974
29,429
19,227
other, net
(815
)
1,442
net cash used for operating activities
(12,413
)
(33,391
)
(16,739
)
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(1,421
)
(829
)
(856
)
proceeds from sales of property, leasehold improvements and
equipment
business acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(556
)
(255
)
(721
)
proceeds from sales of investments
net cash used for investing activities
(1,064
)
(1,084
)
(1,577
)
cash flows from financing activities
short-term borrowings, net
2,233
3,901
issuance of long-term borrowings
43,177
39,283
28,238
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the current portion of
long-term borrowings
(22,340
)
(10,198
)
(7,471
)
derivative contracts with a financing element, net
1,060
common stock repurchased
(7,108
)
(1,805
)
(939
)
dividends paid on common and preferred stock
(511
)
(497
)
(350
)
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
1,719
proceeds from issuance of common stock
1,143
net cash provided by financing activities
19,373
31,753
20,581
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
5,896
(2,722
)
2,265
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
4,365
7,087
4,822
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
10,261
$
4,365
$
7,087
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $17.49billion, $8.55billion
and $7.21billion for the years ended november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $2.47billion, $1.02billion
and $846million for the years ended november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
noncash activities:
the firm assumed $1.15billion and $1.63billion of debt in connection with
business acquisitions for the years ended november2005 and november2004, respectively.
the value of common stock issued in connection with business acquisitions was $165million
for the year ended november2003.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
year ended november
(in millions)
net earnings
$
5,626
$
4,553
$
3,005
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax
(11
)
net gains on cash flow hedges, net of tax
net unrealized holding gains, net of tax
comprehensive income
$
5,615
$
4,558
$
3,133
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1.
description of business
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group
inc.), a delaware corporation, together with its consolidated
subsidiaries (collectively, the firm), is a leading global
investment banking, securities and investment management firm that
provides a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals.
the firms activities are divided
into three segments:
investment banking. the firm provides a broad range of investment banking
services to a diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments
and individuals.
trading and principal investments. the firm facilitates client transactions with
a diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, governments and
individuals and takes proprietary positions through market making in, trading of
and investing in fixed income and equity products, currencies, commodities and
derivatives on such products. in addition, the firm engages in specialist and
market-making activities on equities and options exchanges and clears client
transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection
with the firms merchant banking and other investing activities, the firm makes
principal investments directly and through funds that the firm raises and manages.
asset management and securities services. the firm provides investment advisory
and financial planning services and offers investment products across all major
asset classes to a diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide, and
provides prime brokerage services, financing services and securities lending
services to mutual funds, pension funds, hedge funds, foundations and
high-net-worth individuals worldwide.
note2.
significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
these consolidated financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles that require management to make certain
estimates and assumptions. the most important of these estimates
and assumptions relate to fair value measurements, the accounting
for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets and the provision
for potential losses that may arise from litigation and regulatory
proceedings and tax audits. although these and other estimates and
assumptions are based on the best available information, actual
results could be materially different from these estimates.
these consolidated financial
statements include the accounts of group inc. and all other
entities in which the firm has a controlling financial interest.
all material intercompany transactions and balances have been
eliminated.
the firm determines whether it has a
controlling financial interest in an entity by first evaluating
whether the entity is a voting interest entity, a variable interest
entity (vie)or a qualifying special-purpose entity (qspe)under
generally accepted accounting principles.
voting interest entities. voting interest entities are entities in which (i)the
total equity investment at risk is sufficient to enable the entity to finance
its activities independently and (ii)the equity holders have the obligation to
absorb losses, the right to receive residual returns and the right to make decisions
about the entitys activities. voting interest entities are consolidated in
accordance with accounting research bulletin (arb)no.51, consolidated
financial statements, as amended. arb no.51 states that the usual
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
condition
for a controlling financial interest in an entity is ownership of a majority voting
interest. accordingly, the firm consolidates voting interest entities in which it
has a majority voting interest.
variable interest entities. vies are entities that lack one or more of the
characteristics of a voting interest entity. a controlling financial interest in a
vie is present when an enterprise has a variable interest, or a combination of
variable interests, that will absorb a majority of the vies expected losses,
receive a majority of the vies expected residual returns, or both. the enterprise
with a controlling financial interest, known as the primary beneficiary,
consolidates the vie. in accordance with financial accounting standards board (fasb)
interpretation (fin)no.46-r, consolidation of variable interest entities,
the firm consolidates all vies of which it is the primary beneficiary.
the firm determines whether it is the primary beneficiary of a vie by first performing a
qualitative analysis of the vie that includes a review of, among other factors, its capital
structure, contractual terms, which interests create or absorb variability, related party
relationships and the design of the vie. where qualitative analysis is not conclusive, the
firm performs a quantitative analysis. for purposes of allocating a vies expected losses
and expected residual returns to its variable interest holders, the firm utilizes the top
down method. under that method, the firm calculates its share of the vies expected losses
and expected residual returns using the specific cash flows that would be allocated to it,
based on contractual arrangements and/or the firms position in the capital structure of the
vie, under various probability-weighted scenarios.
qspes. qspes are passive entities that are commonly used in mortgage and other
securitization transactions. statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)no.140,
accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets and
extinguishments of liabilities, sets forth the criteria an entity must satisfy to
be a qspe. these criteria include the types of assets a qspe may hold, limits on
asset sales, the use of derivatives and financial guarantees, and the level of
discretion a servicer may exercise in attempting to collect receivables. these
criteria may require management to make judgments about complex matters, including
whether a derivative is considered passive and the degree of discretion a servicer
may exercise. in accordance with sfasno.140 and finno.46-r, the
firm does not consolidate qspes.
equity-method investments. when the firm does not have a controlling financial
interest in an entity but exerts significant influence over the entitys operating
and financial policies (generally defined as owning a voting interest of 20% to 50%)
and has an investment in common stock or in-substance common stock, the firm
accounts for its investment in accordance with the equity method of accounting
prescribed by accounting principles board (apb)opinion no.18, the equity
method of accounting for investments in common stock.
other. if the firm does not consolidate an entity or apply the equity method of
accounting, the firm accounts for its investment at fair value. the firm also has
formed numerous nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party investors that are
typically organized as limited partnerships. the firm acts as general partner for
these funds and does not hold a majority of the economic interests in any fund. for
funds established on or before june29,2005 in which the firm holds more
than a minor interest and for funds established or modified after june29, 2005,
the firm has provided the third-party investors with rights to terminate the funds
(see recent accounting developments below). these fund investments are
included in financial instruments owned, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group,
inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
unless otherwise stated herein, all
references to november2005, november2004 and november2003 refer
to the firms fiscal years ended, or the dates, as the context
requires, november25, 2005, november26, 2004 and november28,
2003, respectively. certain reclassifications have been
made to previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
revenue recognition
investment banking. underwriting
revenues and fees from mergers and acquisitions and other financial
advisory assignments are recognized in the consolidated statements
of earnings when the services related to the underlying transaction
are completed under the terms of the engagement. expenses
associated with such transactions are deferred until the related
revenue is recognized or the engagement is otherwise concluded.
underwriting revenues are presented net of related expenses.
expenses associated with financial advisory transactions are
recorded as non-compensation expenses, net of client reimbursements.
financial instruments. total
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial
instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value are
reflected in the consolidated statements of financial condition on
a trade-date basis and consist of financial instruments carried at
fair value or amounts that approximate fair value, with related
unrealized gains or losses recognized in the consolidated
statements of earnings. the fair value of a financial instrument is
the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current
transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or
liquidation sale.
in determining fair value, the firm
separates its financial instruments into three categories
cash (i.e., nonderivative) trading instruments, derivative
contracts and principal investments.
cash trading instruments. fair values of the firms cash trading instruments are
generally obtained from quoted market prices in active markets, broker or dealer
price quotations, or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price
transparency. the types of instruments valued in this manner include u.s.government
and agency securities, other sovereign government obligations, liquid
mortgage products, investment-grade corporate bonds, listed equities, money market
securities, state, municipal and provincial obligations, and physical commodities.
certain cash trading instruments trade infrequently and have little or no price
transparency. such instruments may include certain high-yield debt, corporate bank loans,
mortgage whole loans and distressed debt. the firm values these instruments initially at
cost and generally does not adjust valuations unless there is substantive evidence
supporting a change in the value of the underlying instrument or valuation assumptions (such
as similar market transactions, changes in financial ratios or changes in the credit ratings
of the underlying companies). where there is evidence supporting a change in the value, the
firm uses valuation methodologies such as the present value of known or estimated cash flows.
cash trading instruments owned by the firm (long positions) are marked to bid prices and
instruments sold but not yet purchased (short positions) are marked to offer prices. if
liquidating a position is expected to affect its prevailing market price, the valuation is
adjusted generally based on market evidence or predetermined policies. in certain
circumstances, such as for highly illiquid positions, managements estimates are used to
determine this adjustment.
derivative contracts. fair values of the firms derivative contracts consist of
exchange-traded and over-the-counter (otc)derivatives and are reflected net of cash
that the firm has paid and received (for example, option premiums or cash paid or
received pursuant to credit support agreements). fair values of the firms
exchange-traded derivatives are generally
table of contents
the goldman sachs group,
inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
determined from quoted market prices. otc
derivatives are valued using valuation models. the firm uses a variety of valuation
models including the present value of known or estimated cash flows and
option-pricing models. the valuation models used to derive the fair values of the
firms otc derivatives require inputs including contractual terms, market prices,
yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates and
correlations of such inputs. the selection of a model to value an otc derivative
depends upon the contractual terms of, and specific risks inherent in, the
instrument as well as the availability of pricing information in the market. the
firm generally uses similar models to value similar instruments. where possible, the
firm verifies the values produced by its pricing models to market transactions. for
otc derivatives that trade in liquid markets, such as generic forwards, swaps and
options, model selection does not involve significant judgment because market prices
are readily available. for otc derivatives that trade in less liquid markets, model
selection requires more judgment because such instruments tend to be more complex
and pricing information is less available in these markets. price
transparency is inherently more limited for more complex structures
because they often combine one or more product types, requiring
additional inputs such as correlations and volatilities. as markets continue to
develop and more pricing information becomes available, the firm continues to review
and refine the models it uses.
at the inception of an otc derivative contract (day one), the firm values the contract at
the model value if the firm can verify all of the significant model inputs to observable
market data and verify the model to market transactions. when appropriate, valuations are
adjusted to reflect various factors such as liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit
considerations. these adjustments are generally based on market evidence or predetermined
policies. in certain circumstances, such as for highly illiquid positions, managements
estimates are used to determine these adjustments.
where the firm cannot verify all of the significant model inputs to observable market data
and verify the model to market transactions, the firm values the contract at the transaction
price at inception and, consequently, records no day one gain or loss in accordance with
emerging issues task force (eitf)issue no.02-3, issues involved in accounting for
derivative contracts held for trading purposes and contracts involved in energy trading and
risk management activities.
following day one, the firm adjusts the inputs to its valuation models only to the extent
that changes in these inputs can be verified by similar market transactions, third-party
pricing services and/or broker quotes, or can be derived from other substantive evidence
such as empirical market data. in circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model to
market transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model could produce a
materially different estimate of fair value.
principal investments. in valuing corporate and real estate principal investments,
the firms portfolio is separated into investments in private companies, investments
in public companies (excluding the firms investment in the convertible preferred
stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)) and the firms investment in
smfg.
the firms private principal investments, by their nature, have little or no price
transparency. such investments are initially carried at cost as an approximation of fair
value. adjustments to carrying value are made if there are third-party transactions
evidencing a change in value. downward adjustments are also made, in the absence of
third-party transactions, if it is determined that the expected realizable value of the
investment is less than the carrying value. in reaching that determination, many factors are
considered including, but not limited to, the operating cash flows and financial performance
of the companies or properties relative to budgets or projections, trends within sectors
and/or regions, underlying business
table of contents
the goldman sachs group,
inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
models, expected exit timing and strategy, and any
specific rights or terms associated with the investment, such as conversion features and
liquidation preferences.
the firms public principal investments, which tend to be large, concentrated holdings that
result from initial public offerings or other corporate transactions, are valued using
quoted market prices discounted based on predetermined written policies for
nontransferability and illiquidity.
the firms investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg is carried at fair value,
which is derived from a model that incorporates smfgs common stock price and credit
spreads, the impact of nontransferability and illiquidity, and the downside protection on
the conversion strike price. the firms investment in the convertible preferred stock of
smfg is generally nontransferable, but is freely convertible into smfg common stock.
restrictions on the firms ability to hedge or sell one-third of the common stock underlying
its investment in smfg lapsed in february2005. as of november2005, the firm was fully
hedged with respect to these unrestricted shares. under the firms initial agreement with
smfg, restrictions on the firms ability to hedge or sell the remaining shares of common
stock underlying its investment in smfg lapse in equal installments on february7, 2006
and february7, 2007. in connection with a public offering by smfg of its common stock,
the firm has separately agreed with smfg that the restrictions that were to lapse on february7,
2006 will instead lapse on march9, 2006. effective february1, 2006, the
conversion price of the firms smfg preferred stock into shares of smfg common stock is
320,900. this price is subject to downward adjustment if the price of smfg common stock at
the time of conversion is less than the conversion price (subject to a floor of 105,800).
in general, transfers of financial
assets are accounted for as sales under sfasno.140 when
the firm has relinquished control over the transferred assets. for
transfers accounted for as sales, any related gains or losses are
recognized in net revenues. transfers that are not accounted for as
sales are accounted for as collateralized financing arrangements,
with the related interest expense recognized in net revenues over
the lives of the transactions.
collateralized financing arrangements.
collateralized financing arrangements consist of repurchase
agreements and securities borrowed and loaned. interest income or
expense on repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loaned
is recognized in net revenues over the life of the transaction.
resale and repurchase agreements. securities purchased under agreements to resell
and securities sold under agreements to repurchase, principally u.s.government,
federal agency and investment-grade foreign sovereign obligations, represent
short-term collateralized financing transactions and are carried in the consolidated
statements of financial condition at their contractual amounts plus accrued
interest. these amounts are presented on a net-by-counterparty basis when the
requirements of fin no.41, offsetting of amounts related to certain
repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements, or finno.39, offsetting of
amounts related to certain contracts, are satisfied. the firm receives securities
purchased under agreements to resell, makes delivery of securities sold under
agreements to repurchase, monitors the market value of these securities on a daily
basis and delivers or obtains additional collateral as appropriate.
securities borrowed and loaned. securities borrowed and loaned are recorded based
on the amount of cash collateral advanced or received. these transactions are
generally collateralized by cash, securities or letters of credit. the firm receives
securities borrowed,
table of contents
the goldman sachs group,
inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
makes delivery of securities loaned, monitors the market value
of securities borrowed and loaned, and delivers or obtains additional collateral as
appropriate.
power generation. power generation
revenues associated with the firms consolidated power generation
facilities are included in trading and principal investments in
the consolidated statements of earnings when power is delivered.
cost of power generation in the consolidated statement of
earnings includes all of the direct costs of these facilities
(e.g., fuel, operations and maintenance), as well as the
depreciation and amortization associated with the facility and
related contractual assets.
the following table sets forth the
power generation revenues and costs directly associated with the
firms consolidated power generation facilities:
year ended november
2003(2)
(in millions)
revenues (1)
$
$
$
cost of power generation
(1)
excludes revenues from nonconsolidated power
generation facilities, accounted for in accordance with
the equity method of accounting, as well as revenues
associated with the firms power trading activities.
(2)
the firm acquired its first consolidated power
generation facility in october2003.
commissions. commission revenues from
executing and clearing client transactions on stock, options and
futures markets worldwide are recognized in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings on a trade
date basis.
merchant banking overrides. the firm
is entitled to receive merchant banking overrides (i.e., an
increased share of a funds income and gains) when the return on
the funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns. overrides
are based on investment performance over the life of each merchant
banking fund, and future investment underperformance may require
amounts of override previously distributed to the firm to be
returned to the funds. accordingly, overrides are recognized in the
consolidated statements of earnings only when all material
contingencies have been resolved. overrides are included in
trading and principal investments in the consolidated statements
of earnings.
asset management. management fees are
recognized over the period that the related service is provided
based upon average net asset values. in certain circumstances, the
firm is also entitled to receive asset management incentive fees
based on a percentage of a funds return or when the return on
assets under management exceeds specified benchmark returns or
other performance targets. incentive fees are generally based on
investment performance over a 12-month period and are subject to
adjustment prior to the end of the measurement period. accordingly,
incentive fees are recognized in the consolidated statements of
earnings when the measurement period ends. asset management fees
and incentive fees are included in asset management and securities
services in the consolidated statements of earnings.
stock-based compensation
effective for fiscal 2003, the firm
began to account for stock-based employee compensation in
accordance with the fair-value method prescribed by sfasno.123,
accounting for stock-based compensation, as amended by
sfasno.148, accounting for stock-based compensation
transition and disclosure, using the prospective adoption
method. under this method of adoption, compensation expense is
recognized over the relevant service period based on the fair value
of stock options and restricted stock units granted for fiscal 2003
and future years. no unearned
table of contents
the goldman sachs group,
inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
compensation is included in
shareholders equity for such stock options and restricted stock
units granted. rather, such stock options and restricted stock
units are included in shareholders equity under sfasno.123
when services required from employees in exchange for the
awards are rendered and expensed.
compensation expense resulting from
stock options and restricted stock units granted for the year ended
november29, 2002 and prior years is accounted for under the
intrinsic-value-based method prescribed by apb opinion no.25,
accounting for stock issued to employees, as permitted by sfasno.123.
therefore, no compensation expense is recognized
for unmodified stock options issued for years prior to fiscal 2003
that had no intrinsic value on the date of grant. compensation
expense for restricted stock units issued for the years prior to
fiscal 2003 was, and continues to be, recognized over the relevant
service periods using amortization schedules based on the
applicable vesting provisions.
employees who meet the retirement
criteria are subject to a non-compete agreement from the date of
retirement through the date that shares underlying the awards are
delivered. equity awards granted to employees who have satisfied
the retirement eligibility criteria are expensed over the stated
service period for the award. in the event a retirement-eligible
employee retires, any unamortized grant date value is immediately
expensed. a reduction to compensation expense is recorded upon
forfeiture related to employees who meet the retirement criteria
and violate their non-compete agreements.
the firm pays cash dividend
equivalents on outstanding restricted stock units. dividend
equivalents paid on restricted stock units accounted for under sfasno.123
are charged to retained earnings when paid.
dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units that are later
forfeited by employees are reclassified to compensation expense
from retained earnings. dividend equivalents paid on restricted
stock units granted for the year ended november29, 2002 and
prior years, accounted for under apb opinion no.25, are
charged to compensation expense.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
if the firm were to recognize
compensation expense over the relevant service period under the
fair value method of sfasno.123 with respect to stock
options granted for the year ended november29, 2002 and all
prior years, net earnings would have decreased, resulting in pro
forma net earnings and earnings per common share (eps)as set
forth below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per share amounts)
net earnings applicable to common shareholders, as reported
$
5,609
$
4,553
$
3,005
add:
stock-based employee compensation expense, net of related tax effects, included in reported net earnings
1,133
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense, net of related tax
effects, determined under the fair value method for all awards
(1,178
)
(947
)
(782
)
pro forma net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
5,564
$
4,396
$
2,681
eps, as reported
basic
$
11.73
$
9.30
$
6.15
diluted
11.21
8.92
5.87
pro forma eps
basic
$
11.64
$
8.98
$
5.49
diluted
11.12
8.61
5.24
goodwill
goodwill is the cost of acquired
companies in excess of the fair value of identifiable net assets at
acquisition date. in accordance with sfasno.142,
goodwill and other intangible assets, goodwill is tested at least
annually for impairment. an impairment loss is triggered if the
estimated fair value of an operating segment is less than its
estimated net book value. such loss is calculated as the difference
between the estimated fair value of goodwill and its carrying value.
identifiable intangible assets
identifiable intangible assets, which
consist primarily of customer lists, above-market power contracts
and specialist rights, are amortized over their estimated useful
lives. identifiable intangible assets are tested for potential
impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that
an assets or asset groups carrying value may not be fully
recoverable in accordance with sfasno.144, accounting
for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets. an impairment
loss, calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value
and the carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if
the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the
asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying value.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization, are
included in other assets in the consolidated statements of
financial condition.
property and equipment placed in
service prior to december1, 2001 are depreciated under the
accelerated cost recovery method. property and equipment placed in
service on or after december1, 2001 are depreciated on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
leasehold
improvements for which the useful life of the improvement is
shorter than the term of the lease are amortized under the
accelerated cost recovery method if placed in service prior to
december1, 2001. all other leasehold improvements are
amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the
improvement or the term of the lease, whichever is shorter. certain
costs of software developed or obtained for internal use are
amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the
software.
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment are tested for potential impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups
carrying value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with sfasno.144.
an impairment loss, calculated as the difference
between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset
or asset group, is recognized if the sum of the expected
undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset group is
less than the corresponding carrying value.
the firms operating leases include
space held in excess of current needs. rent expense relating to
space held for growth is included in occupancy in the
consolidated statements of earnings. in accordance with sfasno.146,
accounting for costs associated with exit or disposal
activities, the firm records a liability, based on the remaining
lease rentals reduced by any potential or existing sublease
rentals, for leases where the firm has ceased using the space and
management has concluded that the firm will not derive any future
economic benefits. costs to terminate a lease before the end of its
term are recognized and measured at fair value upon termination.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
non-u.s.currencies are translated at rates of exchange
prevailing on the date of the consolidated statement of financial
condition, and revenues and expenses are translated at average
rates of exchange for the fiscal year. gains or losses on
translation of the financial statements of a non-u.s.operation,
when the functional currency is other than the u.s.dollar,
are included, net of hedges and taxes, on the consolidated
statements of comprehensive income. the firm seeks to reduce its
net investment exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates
through the use of foreign currency forward contracts and foreign
currency-denominated debt. for foreign currency forward contracts,
hedge effectiveness is assessed based on changes in forward
exchange rates; accordingly, forward points are reflected as a
component of the currency translation adjustment in the
consolidated statements of comprehensive income. for foreign
currency-denominated debt, hedge effectiveness is assessed based on
changes in spot rates. foreign currency remeasurement gains or
losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are included in
the consolidated statements of earnings.
income taxes
deferred tax assets and liabilities
are recognized for temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of the firms assets and liabilities.
valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets
to the amount that more likely than not will be realized. the
firms tax assets and liabilities are presented as a component of
other assets and other liabilities and accrued expenses,
respectively, in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. tax provisions are computed in accordance with sfasno.109,
accounting for income taxes. contingent liabilities
related to income taxes are recorded when the criteria for loss
recognition under sfasno.5, accounting for
contingencies, as amended, have been met.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
earnings per common share
basic eps is calculated by dividing
net earnings applicable to common shareholders by the weighted
average number of common shares outstanding. common shares
outstanding includes common stock and restricted stock units for
which no future service is required as a condition to the delivery
of the underlying common stock. diluted eps includes the
determinants of basic eps and, in addition, reflects the dilutive
effect of the common stock deliverable pursuant to stock options
and to restricted stock units for which future service is required
as a condition to the delivery of the underlying common stock.
cash and cash equivalents
the firm defines cash equivalents as
highly liquid overnight deposits held in the ordinary course of
business.
recent accounting developments
in december2004, the fasb issued a
revision to sfasno.123, sfasno.123-r,
share-based payment. sfas no.123-r establishes standards of
accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity
instruments for goods and services. sfas no.123-r focuses
primarily on accounting for transactions in which an entity obtains
employee services in share-based payment transactions. two key
differences between sfasno.123 and sfasno.123-r
relate to attribution of compensation costs to reporting periods
and accounting for award forfeitures. sfas no.123-r generally
requires the immediate expensing of equity-based awards granted to
retirement-eligible employees. however, awards granted subject to a
substantive non-compete agreement are generally expensed over the
non-compete period. sfas no.123-r also requires expected
forfeitures to be included in determining stock-based employee
compensation expense (see stock-based compensation above
for a discussion of how the firm currently accounts for
equity-based awards granted to retirement-eligible employees and
forfeitures). the firm will adopt sfasno.123-r in the
first quarter of fiscal 2006. management is currently evaluating
the effect of adoption of sfasno.123-r on the firms
results of operations with respect to awards granted to
retirement-eligible employees that are subject to a non-compete
agreement.
the following table sets forth the
pro forma net earnings that would have been reported for each year
if equity-based awards granted to retirement-eligible employees had
been expensed over the non-compete period and if expected
forfeitures had been accrued as required by sfasno.123-r:
year ended november
(in millions)
net earnings applicable to common shareholders, as reported
$
5,609
$
4,553
$
3,005
add:
stock-based employee compensation expense, net of related tax
effects, included in reported net earnings
1,133
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense, net of related tax
effects, determined under sfasno. 123-r
(1,106
)
(802
)
(503
)
pro forma net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
5,636
$
4,541
$
2,960
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
in june2005, the eitf reached
consensus on issue no.04-5, determining whether a general
partner, or the general partners as a group, controls a limited
partnership or similar entity when the limited partners have
certain rights, which requires general partners (or managing
members in the case of limited liability companies) to consolidate
their partnerships or to provide limited partners with rights to
remove the general partner or to terminate the partnership. the
firm, as the general partner of numerous merchant banking and asset
management partnerships, is required to adopt the provisions of eitf04-5
(i)immediately for partnerships formed or modified
after june29, 2005 and (ii)in the first quarter of fiscal
2007 for partnerships formed on or before june29, 2005 that
have not been modified. the firm generally expects to provide
limited partners in these funds with rights to remove the firm or
rights to terminate the partnerships and, therefore, does not
expect that eitf04-5 will have a material effect on the firms
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
note3.
financial instruments
fair value of financial instruments
the following table sets forth the
firms financial instruments owned, at fair value, including those
pledged as collateral, and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other
money market instruments
$
14,609
(1)
$
$
7,386
(1)
$
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
68,688
51,458
46,777
40,866
corporate and other debt obligations
mortgage whole loans and collateralized debt obligations
31,459
18,346
investment-grade corporate bonds
12,415
4,232
11,783
5,163
bank loans
13,843
8,900
high-yield securities
8,822
2,072
6,057
1,725
preferred stock
7,315
4,792
other
74,731
7,164
50,763
8,344
equities and convertible debentures
56,656
32,565
42,263
18,766
state, municipal and provincial obligations
2,524
1,308
derivative contracts
58,532
(2)
57,829
(3)
62,495
(2)
64,001
(3)
physical commodities
1,286
total
$
277,026
$
149,071
$
211,804
$
132,097
(1)
includes $6.12billion and $5.84billion,
as of november2005 and november2004, respectively, of
money market instruments held by william street funding
corporation to support the william street credit
extension program.
(2)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support
agreements of $22.61billion and $18.65billion
as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
(3)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit support
agreements of $16.10billion and $5.45billion as
of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
credit concentrations
credit concentrations may arise from
trading, underwriting and securities borrowing activities and may
be impacted by changes in economic, industry or political factors.
as of november2005 and november2004, the firm held u.s.government
and federal agency obligations that represented 7% and
5% of the firms total assets, respectively. in addition, most of
the firms securities purchased under agreements to resell are
collateralized by u.s.government, federal agency and other
sovereign obligations. as of november2005 and november2004, the
firm did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty that
exceeded 5% of the firms total assets.
derivative activities
derivative contracts are instruments,
such as futures, forwards, swaps or option contracts that derive
their value from underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a
combination of these factors. derivative instruments may be
privately negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
derivatives may involve future commitments to purchase or sell
financial instruments or commodities, or to exchange currency or
interest payment streams. the amounts exchanged are based on the
specific terms of the contract with reference to specified rates,
securities, commodities, currencies or indices.
certain cash instruments, such as
mortgage-backed securities, interest-only and principal-only
obligations, and indexed debt instruments, are not considered
derivatives even though their values or contractually required cash
flows are derived from the price of some other security or index.
however, certain commodity-related contracts are included in the
firms derivatives disclosure, as these contracts may be settled in
cash or are readily convertible into cash.
substantially all of the firms
derivative transactions are entered into for trading purposes, to
facilitate client transactions, to take proprietary positions or as
a means of risk management. risk exposures are managed through
diversification, by controlling position sizes and by establishing
hedges in related securities or derivatives. for example, the firm
may hedge a portfolio of common stock by taking an offsetting
position in a related equity-index futures contract. gains and
losses on derivatives used for trading purposes are generally
included in trading and principal investments in the consolidated
statements of earnings.
in addition to derivative
transactions entered into for trading purposes, the firm enters
into derivative contracts to hedge its net investment in non-u.s.operations
(see note2 for further information regarding
the firms policy on foreign currency translation) and to manage
the interest rate and currency exposure on its long-term borrowings
and certain short-term borrowings. to manage exposure on its
borrowings, the firm uses derivatives to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. the firm applies fair value
hedge accounting to derivative contracts that hedge the benchmark
interest rate (i.e., london interbank offered rate (libor)) on its
fixed rate long-term borrowings. the firm also applies cash flow
hedge accounting to derivative contracts that hedge changes in
interest rates associated with floating rate long-term borrowings
related to its power generation facilities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
fair values of the firms derivative
contracts are reflected net of cash paid or received pursuant to
credit support agreements and are reported on a net-by-counterparty
basis in the firms consolidated statements of financial condition
when management believes a legal right of setoff exists under an
enforceable netting agreement. the fair value of derivative
financial instruments, computed in accordance with the firms
netting policy, is set forth below:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
forward settlement contracts
$
13,921
$
15,345
$
13,137
$
14,578
swap agreements
25,865
22,001
34,727
30,836
option contracts
18,746
20,483
14,631
18,587
total
$
58,532
$
57,829
$
62,495
$
64,001
securitization activities
the firm securitizes commercial and
residential mortgages, home equity and auto loans, government and
corporate bonds and other types of financial assets. the firm acts
as underwriter of the beneficial interests that are sold to
investors. the firm derecognizes financial assets transferred in
securitizations provided it has relinquished control over such
assets. transferred assets are accounted for at fair value prior to
securitization. net revenues related to these underwriting
activities are recognized in connection with the sales of the
underlying beneficial interests to investors.
the firm may retain interests in
securitized financial assets. retained interests are accounted for
at fair value and included in total financial instruments owned,
at fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition.
during the years ended november2005
and november2004, the firm securitized $92.00billion and
$62.93billion, respectively, of financial assets, including
$65.18billion and $47.46billion, respectively, of
residential mortgage-backed securities. cash flows received on
retained interests were approximately $908million and $984million
for the years ended november2005 and november2004,
respectively.
as of november2005 and november
2004, the firm held $6.07billion and $4.33billion of
retained interests, respectively, including $5.62billion and
$4.11billion, respectively, held in qspes. the fair value of
retained interests valued using quoted market prices in active
markets was $1.34billion and $949million as of november
2005 and november2004, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table sets forth the
weighted average key economic assumptions used in measuring
retained interests for which fair value is based on alternative
pricing sources with reasonable, little or no price transparency
and the sensitivity of those fair values to immediate adverse
changes of 10% and 20% in those assumptions:
as of november 2005
as of november 2004
type of retained interests
type of retained interests
mortgage-
corporate debt
mortgage-
corporate debt
backed
and other(3)
backed
and other(3)
($ in millions)
fair value of retained interests
$
2,928
$
1,799
$
1,798
$
1,578
weighted average life (years)
5.7
5.1
4.2
3.7
annual constant prepayment rate
18.6
%
n/a
21.5
%
n/a
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(44
)
$
$
(6
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(73
)
(10
)
annual credit losses(1)
5.0
%
2.5
%
4.0
%
4.1
%
impact of 10% adverse change(2)
$
(25
)
$
(4
)
$
(10
)
$
(1
)
impact of 20% adverse change(2)
(48
)
(9
)
(14
)
(2
)
annual discount rate
7.4
%
6.5
%
8.5
%
4.9
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(70
)
$
(13
)
$
(39
)
$
(24
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(136
)
(29
)
(75
)
(48
)
(1)
annual percentage credit loss is based only on
positions in which expected credit loss is a key
assumption in the determination of fair values.
(2)
the impacts of adverse change take into account
credit mitigants incorporated in the retained interests,
including over- collateralization and subordination
provisions.
(3)
includes retained interests in bonds and other
types of financial assets that are not subject to
prepayment risk.
the preceding table does not give
effect to the offsetting benefit of other financial instruments
that are held to hedge risks inherent in these retained interests.
changes in fair value based on a 10% adverse variation in
assumptions generally cannot be extrapolated because the
relationship of the change in assumptions to the change in fair
value is not usually linear. in addition, the impact of a change in
a particular assumption is calculated independently of changes in
any other assumption. in practice, simultaneous changes in
assumptions might magnify or counteract the sensitivities disclosed
above.
in addition to the retained interests
described above, the firm also held interests in residential
mortgage qspes purchased in connection with secondary market-making
activities. these purchased interests approximated $5billion
as of both november2005 and november2004.
in connection with the issuance of
asset-repackaged notes to investors, the firm had derivative
receivables from qspes, to which the firm has transferred assets,
with a fair value of $108million and $126million as of
november2005 and november2004, respectively. these receivables
are collateralized by a first-priority interest in the assets held
by each qspe.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
variable interest entities (vies)
the firm, in the ordinary course of
its business, retains interests in vies in connection with its
securitization activities. the firm also purchases and sells
variable interests in vies, which primarily issue mortgage-backed
and other asset-backed securities and collateralized debt
obligations (cdos), in connection with its market-making activities
and makes investments in and loans to vies that hold performing and
nonperforming debt, equity, real estate, power-related and other
assets. in addition, the firm utilizes vies to provide investors
with credit-linked and asset-repackaged notes designed to meet
their objectives.
vies generally purchase assets by
issuing debt and equity instruments. in certain instances, the firm
provides guarantees to vies or holders of variable interests in
vies. in such cases, the maximum exposure to loss included in the
tables set forth below is the notional amount of such guarantees.
such amounts do not represent anticipated losses in connection with
these guarantees.
the firms variable interests in vies
include senior and subordinated debt; limited and general
partnership interests; preferred and common stock; interest rate,
foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit derivatives;
guarantees; and residual interests in mortgage-backed and
asset-backed securitization vehicles and cdos. the firms exposure
to the obligations of vies is generally limited to its interests in
these entities.
the following table sets forth the
firms total assets and maximum exposure to loss associated with
its significant variable interests in consolidated vies where the
firm does not hold a majority voting interest:
as of november
(in millions)
consolidated vie assets(1)
$
4,143
$
5,197
maximum exposure to loss
1,481
(1)
consolidated vie assets include assets financed
by nonrecourse short-term and long-term debt. nonrecourse
debt is debt that only the issuing subsidiary or, if
applicable, a subsidiary guaranteeing the debt is
obligated to repay.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following tables set forth total
assets in nonconsolidated vies in which the firm holds significant
variable interests and the firms maximum exposure to loss
associated with these interests:
as of november 2005
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated vies
purchased
commitments
vie
and retained
and
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
collateralized debt obligations
$
19,437
$
$
$
2,074
$
$
2,854
asset repackagings and credit- linked notes
3,189
1,995
1,995
power-related
6,667
1,070
1,167
investments in loans and real estate
14,232
1,082
1,093
mortgage-backed and other asset- backed
6,378
total
$
49,903
$
$
$
4,121
$
2,578
$
8,043
as of november 2004
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated vies
purchased
commitments
vie
and retained
and
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
collateralized debt obligations
$
5,989
$
$
$
$
$
asset repackagings and credit- linked notes
power-related
5,340
investments in loans and real estate
9,853
1,195
1,195
mortgage-backed and other asset- backed
7,308
1,056
total
$
28,694
$
$
$
$
2,657
$
3,534
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
secured borrowing and lending activities
the firm obtains secured short-term
financing principally through the use of repurchase agreements,
securities lending agreements and other financings. in these
transactions, the firm receives cash or securities in exchange for
other securities, including u.s.government, federal agency and
sovereign obligations, corporate debt and other debt obligations,
equities and convertibles, letters of credit and other assets.
the firm obtains securities as
collateral principally through the use of resale agreements,
securities borrowing agreements, derivative transactions, customer
margin loans and other secured borrowing activities to finance
inventory positions, to meet customer needs and to satisfy
settlement requirements. in many cases, the firm is permitted to
sell or repledge securities held as collateral. these securities
may be used to secure repurchase agreements, to enter into
securities lending or derivative transactions, or to cover short
positions. as of november2005 and november2004, the fair value of
securities received as collateral by the firm that it was permitted
to sell or repledge was $629.94billion and $511.98billion,
respectively, of which the firm sold or repledged $550.33billion
and $451.79billion, respectively.
the firm also pledges securities it
owns. counterparties may or may not have the right to sell or
repledge the securities. securities owned and pledged to
counterparties that have the right to sell or repledge are reported
as financial instruments owned and pledged as collateral, at fair
value in the consolidated statements of financial condition and
were $38.98billion and $27.92billion as of november2005
and november2004, respectively. securities owned and pledged in
connection with repurchase and securities lending agreements to
counterparties that did not have the right to sell or repledge are
included in financial instruments owned, at fair value in the
consolidated statements of financial condition and were $93.90billion
and $46.86billion as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively.
in addition to repurchase and
securities lending agreements, the firm also pledges securities and
other assets it owns to counterparties that do not have the right
to sell or repledge, in order to collateralize secured short-term
and long-term borrowings. in connection with these transactions,
the firm pledged assets of $27.84billion and $22.81billion
as collateral as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively. see note4 and note5 for further information
regarding the firms secured short-term and long-term borrowings.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note4.
short-term borrowings
the firm obtains secured and
unsecured short-term borrowings primarily through the issuance of
promissory notes, commercial paper and bank loans. as of november
2005 and november2004, secured short-term borrowings were $7.97billion
and $8.56billion, respectively. unsecured
short-term borrowings were $47.25billion and $46.40billion
as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
short-term borrowings also include the portion of long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement date
and certain long-term borrowings that are redeemable within one
year of the financial statement date at the option of the holder.
the carrying value of these short-term obligations approximates
fair value due to their short-term nature.
short-term borrowings are set forth
below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
17,339
$
19,513
commercial paper
5,154
4,355
bank loans and other
15,975
13,474
current portion of long-term borrowings
16,751
17,617
total(1)
$
55,219
$
54,959
(1)
as of november2005 and november2004, the
weighted average interest rates for short-term
borrowings, including commercial paper, were 3.98% and
2.73%, respectively. the weighted average interest rates,
after giving effect to hedging activities, were 3.86% and
2.30% as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
note5.
long-term borrowings
the firm obtains secured and
unsecured long-term borrowings, which consist principally of senior
borrowings with maturities extending to 2035. as of november2005
and november2004, secured long-term borrowings were $15.67billion
and $12.09billion, respectively. unsecured long-term
borrowings were $84.34billion and $68.61billion as of
november2005 and november2004, respectively.
long-term borrowings are set forth
below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
35,530
$
32,078
non-u.s.dollar
16,224
12,553
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
31,952
26,033
non-u.s.dollar
16,301
10,032
total
$
100,007
$
80,696
(1)
as of november2005 and november2004, interest rates on u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged
from 3.72% to 12.00% and from 2.85% to 12.00%, respectively. as of november2005 and november2004,
interest rates on non-u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from 0.65% to 8.88% and from 0.70% to 8.88%, respectively.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the federal funds rate. certain equity-linked
and indexed instruments are included in floating rate obligations.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
long-term borrowings include
nonrecourse debt issued by the following subsidiaries, as set forth
in the table below. nonrecourse debt is debt that only the issuing
subsidiary or, if applicable, a subsidiary guaranteeing the debt is
obligated to repay.
as of november
(in millions)
william street funding corporation
$
5,107
$
5,144
variable interest entities
5,568
4,546
other subsidiaries(1)
2,951
2,364
total
$
13,626
$
12,054
(1)
includes $1.33billion and $978million of nonrecourse debt related to the firms consolidated
power generation facilities as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
long-term borrowings by fiscal
maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2005(1)(2)
2004(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
10,691
$
2,616
$
13,307
13,662
14,523
7,116
8,064
6,218
2,872
9,090
4,626
3,179
7,805
9,241
3,094
12,335
9,061
4,116
13,177
6,411
7,698
14,109
2,515
2,918
5,433
2011-thereafter
31,950
18,000
49,950
24,102
8,808
32,910
total
$
67,482
$
32,525
$
100,007
$
58,111
$
22,585
$
80,696
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year of
the financial statement date and certain long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the
financial statement date at the option of the holder are
included as short-term borrowings in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
(2)
long-term borrowings repayable at the option of
the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. certain long-term borrowings that are redeemable
prior to maturity at the option of the holder are
reflected at the dates such options become exercisable.
the firm enters into derivative
contracts, such as interest rate futures contracts, interest rate
swap agreements, currency swap agreements, equity-linked and
indexed contracts, to effectively convert a substantial portion of
its long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based floating rate
obligations. accordingly, the aggregate carrying value of these
long-term borrowings and related hedges approximates fair value.
the effective weighted average
interest rates for long-term borrowings, after hedging activities,
are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
3,468
5.48
%
$
2,383
6.56
%
floating rate obligations
96,539
4.31
78,313
2.48
total
$
100,007
4.35
$
80,696
2.60
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
deferrable interest junior subordinated debentures
in february2004, goldman sachs
capitali (the trust), a wholly owned delaware statutory trust,
was formed by the firm for the exclusive purposes of (i)issuing
$2.75billion of guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests and $85million of common beneficial interests in the
trust, (ii)investing the proceeds from the sale to purchase
junior subordinated debentures from group inc. and (iii)engaging
in only those other activities necessary or incidental to
these purposes. the preferred beneficial interests were purchased
by third parties, and, as of november2005, the firm held all of
the common beneficial interests.
the trust is a wholly owned finance
subsidiary of the firm for legal and regulatory purposes. however,
for accounting purposes, under finno.46-r, the trust is
not a consolidated subsidiary of the firm because the firms
ownership of the common beneficial interest is not considered at
risk, since the trusts principal asset is the $2.84billion of
junior subordinated debentures issued by the firm. the firm pays
interest semiannually on these debentures at an annual rate of
6.345% and the debentures mature on february15, 2034. the
coupon rate and payment dates applicable to the beneficial
interests are the same as the interest rate and payment dates
applicable to the debentures. see note6 for further
information regarding the firms guarantee of the preferred
beneficial interests issued by the trust.
the firm has the right, from time to
time, to defer payment of interest on the junior subordinated
debentures, and, therefore, cause payment of dividends on the
trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in each case
for up to ten consecutive semiannual periods, and during any such
extension period group inc. will not be permitted to, among other
things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of its common
stock. the trust is not permitted to pay any distributions on the
common beneficial interests held by the firm unless all dividends
payable on the preferred beneficial interests have been paid in
full.
note6.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
commitments
forward secured financings. the firm
had commitments to enter into forward secured financing
transactions, including certain repurchase and resale agreements
and secured borrowing and lending arrangements, of $49.93billion
and $48.32billion as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively.
commitments to extend credit. in
connection with its lending activities, the firm had outstanding
commitments of $61.12billion and $27.72billion as of
november2005 and november2004, respectively. the firms
commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to
counterparties that have fixed termination dates and are contingent
on the satisfaction of all conditions to borrowing set forth in the
contract. since these commitments may expire unused, the total
commitment amount does not necessarily reflect the actual future
cash flow requirements. the firm accounts for these commitments at
fair value.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table summarizes the
firms commitments to extend credit at november2005 and november
2004.
commitments to extend credit
(in millions)
year ended november
william street program
$
14,505
$
9,400
other commercial lending commitments
investment-grade
17,592
4,984
non-investment-grade
18,536
7,334
warehouse financing
10,489
5,998
total commitments to extend credit
$
61,122
$
27,716
william street program. substantially all of the commitments provided under the
william street credit extension program are to investment-grade corporate borrowers.
commitments under the william street credit extension program are issued by william
street commitment corporation (commitment corp.), a consolidated wholly owned
subsidiary of group inc. whose assets and liabilities are legally separated from
other assets and liabilities of the firm, and also by other subsidiaries of group
inc. william street funding corporation (funding corp.), another consolidated wholly
owned subsidiary of group inc. whose assets and liabilities are legally separated
from other assets and liabilities of the firm, was formed to raise funding to
support the william street credit extension program. the assets of commitment corp.
and of funding corp. will not be available to their respective shareholders until
the claims of their respective creditors have been paid. in addition, no affiliate
of either commitment corp. or funding corp., except in limited cases as expressly
agreed in writing, is responsible for any obligation of either entity. with respect
to these commitments, the firm has credit loss protection provided to it by smfg,
which is generally limited to 95% of the first loss the firm realizes on approved
loan commitments, subject to a maximum of $1.00billion. in addition, subject to
the satisfaction of certain conditions, upon the firms request, smfg will provide
protection for 70% of the second loss on such commitments, subject to a maximum of
$1.13billion. the firm also uses other financial instruments to hedge certain
william street commitments not covered by smfg.
other commercial lending commitments. in addition to the commitments issued under
the william street credit extension program, the firm extends other credit
commitments, primarily in connection with contingent acquisition financing and other
types of corporate lending. as part of its ongoing credit origination activities,
the firm may reduce its credit risk on commitments by syndicating all or substantial
portions to other investors. additionally, commitments that are extended for
contingent acquisition financing are often short-term in nature, as
borrowers often replace them
with other funding sources.
warehouse financing. the firms commitments to extend credit also include mortgage
and other forms of warehouse financing. these financings are expected to be repaid
from the proceeds of related securitizations for which the firm may or may not act
as underwriter. these arrangements are secured by the warehoused assets, primarily
consisting of mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities, residential and
commercial mortgages and corporate debt instruments.
letters of credit. the firm provides
letters of credit issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu
of securities or cash to satisfy various collateral and margin
deposit requirements. letters of credit outstanding were $9.23billion
and $11.15billion as of november2005 and november
2004, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
merchant banking commitments. the
firm acts as an investor in merchant banking transactions, which
includes making long-term investments in equity and debt securities
in privately negotiated transactions, corporate acquisitions and
real estate transactions. in connection with these activities, the
firm had commitments to invest up to $3.54billion and $1.04billion
in corporate and real estate investment funds as of
november2005 and november2004, respectively.
construction-related commitments.
during the third fiscal quarter of 2005, the firm announced plans
for a new world headquarters in new york city, with initial
occupancy scheduled for 2009, at an expected cost of $2.3billion
to $2.5billion. the firm will partially finance the
project with tax-exempt liberty bonds. as of november2005, the
firm borrowed approximately $1.4billion through the issuance
of liberty bonds and may borrow up to an additional $250million
through the issuance of additional liberty bonds before
2010. as of november2005, the firm had outstanding
construction-related commitments of $47million in connection
with this project. included in the firms future minimum rental
payments under noncancelable lease agreements (included below) is
$309million related to a 64-year ground lease for the land on
which the firms world headquarters will be constructed, of which
$161million is a lump-sum payment due by june2007.
in addition, the firm had other
construction-related commitments of $98million and $107million
as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
other. in august2005, the firm
entered into an agreement to acquire the variable annuity and
variable life insurance business of the hanover insurance group,
inc. (formerly allmerica financial corporation), including its
wholly owned life insurance subsidiary, allmerica financial life
insurance and annuity company. the transaction closed on december30,
2005 at a purchase price of approximately $271million
upfront and an estimated $34million over three years, subject
to final adjustments.
the firm had other purchase
commitments of $773million and $242million as of november2005
and november2004, respectively.
leases. the firm has contractual
obligations under long-term noncancelable lease agreements,
principally for office space, expiring on various dates through
2069. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation
provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges.
future minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals,
and rent charged to operating expense for the last three years are
set forth below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2011-thereafter
2,134
total
$
4,002
net rent expense
$
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
contingencies
the firm is involved in a number of
judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings concerning matters
arising in connection with the conduct of its businesses.
management believes, based on currently available information, that
the results of such proceedings, in the aggregate, will not have a
material adverse effect on the firms financial condition, but may
be material to the firms operating results for any particular
period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such
period. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of
the firms litigation and regulatory matters, particularly in cases
or proceedings in which substantial or indeterminate damages or
fines are sought, the firm cannot estimate losses or ranges of
losses for cases or proceedings where there is only a reasonable
possibility that a loss may be incurred.
guarantees
the firm enters into various
derivative contracts that meet the definition of a guarantee under
finno.45, guarantors accounting and disclosure
requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of
indebtedness of others. such derivative contracts include credit
default swaps, written equity and commodity put options, written
currency contracts and interest rate caps, floors and swaptions. finno.45
does not require disclosures about derivative
contracts if such contracts may be cash settled and the firm has no
basis to conclude it is probable that the counterparties held, at
inception, the underlying instruments related to the derivative
contracts. the firm has concluded that these conditions have been
met for certain large, internationally active commercial and
investment bank end users and certain other users. accordingly, the
firm has not included such contracts in the tables below.
the firm, in its capacity as an
agency lender, indemnifies most of its securities lending customers
against losses incurred in the event that borrowers do not return
securities and the collateral held is insufficient to cover the
market value of the securities borrowed. in connection with certain
asset sales and securitization transactions, the firm guarantees
the collection of contractual cash flows. in connection with its
merchant banking activities, the firm may issue loan guarantees to
secure financing. in addition, the firm provides letters of credit
and other guarantees, on a limited basis, to enable clients to
enhance their credit standing and complete transactions.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
in connection with the firms
establishment of the trust, group inc. effectively provided for the
full and unconditional guarantee of the beneficial interests in the
trust held by third parties. timely payment by group inc. of
interest on the junior subordinated debentures and other amounts
due and performance of its other obligations under the transaction
documents will be sufficient to cover payments due by the trust on
its beneficial interests. as a result, management believes that it
is unlikely the firm will have to make payments related to the
trust other than those required under the junior subordinated
debentures and in connection with certain expenses incurred by the
trust.
the following tables set forth
certain information about the firms derivative contracts that meet
the definition of a guarantee and certain other guarantees as of
november2005 and november2004:
as of november 2005
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration (4)
carrying
2007-
2009-
2011-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives(1)
$
8,217
$
356,131
$
244,163
$
259,332
$
289,459
$
1,149,085
securities lending indemnifications(2)
16,324
16,324
guarantees of trust preferred beneficial interest(3)
6,851
7,723
guarantee of the collection of contractual cash flows
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and other guarantees
as of november 2004
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration (4)
carrying
2006-
2008-
2010-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives(1)
$
6,752
$
269,246
$
96,829
$
175,910
$
349,789
$
891,774
securities lending indemnifications(2)
14,737
14,737
guarantees of trust preferred beneficial interest(3)
7,025
7,897
guarantee of the collection of contractual cash flows
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and other guarantees
(1)
the carrying value excludes the effect of a legal right of setoff that may exist under an enforceable netting agreement.
(2)
collateral held by the lenders in connection with securities lending indemnifications was $16.89billion and $15.28billion as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
(3)
includes the guarantee of all payments scheduled to be made over the life of the trust, which could be
shortened in the event the firm redeemed the junior subordinated debentures issued to fund the trust. (see
note5 for further information regarding the trust.)
(4)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated losses in connection with these contracts.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
in the normal course of its business,
the firm indemnifies and guarantees certain service providers, such
as clearing and custody agents, trustees and administrators,
against specified potential losses in connection with their acting
as an agent of, or providing services to, the firm or its
affiliates. the firm also indemnifies some clients against
potential losses incurred in the event specified third-party
service providers, including sub-custodians and third-party
brokers, improperly execute transactions. in addition, the firm is
a member of payment, clearing and settlement networks as well as
securities exchanges around the world that may require the firm to
meet the obligations of such networks and exchanges in the event of
member defaults. in connection with its prime brokerage and
clearing businesses, the firm agrees to clear and settle on behalf
of its clients the transactions entered into by them with other
brokerage firms. the firms obligations in respect of such
transactions are secured by the assets in the clients account as
well as any proceeds received from the transactions cleared and
settled by the firm on behalf of the client. in connection with
joint venture investments, the firm may issue loan guarantees under
which it may be liable in the event of fraud, misappropriation,
environmental liabilities and certain other matters involving the
borrower. the firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum
payout under these guarantees and indemnifications. however,
management believes that it is unlikely the firm will have to make
any material payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities
related to these guarantees and indemnifications have been
recognized in the consolidated statements of financial condition as
of november2005 and november2004.
the firm provides representations and
warranties to counterparties in connection with a variety of
commercial transactions and occasionally indemnifies them against
potential losses caused by the breach of those representations and
warranties. the firm may also provide indemnifications protecting
against changes in or adverse application of certain u.s.tax
laws in connection with ordinary-course transactions such as
securities issuances, borrowings or derivatives. in addition, the
firm may provide indemnifications to some counterparties to protect
them in the event additional taxes are owed or payments are
withheld, due either to a change in or an adverse application of
certain non-u.s.tax laws. these indemnifications generally are
standard contractual terms and are entered into in the normal
course of business. generally, there are no stated or notional
amounts included in these indemnifications, and the contingencies
triggering the obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur.
the firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout
under these guarantees and indemnifications. however, management
believes that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any
material payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities
related to these arrangements have been recognized in the
consolidated statements of financial condition as of november2005
and november2004.
note7.
shareholders equity
dividends declared per common share
were $1.00 in fiscal 2005, $1.00 in fiscal 2004 and $0.74 in fiscal
2003. on december14, 2005, the board of directors of group
inc. (the board) declared a dividend of $0.25per share to be
paid on february23, 2006 to common shareholders of record on
january24,2006.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
during fiscal 2005, the firm issued
70,000shares of preferred stock in three series as set forth
in the following table:
preferred stock by series
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
description
date issued
issued
authorized
redemption date
(in millions)
a
perpetual floating rate
april25, 2005
30,000
50,000
april25, 2010
$
non-cumulative
b
perpetual 6.20%
october31, 2005
32,000
50,000
october31, 2010
non-cumulative
c
perpetual floating rate
october31, 2005
8,000
25,000
october31, 2010
non-cumulative
70,000
125,000
$
1,750
each share of preferred stock has a
par value of $0.01, has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is
represented by 1,000 depositary shares and is redeemable at the
firms option at a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus declared
and unpaid dividends. the firms ability to declare or pay
dividends on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, its common
stock is subject to certain restrictions in the event that the firm
fails to pay or set aside full dividends on the preferred stock for
the latest completed dividend period. all preferred stock also has
a preference over the firms common stock upon liquidation.
dividends declared per share of seriesa
preferred stock were $578.72 in fiscal 2005. on december14,
2005, the board declared a dividend per preferred share of
$323.28, $430.56 and $353.68 for seriesa, seriesb and
seriesc preferred stock, respectively, to be paid on february10,
2006 to preferred shareholders of record on january26,
2006.
during fiscal 2005, the firm
repurchased 63.7million shares of its common stock at a total
cost of $7.11billion, and during fiscal 2004, the firm
repurchased 18.7million shares of its common stock at a total
cost of $1.81billion. the average price paid per share for
repurchased shares was $111.57 and $96.29 for the years ended
november2005 and november2004, respectively. in addition, to
satisfy minimum statutory employee tax withholding requirements
related to the delivery of shares underlying restricted stock
units, the firm cancelled 1.6million restricted stock units at
a total cost of $163million in fiscal 2005, and it cancelled
9.1million restricted stock units at a total cost of $870million
in fiscal 2004.
the following table sets forth the
firms accumulated other comprehensive income by type:
as of
november
(in millions)
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
$
(16
)
$
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax
(11
)
net gains on cash flow hedges, net of tax
net unrealized holding gains, net of tax(1)
total accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax
$
$
(1)
consists of net unrealized gains on available-for-sale securities held by investments accounted for under the equity method.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note8.
earnings per common share
the computations of basic and diluted
earnings per common share are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
numerator for basic and diluted eps earnings applicable to
common shareholders
$
5,609
$
4,553
$
3,005
denominator for basic eps weighted average number of common
shares
478.1
489.5
488.4
effect of dilutive securities
restricted stock units
9.9
9.6
16.0
stock options
12.2
11.4
7.5
dilutive potential common shares
22.1
21.0
23.5
denominator for diluted eps weighted average number of common
shares and dilutive potential common shares(1)
500.2
510.5
511.9
basic eps
$
11.73
$
9.30
$
6.15
diluted eps
11.21
8.92
5.87
(1)
the diluted eps computations do not include the antidilutive effect of the following options:
year ended november
(in millions)
number of antidilutive options, end of period
note9.
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
goodwill
as of november2005 and november
2004, goodwill of $3.15billion and $3.18billion,
respectively, was included in other assets in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
identifiable intangible assets
the following table sets forth the
gross carrying amount, accumulated amortization and net carrying
amount of identifiable intangible assets:
as of november
(in millions)
customer lists (1)
gross carrying amount
$
1,021
$
1,021
accumulated amortization
(244
)
(193
)
net carrying amount
$
$
new york stockexchange (nyse)specialist rights
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(134
)
(107
)
net carrying amount
$
$
power contracts (2)
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(16
)
net carrying amount
$
$
exchange-tradedfund (etf)and optionspecialist rights
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(27
)
(24
)
net carrying amount
$
$
other (3)
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(206
)
(165
)
net carrying amount
$
$
total
gross carrying amount
$
2,682
$
2,178
accumulated amortization
(627
)
(489
)
net carrying amount
$
2,055
$
1,689
(1)
primarily includes the firms clearance and
execution and nasdaq customer lists related to slk llc
(slk)and financial counseling customer lists related
to the ayco company, l.p.
(2)
primarily relates to above-market power contracts
of consolidated power generation facilities related to
cogentrix energy, inc. and national energy& gas
transmission co. (negt). the firm closed on its
acquisition of negt and recorded purchase price
allocation adjustments for negt and cogentrix energy,
inc. in fiscal 2005. substantially all of these power
contracts have been pledged as collateral to
counterparties in connection with certain of the firms
secured short-term and long-term borrowings. the weighted
average remaining life of these power contracts is
approximately 15years.
(3)
primarily includes technology-related assets
related to slk.
identifiable intangible assets are
amortized over their estimated useful lives. the weighted average
remaining life of the firms identifiable intangibles is
approximately 16years. there were no identifiable intangible
assets that were considered to be indefinite-lived and, therefore,
not subject to amortization.
amortization expense associated with
identifiable intangible assets was $165million for the fiscal
year ended november2005, including amortization associated with
the firms consolidated power generation facilities reported within
cost of power generation in the consolidated statements of
earnings. amortization expense associated with identifiable
intangible assets was $125million and $319million
(including $188million of impairment charges) for the fiscal
years ended november2004 and november2003, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
estimated future amortization expense
for existing identifiable intangible assets is set forth below:
(in millions)
$
note10.
other assets and other liabilities
other assets
other assets are generally less
liquid, nonfinancial assets. the following table sets forth the
firms other assets by type:
as of november
(in millions)
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets (1)
$
5,203
$
4,871
property, leasehold improvements and equipment (2)
5,097
4,083
equity-method investments and joint ventures
2,965
2,447
income tax-related assets
1,304
miscellaneous receivables and other
2,743
2,965
total
$
17,312
$
15,143
(1)
see note9 for further information regarding
the firms goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
(2)
net of accumulated depreciation and amortization
of $4.62billion and $4.23billion for november
2005 and november2004, respectively.
other liabilities
other liabilities and accrued
expenses primarily includes compensation and benefits, minority
interest in certain consolidated entities, litigation liabilities,
tax-related payables, deferred revenue and other payables. the
following table sets forth the firms other liabilities and accrued
expenses by type:
as of november
(in millions)
compensation and benefits
$
6,598
$
5,571
minority interest
3,164
1,809
accrued expenses and other payables
4,068
2,980
total
$
13,830
$
10,360
note11.
employee benefit plans
the firm sponsors various pension
plans and certain other postretirement benefit plans, primarily
healthcare and life insurance. the firm also provides certain
benefits to former or inactive employees prior to retirement. a
summary of these plans is set forth below.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
defined benefit pension plans and postretirement plans
the firm maintains a defined benefit
pension plan for substantially all u.s.employees hired prior
to november1, 2003. as of november2004, this plan has been
closed to new participants and no further benefits will be accrued
to existing participants. employees of certain non-u.s.
subsidiaries participate in various local defined benefit pension
plans. these plans generally provide benefits based on years of
credited service and a percentage of the employees eligible
compensation. in addition, the firm has unfunded postretirement
benefit plans that provide medical and life insurance for eligible
retirees and their dependents covered under the u.s.benefits
program.
the following table provides a
summary of the changes in the plans benefit obligations and the
fair value of assets for november2005 and november2004 and a
statement of the funded status of the plans as of november2005 and
november2004:
as of or for the year ended november
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
benefit obligation
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
service cost
interest cost
plan amendments
(2
)
actuarial loss
benefits paid
(6
)
(67
)
(6
)
(4
)
(14
)
(6
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
(50
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
fair value of plan assets
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
actual return on plan assets
firm contributions
employee contributions
benefits paid
(6
)
(43
)
(6
)
(4
)
(14
)
(6
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
(42
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
funded status
$
(39
)
$
(94
)
$
(277
)
$
(37
)
$
(92
)
$
(215
)
unrecognized loss
unrecognized transition (asset)/obligation
(20
)
(22
)
unrecognized prior service cost
adjustment to recognize additional minimum liability
(18
)
(1
)
(1
)
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
$
$
$
(176
)
$
$
$
(142
)
the accumulated benefit obligation
for all defined benefit pension plans was $795million and $742million
as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
for plans in which the accumulated
benefit obligation exceeded plan assets, the aggregate projected
benefit obligation and accumulated benefit obligation was $135million
and $126million, respectively, as of november2005,
and $184million and $154million, respectively, as of
november2004. the fair value of plan assets for each of these
plans was $64million and $104million as of november2005
and november2004, respectively.
the components of pension
(income)/expense and postretirement expense are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(27
)
(23
)
(16
)
net amortization
total
$
(2
)
$
$
non-u.s.pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(23
)
(20
)
(15
)
net amortization
other(1)
(17
)
total
$
$
$
postretirement
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
net amortization
total
$
$
$
(1)
represents a benefit as a result of the termination of a japanese pension plan.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the weighted average assumptions used
to develop net periodic pension cost and the actuarial present
value of the projected benefit obligation are set forth below.
these assumptions represent a weighted average of the assumptions
used for the u.s. and non-u.s.plans and are based on the
economic environment of each applicable country.
year ended november
defined benefit pension plans
u.s.pension projected benefit obligation
discount rate
5.25
%
5.50
%
6.00
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
n/a
5.00
u.s.pension net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.50
6.00
6.59
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
5.00
5.00
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
7.50
8.50
8.50
non-u.s.pension projected benefit obligation
discount rate
4.81
4.63
4.76
rate of increase in future compensation levels
4.75
4.49
4.37
non-u.s.pension net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
4.63
4.76
4.78
rate of increase in future compensation levels
4.49
4.37
4.14
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
6.35
6.25
5.86
postretirement plans benefit obligation
discount rate
5.25
%
5.50
%
6.00
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
postretirement plans net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.50
6.00
6.75
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
generally, the firm determined the
discount rates for its defined benefit plans by referencing indices
for long-term, high-quality bonds and ensuring that the discount
rate does not exceed the yield reported for those indices after
adjustment for the duration of the plans liabilities.
the firms approach in determining
the long-term rate of return for plan assets is based upon
historical financial market relationships that have existed over
time with the presumption that this trend will generally remain
constant in the future.
for measurement purposes, an annual
growth rate in the per capita cost of covered healthcare benefits
of 11.46% was assumed for the fiscal year ending november2006. the
rate was assumed to decrease ratably to 5.00% for the fiscal year
ending november2015 and remain at that level thereafter.
the assumed cost of healthcare has an
effect on the amounts reported for the firms postretirement plans.
a 1% change in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would have
the following effects:
1% increase
1% decrease
(in millions)
cost
$
$
$
(5
)
$
(4
)
obligation
(37
)
(29
)
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table sets forth the
composition of plan assets for the u.s. and non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans by asset category:
as of november
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
pension
pension
pension
pension
equity securities
%
%
%
%
debt securities
other
total
%
%
%
%
the investment approach of the firms
u.s. and major non-u.s.defined benefit pension plans involves
employing a sufficient level of flexibility to capture investment
opportunities as they occur, while maintaining reasonable
parameters to ensure that prudence and care are exercised in the
execution of the investment programs. the plans employ a total
return on investment approach, whereby a mix, which is broadly
similar to the actual asset allocation as of november2005, of
equity securities, debt securities and other assets, is targeted to
maximize the long-term return on assets for a given level of risk.
investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis by
the firms retirement committee through periodic portfolio reviews,
meetings with investment managers and annual liability measurements.
the firm will contribute a minimum of
$13million to its pension plans and $7million to its
postretirement plans in fiscal 2006.
the following table sets forth
benefits projected to be paid from the firms u.s. and non-u.s.defined
benefit pension and postretirement plans (net of medicare
subsidy receipts) and reflects expected future service, where
appropriate:
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
$
$
$
2011-2015
defined contribution plans
the firm contributes to
employer-sponsored u.s. and non-u.s.defined contribution
plans. the firms contribution to these plans was $305million,
$189million and $199million for the years ended november
2005, november2004 and november2003, respectively.
the firm previously maintained a
nonqualified defined contribution plan for certain senior employees
which held shares of common stock. all shares were distributed to
participants and there were no remaining assets in the plan as of
january2005. plan expense was immaterial for the years ended
november2005, november2004 and november2003.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note12.
employee incentive plans
stock incentive plan
the firm sponsors a stock incentive
plan, the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan
(the amended sip), which provides for grants of incentive stock
options, nonqualified stock options, stock appreciation rights,
dividend equivalent rights, restricted stock, restricted stock
units and other stock-based awards. in the second quarter of fiscal
2003, the amended sip was approved by the firms shareholders,
effective for grants after april1, 2003, and no further awards
were or will be made under the original plan after that date,
although awards granted under the original plan prior to that date
remain outstanding.
the total number of shares of common
stock that may be issued under the amended sip through fiscal 2008
may not exceed 250million shares and, in each fiscal year
thereafter, may not exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares
of common stock, determined as of the last day of the immediately
preceding fiscal year, increased by the number of shares available
for awards in previous fiscal years but not covered by awards
granted in such years. as of november2005 and november2004, 196.6million
and 218.9million shares, respectively, were
available for grant under the amended sip, after taking into
account stock-based compensation awards that were issued subsequent
to year end, as part of year-end compensation.
other compensation arrangements
in november2004, the firm adopted
new deferred compensation plans for eligible employees for fiscal
2005. in general, under the plans, participants are able to defer
payment of a portion of their cash year-end compensation. during
the deferral period, participants are able to nominally invest
their deferrals in certain alternatives available under the plans.
generally, under current tax law, participants are not subject to
income tax on amounts deferred or on any notional investment
earnings until the returns are distributed, and the firm is not
entitled to a corresponding tax deduction until the amounts are
distributed. the firm has recognized compensation expense for the
amounts deferred under these plans. as of november2005, $134million
related to these plans was included in other liabilities
and accrued expenses in the consolidated statements of financial
condition.
in november2004, the firm adopted a
discount stock program through which eligible senior executives may
acquire restricted stock units in fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2006 under
the firms amended sip at an effective 25% discount. the 25%
discount is effected by an additional grant of restricted stock
units equal to one-third of the number of restricted stock units
purchased by qualifying participants. the purchased restricted
stock units are 100% vested when granted, but the shares underlying
them are not able to be sold or transferred (other than to satisfy
tax obligations) before the third anniversary of the grant date.
the shares underlying the restricted stock units that are granted
in order to effect the 25% discount will generally vest in equal
installments on the second and third anniversaries following the
grant date and will not be transferable before the third
anniversary of the grant date. compensation expense related to
these restricted stock units is recognized over the vesting period.
the total value of restricted stock units granted in fiscal 2005 in
order to effect the 25% discount was $79million.
restricted stock units
the firm issued restricted stock
units to employees under the amended sip, primarily in connection
with year-end compensation and acquisitions. of the total
restricted stock units outstanding as of november2005 and november
2004, (i)30.1million units and 24.9million units,
respectively, required future service as a condition to the
delivery of the underlying shares of common stock and (ii)25.0million
units and 13.0million units, respectively, did
not require future service.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
in all cases, delivery of the
underlying shares of common stock is conditioned on the grantees
satisfying certain other requirements outlined in the award
agreements. the activity related to these restricted stock units is
set forth below:
restricted stock units outstanding
no future service
future service
required
required
outstanding, november2002
18,315,938
29,895,000
granted(1)
3,615,366
9,357,593
forfeited
(179,708
)
(1,886,420
)
delivered
(11,261,989
)
vested
12,824,458
(12,824,458
)
outstanding, november2003
23,314,065
24,541,715
granted(1)
6,629,717
11,253,970
forfeited
(142,163
)
(879,420
)
delivered
(26,806,448
)
vested
10,032,240
(10,032,240
)
outstanding, november2004
13,027,411
24,884,025
granted(1)
10,048,356
12,217,764
forfeited
(23,621
)
(819,840
)
delivered
(4,222,409
)
vested
6,164,129
(6,164,129
)
outstanding, november2005
24,993,866
30,117,820
(1)
includes restricted stock units granted to
employees subsequent to year end as part of year-end
compensation.
total employee stock compensation
expense, net of forfeitures, was $1.76billion, $1.22billion
and $711million for the years ended november2005,
november2004 and november2003, respectively.
stock options
as of november2004, all stock
options granted to employees in may1999 in connection with the
firms initial public offering are fully vested and exercisable.
stock options granted to employees subsequent to the firms initial
public offering generally vest as outlined in the applicable stock
option agreement and first become exercisable on the third
anniversary of the grant date. year-end stock options for 2005
become exercisable in january2009 and expire on november27,
2015. shares received on exercise prior to january2010 will not be
transferable until january2010. all employee stock option
agreements provide that vesting is accelerated in certain
circumstances, such as upon retirement, death and extended absence.
in general, all stock options expire on the tenth anniversary of
the grant date, although they may be subject to earlier termination
or cancellation in certain circumstances in accordance with the
terms of the amended sip and the applicable stock option agreement.
the dilutive effect of the firms outstanding stock options is
included in average common shares outstanding diluted in
the consolidated statements of earnings.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the activity related to these stock
options is set forth below:
weighted
weighted average
options
average
remaining
outstanding
exercise price
life(years)
outstanding, november2002
94,269,101
$
74.53
8.08
granted
902,511
95.81
exercised
(2,686,955
)
52.76
forfeited
(3,428,692
)
73.08
outstanding, november2003
89,055,965
75.47
7.17
granted
22,500
96.08
exercised
(9,025,867
)
57.80
forfeited
(1,496,863
)
81.00
outstanding, november2004
78,555,735
77.40
6.33
granted(1)
3,390,480
131.64
exercised
(17,285,849
)
66.20
forfeited
(422,679
)
82.98
outstanding, november2005
64,237,687
83.24
5.84
exercisable, november2005
46,422,603
$
80.75
5.17
(1)
includes stock options granted to employees subsequent to year end as part of year-end compensation.
the options outstanding as of
november2005 are set forth below:
weighted
weighted average
options
average
remaining
exercise price
outstanding
exercise price
life (years)
$45.00
$59.99
9,921,971
$
52.98
3.5
60.00
74.99
75.00
89.99
27,661,787
80.89
6.00
90.00
104.99
23,263,449
91.89
6.06
105.00
119.99
120.00
134.99
3,390,480
131.64
9.92
outstanding, november2005
64,237,687
the weighted average fair value of
options granted for fiscal 2005, fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003 was
$32.91per option, $32.22per option and $31.31per
option, respectively. fair value was estimated as of the grant date
based on a binomial option-pricing model using the following
weighted average assumptions:
year ended november
risk-free interest rate
4.5
%
3.4
%
3.4
%
expected volatility
30.0
35.0
35.0
dividend yield
0.9
1.0
1.0
expected life
7.5years
5years
5years
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
the fair value of options granted in
fiscal 2005 reflects an additional discount for sales restrictions
on the shares of common stock underlying such options that apply
until january2010. the expected life of the options granted in
fiscal 2005 has been extended to 7.5years to reflect the
estimated impact of the sales restrictions on the expected life of
the awards.
note13.
affiliated funds
the firm has formed numerous
nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party investors. the
firm generally acts as the investment manager for these funds and,
as such, is entitled to receive management fees and, in certain
cases, advisory fees, incentive fees or overrides from these funds.
these fees amounted to $2.08billion, $1.72billion and
$1.17billion for the years ended november2005, november2004
and november2003, respectively. as of november2005 and november
2004, the fees receivable from these funds were $388million
and $445million, respectively. additionally, the firm may
invest alongside the third-party investors in certain funds. the
aggregate carrying value of the firms interests in these funds was
$2.17billion and $1.72billion as of november2005 and
november2004, respectively. in addition, the firm had commitments
to invest up to $3.54billion and $1.04billion in these
funds as of november2005 and november2004, respectively. in the
normal course of business, the firm may also engage in other
activities with these funds, including among
others, securities lending, trade execution, trading and custody.
note14.
income taxes
the components of the net tax expense
reflected in the consolidated statements of earnings are set forth
below:
year ended november
(in millions)
current taxes
u.s.federal
$
1,504
$
$
state and local
non-u.s.
1,380
total current tax expense
3,097
1,083
1,347
deferred taxes
u.s.federal
state and local
(4
)
non-u.s.
(449
)
total deferred tax (benefit)/expense
(450
)
1,040
net tax expense
$
2,647
$
2,123
$
1,440
deferred income taxes reflect the net
tax effects of temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. these temporary
differences result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years
and are measured using the tax rates and laws that will be in
effect when such differences are expected to reverse.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
significant components of the firms
deferred tax assets and liabilities are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
deferred tax assets
compensation and benefits
$
1,563
$
other, net
1,882
1,147
valuation allowance(1)
(6
)
(21
)
total deferred tax assets
1,876
1,126
deferred tax liabilities
depreciation and amortization
unrealized gains
total deferred tax liabilities
$
1,080
$
(1)
relates primarily to the ability to utilize
losses of certain foreign entities and state and local
tax credits.
the firm permanently reinvests
eligible earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly,
does not accrue any u.s.income taxes that would arise if such
earnings were repatriated. as of november2005, this policy
resulted in an unrecognized net deferred tax liability of $172million
attributable to reinvested earnings of $2.4billion.
additionally, during fiscal 2005, the
valuation allowance was decreased by $15million, primarily due
to the utilization of certain state and local tax credits. acquired
federal net operating loss carryforwards of $24million as of
november2005 and $88million as of november2004 are subject
to annual limitations on utilization and will begin to expire in
2020. acquired state and local net operating loss carryforwards of
$328million as of november2005 and $436million as of
november2004 are subject to annual limitations on utilization.
acquired alternative minimum tax credit carryforwards of $7million
as of november2005 and $32million as of november2004
are subject to annual limitations on utilization, but can be
carried forward indefinitely.
the firm is subject to examination by
the internal revenue service (irs)and other tax authorities in
certain countries, such as japan and the united kingdom, and states
in which the firm has significant business operations, such as new
york. the irs is currently examining the firms 2003 and 2004
fiscal years. during fiscal 2005, the irs concluded its examination
of 1999 through 2002, and new york state and city substantially
concluded their examinations covering periods through fiscal year
2003. the firm regularly assesses the likelihood of additional
assessments by each jurisdiction to which the firm pays taxes
resulting from the impact of current and future examinations. tax
reserves have been established, which the firm believes are
adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments.
the resolution of tax matters is not expected to have a material
effect on the firms financial condition but may be material to the
firms operating results for a particular period, depending, in
part, upon the operating results for that period and the firms
effective tax rate for that period.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
a reconciliation of the u.s.federal
statutory income tax rate to the firms effective income
tax rate is set forth below:
year ended november
u.s.federal statutory income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase related to state and local taxes, net of u.s.
income tax effects
1.6
1.4
2.1
tax credits
(1.6
)
(3.6
)
(3.1
)
foreign operations
(1.2
)
(1.2
)
(1.2
)
tax-exempt income, including dividends
(0.6
)
(0.7
)
(1.0
)
other
(1.2
)(1)
0.9
0.6
effective income tax rate
32.0
%
31.8
%
32.4
%
(1)
primarily includes the effect of audit
settlements.
tax benefits of approximately $272million
in november2005, $330million in november2004
and $103million in november2003, related to the delivery of
restricted stock units and the exercise of options, were credited
directly to additional paid-in capital in the consolidated
statements of financial condition and changes in shareholders
equity.
note15.
regulation
during the firms second fiscal
quarter of 2005, the firm became regulated by the u.s.securities
and exchange commission (sec)as a consolidated
supervised entity (cse). as such, it is subject to group-wide
supervision and examination by the sec and is subject to minimum
capital requirements on a consolidated basis. as of november2005,
the firm was in compliance with the cse capital requirements.
the firms principal u.s.regulated
subsidiaries include goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.)
and goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec). gs&co. and
gsec are registered u.s.broker-dealers and futures commission
merchants subject to rule15c3-1 of the sec and rule1.17
of the commodity futures trading commission, which specify uniform
minimum net capital requirements, as defined, for their
registrants. gs&co. and gsec have elected to compute their minimum
capital requirements in accordance with the alternative net
capital requirement as permitted by rule15c3-1. as of
november2005, gs&co. and gsec had net capital in excess of their
minimum capital requirements. in addition to its alternative
minimum net capital requirements, gs&co. is also required to hold
tentative net capital in excess of $1billion and net capital
in excess of $500million in accordance with the market and
credit risk standards of appendixe of rule15c3-1. gs&co.
is also required to notify the sec in the event that its tentative
net capital is less than $5billion. as of november2005,
gs&co. had tentative net capital and net capital in excess of both
the minimum and the notification requirements.
the firms principal international
regulated subsidiaries include goldman sachs international (gsi)
and goldman sachs (japan) ltd. (gsjl). gsi, a regulated u.k.
broker-dealer, is subject to the capital requirements of the u.k.s
financial services authority, and gsjl, a regulated broker-dealer
based in tokyo, is subject to the capital requirements of japans
financial services agency. as of november2005 and november2004,
gsi and gsjl were in compliance with their local capital adequacy
requirements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
certain other subsidiaries of the
firm are also subject to capital adequacy requirements promulgated
by authorities of the countries in which they operate. as of
november2005 and november2004, these subsidiaries were in
compliance with their local capital adequacy requirements.
note16.
business segments
in reporting to management, the
firms operating results are categorized into the following three
segments: investment banking, trading and principal investments,
and asset management and securities services.
basis of presentation
in reporting segments, certain of the
firms business lines have been aggregated where they have similar
economic characteristics and are similar in each of the following
areas: (i)the nature of the services they provide, (ii)their
methods of distribution, (iii)the types of clients they
serve and (iv)the regulatory environments in which they
operate.
the cost drivers of the firm taken as
a whole compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of the firms business
segments. compensation expenses within the firms segments reflect,
among other factors, the overall performance of the firm as well as
performance of individual business units. consequently, pre-tax
margins in one segment of the firms business may be significantly
affected by the performance of the firms other business segments.
the firm allocates revenues and
expenses among the three segments. due to the integrated nature of
the business segments, estimates and judgments have been made in
allocating certain revenue and expense items. transactions between
segments are based on specific criteria or approximate third-party
rates. total operating expenses include corporate items that have
not been allocated to individual business segments. the allocation
process is based on the manner in which management views the
business of the firm.
the segment information presented in
the table below is prepared according to the following
methodologies:
revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are included in
determining pre-tax earnings.
net revenues in the firms segments include allocations of interest income and
interest expense to specific securities, commodities and other positions in relation
to the cash generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying positions. net
interest is included within segment net revenues as it is consistent with the way in
which management assesses segment performance.
overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments are allocated
ratably based on direct segment expenses.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
segment operating results
management believes that the
following information provides a reasonable representation of each
segments contribution to consolidated pre-tax earnings and total
assets:
as of or for the year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
net revenues(1)
$
3,671
$
3,374
$
2,711
operating expenses
3,258
2,973
2,504
pre-tax earnings(3)
$
$
$
segment assets
$
4,869
$
4,759
$
4,867
trading and principal investments
net revenues(1)
$
16,362
$
13,327
$
10,443
operating expenses
10,144
8,287
6,938
pre-tax earnings(3)
$
6,218
$
5,040
$
3,505
segment assets
$
505,536
$
358,137
$
250,490
asset management and securities services
net revenues(1)
$
4,749
$
3,849
$
2,858
operating expenses
3,070
2,430
1,890
pre-tax earnings(3)
$
1,679
$
1,419
$
segment assets
$
196,399
$
167,957
$
147,647
total
net revenues(1)
$
24,782
$
20,550
$
16,012
operating expenses(2)
16,509
13,874
11,567
pre-tax earnings(3)
$
8,273
$
6,676
$
4,445
total assets(4)
$
706,804
$
531,379
$
403,799
(1)
net revenues include net interest and cost of
power generation as set forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
1,343
1,888
asset management and securities services
1,659
1,194
total net interest and cost of power generation
$
2,641
$
2,625
$
3,140
(2)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to the firms segments: (i)the
amortization of employee initial public offering awards,
net of forfeitures, of $19million and $80million for the years ended november2004 and november
2003, respectively; (ii)net provisions for a number
of litigation and regulatory proceedings of $37million,
$103million and $155million for the
years ended november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively; and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of the firms joint
venture in china for the year ended november2004.
(3)
pre-tax earnings include total depreciation and
amortization as set forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
asset management and securities services
total depreciation and amortization
$
$
$
1,145
(4)
includes deferred tax assets relating to the
firms conversion to corporate form and certain assets
that management believes are not allocable to a
particular segment for the years ended november2004 and
november2003.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
geographic information
due to the highly integrated nature
of international financial markets, the firm manages its businesses
based on the profitability of the enterprise as a whole.
accordingly, management believes that profitability by geographic
region is not necessarily meaningful.
the firms revenues and
expenses are generally allocated based on the country of domicile of
the legal entity providing the service.
the following table sets forth the
total net revenues and pre-tax earnings of the firm and its
consolidated subsidiaries by geographic region allocated on the
basis described above:
year ended november
(in millions)
net revenues
united states
$
14,315
$
12,932
$
10,040
europe
6,804
5,222
4,037
asia
3,389
2,368
1,704
other
total net revenues
$
24,782
$
20,550
$
16,012
pre-tax earnings
united states
$
5,312
$
4,761
$
3,105
europe
1,444
asia
1,308
1,121
other
(6
)
corporate(1)
(37
)
(184
)
(235
)
total pre-tax earnings
$
8,273
$
6,676
$
4,445
(1)
includes the following expenses that have not
been allocated to the firms segments: (i)the
amortization of employee initial public offering awards,
net of forfeitures, of $19million and $80million
for the years ended november2004 and november
2003, respectively; (ii)net provisions for a number
of litigation and regulatory proceedings of $37million,
$103million and $155million for the
years ended november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively; and (iii)$62million in
connection with the establishment of the firms joint
venture in china for the year ended november2004.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements (continued)
note17.
subsequent event
in january2006, the firm entered
into a definitive agreement to invest $2.58billion in the
industrial and commercial bank of china limited (icbc), with
investment funds managed by the firm assuming a substantial portion
of the firms economic interest. in addition, the firm and icbc
have entered into a strategic cooperation agreement under which the
firm will assist icbc in developing further icbcs corporate
governance, risk management and internal controls, as well as
providing expertise to enhance icbcs capabilities in treasury,
asset management, corporate and investment banking, nonperforming
loans disposal and product innovation. the transactions are
expected to close by may2006, subject to receipt of regulatory
approvals and other closing conditions.
table of contents
supplemental financial information
quarterly results (unaudited)
the following represents the firms
unaudited quarterly results for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004. these
quarterly results were prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles and reflect all adjustments that
are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair statement
of the results. these adjustments are of a normal recurring nature.
2005 fiscal quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
9,964
$
8,949
$
12,333
$
12,145
interest expense
3,449
4,022
4,940
5,742
cost of power generation
revenues, net of interest expense and cost of power generation
6,405
4,806
7,285
6,286
operating expenses
4,260
3,562
4,880
3,807
pre-tax earnings
2,145
1,244
2,405
2,479
provision for taxes
net earnings
1,512
1,617
1,632
preferred stock dividend
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
1,512
$
$
1,608
$
1,624
earnings per common share
basic
$
3.06
$
1.78
$
3.40
$
3.53
diluted
2.94
1.71
3.25
3.35
dividends declared per common share
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
2004 fiscal quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
7,905
$
7,676
$
6,803
$
7,455
interest expense
1,873
2,038
2,156
2,821
cost of power generation
revenues, net of interest expense and cost of power generation
5,928
5,511
4,530
4,581
operating expenses
3,999
3,771
3,237
2,867
pre-tax earnings
1,929
1,740
1,293
1,714
provision for taxes
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
1,293
$
1,187
$
$
1,194
earnings per common share
basic
$
2.63
$
2.43
$
1.80
$
2.44
diluted
2.50
2.31
1.74
2.36
dividends declared per common share
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
table of contents
supplemental financial information
common stock price range
the following table sets forth, for
the fiscal quarters indicated, the high and low sales prices per
share of the firms common stock as reported by the consolidated
tape association.
sales price
fiscal 2005
fiscal 2004
fiscal 2003
high
low
high
low
high
low
first quarter
$
113.93
$
101.79
$
108.00
$
95.73
$
80.90
$
63.75
second quarter
114.25
95.16
109.29
90.08
81.67
61.02
third quarter
114.87
94.75
95.15
83.29
91.98
81.50
fourth quarter
134.99
108.86
105.40
88.46
97.39
83.64
as of
january 30, 2006, there were
approximately 6,159 holders of record of the firms common
stock.
on january 30, 2006, the last
reported sales price for the firms common stock on the new york
stock exchange was $139.87 per share.
table of contents
supplemental financial information
selected financial data
as of or for the year ended november
income statement data  (in millions)
total revenues
$
43,391
$
29,839
$
23,623
$
22,854
$
31,138
interest expense
18,153
8,888
7,600
8,868
15,327
cost of power generation(1)
revenues, net of interest expense and cost of power generation
24,782
20,550
16,012
13,986
15,811
compensation and benefits
11,688
9,652
7,515
7,037
8,164
other operating expenses
4,821
4,222
4,052
3,696
3,951
pre-tax earnings
$
8,273
$
6,676
$
4,445
$
3,253
$
3,696
balance sheet data  (in millions)
total assets
$
706,804
$
531,379
$
403,799
$
355,574
$
312,218
long-term borrowings(2)
100,007
80,696
57,482
38,711
31,016
total liabilities
678,802
506,300
382,167
336,571
293,987
total shareholders equity
28,002
25,079
21,632
19,003
18,231
common share data  (in millions, except per share amounts)
earnings per common share
basic
$
11.73
$
9.30
$
6.15
$
4.27
$
4.53
diluted
11.21
8.92
5.87
4.03
4.26
dividends declared per common share
1.00
1.00
0.74
0.48
0.48
book value per common share(3)
57.02
50.77
43.60
38.69
36.33
average common shares outstanding
basic
478.1
489.5
488.4
495.6
509.7
diluted
500.2
510.5
511.9
525.1
541.8
selected data  (unaudited)
employees
united states
13,945
13,278
12,786
12,511
14,565
international
8,480
7,444
6,690
7,228
8,112
total employees
22,425
20,722
19,476
19,739
22,677
assets under management  (in billions)(4)
asset class
money markets
$
$
$
$
$
fixed income and currency
equity(5)
alternative investments(6)
total assets under management
$
$
$
(7)
$
$
(1)
cost of power generation includes all of the direct
costs of the firms power generation facilities (e.g., fuel,
operations and maintenance), as well as the depreciation and
amortization associated with the facility and related
contractual assets.
(2)
long-term borrowings include $13.63billion of
nonrecourse debt issued by william street funding
corporation, consolidated vies and other consolidated
entities. nonrecourse debt is debt that only the issuing
subsidiary or, if applicable, a subsidiary guaranteeing the
debt is obligated to repay.
(3)
book value per common share is based on common shares
outstanding, including restricted stock units granted to
employees with no future service requirements, of 460.4million,
494.0million, 496.1million, 491.2million
and 501.8million as of november2005, november
2004, november2003, november2002 and november2001,
respectively.
(4)
substantially all assets under management are valued
as of calendar month end.
(5)
includes both the firms fundamental equity and
quantitative equity strategies.
(6)
primarily includes private equity funds, hedge funds,
real estate funds, certain currency and asset allocation strategies and other
assets allocated to external investment managers.
(7)
includes $4billion in non-money market assets
related to the firms acquisition of ayco.
table of contents
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
there were no changes in or
disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure during the last two fiscal years.
item9a.
controls and procedures
as of the end of the period covered
by this report, an evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs
management, with the participation of our chief executive officer
and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in rule13a-15(e) under the
securities exchange act of 1934). based upon that evaluation, our
chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that
these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the
end of the period covered by this report. in addition, no change in
our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in rule13a-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934) occurred
during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended november25,
2005 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal
control over financial reporting and the report of independent
registered public accounting firm thereon are set forth in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k.
item9b.
other information
not applicable.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
information relating to the
registrants executive officers is included on pages42 to 43
of the annual report on form10-k. information relating to
directors of the registrant, including its audit committee and
audit committee financial experts, and its executive officers will
be in the registrants definitive proxy statement for its 2006
annual meeting of shareholders to be held on march31, 2006,
which will be filed within 120days of the end of our fiscal
year ended november25, 2005 (the 2006 proxy statement) and is
incorporated herein by reference. information relating to the
registrants code of business conduct and ethics that applies to
its senior financial officers, as defined in the code, is included
in parti, item1 of the annual report on form10-k.
item11.
executive compensation
information relating to the
registrants executive officer and director compensation will be in
the 2006 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
information relating to security
ownership of certain beneficial owners of the registrants common
stock and information relating to the security ownership of the
registrants management will be in the 2006 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
the following table provides
information as of november25, 2005, the last day of fiscal
2005, regarding securities issued under our equity compensation
plans that were in effect during fiscal 2005, including those
granted on december13, 2005 in respect of fiscal 2005
performance as part of the firms discount stock program.
number of securities
number of
remaining available
securities to be
for future issuance
issued upon
weighted-average
under equity
exercise of
exercise price of
compensation plans
outstanding
outstanding
(excluding securities
options, warrants
options, warrants
reflected in the
plan category
and rights
and rights
second column)
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan(1)
64,237,687
(2)
$
83.2431
(2)
250,020,377
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
none
total
64,237,687
(2)
250,020,377
(3)(4)
(1)
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock
incentive plan (the sip) was approved by the shareholders
of goldman sachs at our 2003 annual meeting of
shareholders and is a successor plan to the goldman sachs
1999 stock incentive plan (the 1999 plan), which was
approved by our shareholders immediately prior to our
initial public offering in may1999 and under which no
additional awards have been granted since approval of the
sip.
(2)
includes options that are subject to vesting and
other conditions. the number of securities to be issued
upon exercise of outstanding options, warrants and
rights, as well as the weighted average exercise price of
the outstanding options, warrants and rights, excludes
approximately 65,000 options granted with a strike price
of $0.01 in foreign jurisdictions that were intended to
replicate the economic effect of our restricted stock
units.
(3)
of these shares, 55,086,037shares may be
issued pursuant to outstanding restricted stock units,
including 48,602,805shares granted under the sip and
6,483,232shares granted under the 1999 plan.
table of contents
(4)
represents shares remaining to be issued under
the sip (243,537,145shares) and the 1999 plan
(6,483,232shares). the total number of shares of
common stock that may be delivered pursuant to awards
granted under the sip initially may not exceed 250,000,000shares.
beginning november29, 2008 and each
fiscal year thereafter, the number of shares of common
stock that may be delivered pursuant to awards granted
after april1,2003 under the sip may not exceed
5% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock,
determined as of the last day of the immediately
preceding fiscal year, increased by the number of shares
that were available for awards in previous fiscal years
but were not, at the date of determination, covered by
awards granted in previous years.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
information regarding certain
relationships and related transactions will be in the 2006 proxy
statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.
principal accountant fees and services
information regarding principal
accountant fees and services will be in the 2006 proxy statement
and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)documents filed as part of this report:
1.
consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed in the annual
report on form10-k are listed on page f-1 hereof and in partii, item8
hereof.
2.
financial statement schedule
the financial statement schedule required in the annual report on form10-k
is listed on pagef-1 hereof. the required schedule appears on pagesf-2
through f-16 hereof.
3.
exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation (incorporated by reference to the corresponding
exhibit to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-74449)).
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of the goldman sachs group, inc.
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs group, inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form8-k, filed september20, 2005).
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19, 1999, between the goldman sachs
group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit6 to the registrants registration statement
on form8-a, filed june29, 1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated as of february20, 2004,
between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as
trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.2 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november28, 2003).
certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt
securities of the registrant and its subsidiaries are omitted
pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulations-k. the
registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon request,
copies of any such instruments.
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended february28,
2003).
10.2
the goldman sachs defined contribution plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.16 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.3
the goldman sachs restricted partner compensation plan (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report
on form10-q for the period ended february28, 2003).
10.4
form of employment agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.19
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.5
form of agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.20 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.6
form of option agreement (discretionary options) (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.24 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.7
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7, 1999, by and
among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.25 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
table of contents
10.8
amended and restated shareholders agreement, dated june22,
2004, among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties
(incorporated by reference to exhibitm to amendment no.54
to schedule13d, filed june23, 2004, relating to the
registrants common stock).
10.9
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.27
to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.10
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.28 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.11
registration rights instrument, dated as of december10, 1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibitg to amendment no.1 to
schedule13d, filed december17,1999, relating to the
registrants common stock (no.005-56295)).
10.12
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december10,
1999 (incorporated by reference to exhibith to amendment no.1
to schedule13d, filed december17, 1999, relating to
the registrants common stock).
10.13
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.44 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.14
form of indemnification agreement, dated as of july5, 2000
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,
2000).
10.15
amendment no.1, dated as of september5, 2000, to the tax
indemnification agreement, dated as of may7, 1999 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.3 to the registrants quarterly report
on form10-q for the period ended august25,2000).
10.16
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december21,
2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibitaa to amendment no.12
to schedule13d, filed january23, 2001, relating to
the registrants common stock).
10.17
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december21,
2001 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4 to
registrants registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-74006)).
10.18
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december20,
2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4 to
registrants registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-101093)).
10.19
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to dr.ruth j. simmons (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.63
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.20
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.john h. bryan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.64
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for
the fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.21
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.james a. johnson (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.65
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24,2000).
10.22
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to lord browne of madingley (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.66
to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24,2000).
10.23
letter, dated december18, 2002, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.william w. george (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.39 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november29,2002).
table of contents
10.24
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.claes dahlbck (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1
to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.25
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.edward m. liddy (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2
to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.26
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of december19,
2003 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.4 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-110371)).
10.27
letter, dated march31, 2004, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to ms.lois d. juliber (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1
to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may28, 2004).
10.28
letter, dated april6, 2005, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.stephen friedman (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1
to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed april8,
2005).
10.29
form of amendment, dated november27, 2004, to agreement relating
to noncompetition and other covenants, dated may7, 1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.32 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november26,
2004).
10.30
form of 2005 rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
(subject to transfer restrictions).
10.31
form of 2005 rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (not
subject to transfer restrictions).
10.32
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation
plan for u.s.participating managing directors.
10.33
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation
plan for u.s.extended managing directors and other select
employees (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.36 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year
ended november26, 2004).
10.34
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation
plan for u.k. participating managing directors.
10.35
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation for
u.k. extended managing directors and other select u.k. employees
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.38 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november26,
2004).
10.36
form of year-end option award agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants current report on form8-k,
filed december9,2005).
10.37
form of year-end rsu award agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 to the registrants current report on form8-k,
filed december9,2005).
10.38
form of year-end restricted stock award agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.3 to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed december9,2005).
10.39
form of non-employee director option award agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.4 to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed december9,2005).
10.40
form of non-employee director rsu award agreement (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.5 to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed december9,2005).
table of contents
10.41
description of non-employee director compensation.
10.42
description of certain benefits for participating managing directors.
10.43
form of one-time rsu award
agreement.
10.44
ground lease, dated august23, 2005, between battery park city
authority d/b/a/ hugh l. carey battery park city authority, as
landlord, and goldman sachs headquarters llc, as tenant (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants current report
on form8-k, filed august26, 2005).
10.45
general guarantee agreement, dated january30, 2006, made by the
goldman sachs group, inc.
12.1
statement re: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges and
ratios of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock
dividends.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1
powers of attorney (included on signature page).
31.1
rule13a-14(a) certifications.
32.1
section1350 certifications.
99.1
report of independent registered public accounting firm on selected
financial data.
this exhibit is a management contract or a compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
index to financial statements and financial statement schedule
items15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
pageno.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
notes to consolidated financial statements
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
selected financial data
financial statement schedule
report of independent registered public accounting firm
schedulei condensed nonconsolidated financial information of registrant (parent company only)
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
f-3
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
f-4
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
f-5
schedules not listed are omitted
because of the absence of the conditions under which they are
required or because the information is in the consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto.
f-1
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions)
revenues
equity in earnings of subsidiaries
$
4,763
$
4,785
$
3,476
principal investments
1,927
1,561
interest income
5,351
2,843
2,181
total revenues
12,041
9,189
6,218
interest expense
5,069
2,834
2,154
revenues, net of interest expense
6,972
6,355
4,064
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other expenses
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
6,550
5,972
3,836
provision for taxes
1,419
net earnings
5,626
4,553
3,005
preferred stock dividend
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
5,609
$
4,553
$
3,005
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-2
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,570
$
receivables from affiliates
5,797
3,846
loans to affiliates
83,876
74,262
subordinated loans to affiliates
27,848
23,178
investments in subsidiaries
25,260
23,667
financial instruments owned, at fair value
10,026
9,894
other assets
2,572
1,725
total assets
$
156,949
$
136,612
liabilities and shareholders equity
unsecured short-term borrowings
with third parties
$
39,976
$
39,628
with affiliates
1,439
total unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current
portion oflong-termborrowings
41,415
40,499
payables to affiliates
1,019
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
1,970
other liabilities and accrued expenses
2,005
unsecured long-term borrowings
with third parties
79,756
65,391
with affiliates
3,470
3,608
total unsecured long-term borrowings
83,226
68,999
total liabilities
128,947
111,533
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01per share; 150,000,000shares
authorized, 70,000shares issued and outstanding as of
november2005 with liquidation preference of $25,000per share
1,750
common stock, par value $0.01per share; 4,000,000,000shares
authorized, 573,970,935 and 554,063,234shares issued as
of november2005 and november2004, respectively, and 437,170,695
and 480,959,660shares outstanding as of november2005 and
november2004, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
3,415
2,013
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01per share; 200,000,000shares
authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
17,159
15,501
retained earnings
19,085
13,970
unearned compensation
(117
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
common stock held in treasury, at cost, par value $0.01per
share; 136,800,240 and 73,103,574shares as of november2005 and
november2004, respectively
(13,413
)
(6,305
)
total shareholders equity
28,002
25,079
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
156,949
$
136,612
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-3
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
5,626
$
4,553
$
3,005
noncash items included in net earnings
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
(4,293
)
(3,663
)
(1,323
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
1,017
stock-based compensation
changes in operating assets and liabilities
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(661
)
(3,317
)
(2,126
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
1,832
receivables from affiliates, net
(1,020
)
2,730
other, net
(1,000
)
net cash provided by operating activities
2,838
1,259
cash flows from investing activities
loans to affiliates
(13,053
)
(10,175
)
(13,270
)
subordinated loans to affiliates
(4,670
)
(6,394
)
(3,472
)
investments in subsidiaries, net
2,413
(165
)
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(162
)
(46
)
(8
)
business acquisitions, net of cash
(740
)
purchase of other investments
net cash used for investing activities
(15,472
)
(15,865
)
(17,316
)
cash flows from financing activities
short-term borrowings, net
1,118
(2,869
)
issuance of long-term borrowings
31,382
30,004
22,168
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the current portion of
long-term borrowings
(13,579
)
(10,102
)
(5,363
)
common stock repurchased
(7,108
)
(1,805
)
(939
)
dividends paid on common and preferred stock
(511
)
(497
)
(350
)
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
1,719
proceeds from issuance of common stock
1,143
net cash provided by financing activities
14,164
15,252
16,057
net increase in cash and cash equivalents
1,530
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
1,570
$
$
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $5.52billion, $2.59billion
and $1.97billion for the years ended november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $1.52billion, $284million
and $324million for the years ended november2005, november2004 and november2003,
respectively.
noncash activities:
the value of common stock issued in connection with business acquisitions was $165million
for the year ended november2003.
stock-based compensation expense included in subsidiary net earnings was $1.58billion,
$1.10billion and $644million for the years ended november2005, november2004 and
november2003, respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-4
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
note1.
significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
the condensed nonconsolidated
financial statements of the goldman sachs group, inc. (the parent
company), a delaware corporation, should be read in conjunction
with the consolidated financial statements of the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries (the firm) and notes thereto (the
consolidated financial statements), which are included in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form10-k. these
condensed nonconsolidated financial statements reflect the results
of operations, financial condition and cash flows for the parent
company only. investments in subsidiaries are accounted for using
the equity method of accounting prescribed by accounting principles
board (apb)opinion no.18, the equity method of accounting
for investments in common stock.
these condensed nonconsolidated
financial statements have been prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles that require management to
make certain estimates and assumptions. the most important of these
estimates and assumptions relate to fair value measurements, the
accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets and the
provision for potential losses that may arise from litigation and
regulatory proceedings and tax audits. although these and other
estimates and assumptions are based on the best available
information, actual results could be materially different from
these estimates.
the parent company has formed
numerous nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party
investors that are typically organized as limited partnerships. the
parent company, through its subsidiaries, acts as general partner
for these funds and does not hold a majority of the economic
interests in any fund. for funds established on or before june29,
2005 in which the parent company, through its subsidiaries,
holds more than a minor interest and for funds established or
modified after june29, 2005, the parent company has provided
the third-party investors with rights to terminate the funds (see recent
accounting developments in note2 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
annual report on form10-k). such fund investments are included
in financial instruments owned, at fair value in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
unless otherwise stated herein, all
references to november2005, november2004 and november2003 refer
to the parent companys fiscal years ended, or the dates, as the
context requires, november25, 2005, november26, 2004 and
november28, 2003, respectively. certain reclassifications have
been made to previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
revenue recognition
financial instruments. financial
instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold,
but not yet purchased, at fair value are reflected in the
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition on a
trade-date basis and consist of financial instruments carried at
fair value or amounts that approximate fair value, with related
unrealized gains or losses recognized in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of earnings. the fair value of a
financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be
exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other
than in a forced or liquidation sale.
in determining fair value, the parent
company separates its financial instruments into two categories
derivative contracts and principal investments.
f-5
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
derivative contracts. fair values of the parent companys derivative contracts
consist of exchange-traded and over-the-counter (otc)derivatives entered into
with affiliates and are reflected net of cash that the parent company has paid and
received. fair values of the parent companys exchange-traded derivatives are
generally determined from quoted market prices. otc derivatives are valued using
valuation models. the parent company uses a variety of valuation models including
the present value of known or estimated cash flows and option-pricing models.
principal investments. in valuing corporate and real estate principal investments,
the parent companys portfolio is separated into investments in private companies,
investments in public companies (excluding the parent companys investment in the
convertible preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)) and the
parent companys investment in smfg.
the parent companys private principal investments, by their nature, have little or no
price transparency. such investments are initially carried at cost as an approximation of
fair value. adjustments to carrying value are made if there are third-party transactions
evidencing a change in value. downward adjustments are also made, in the absence of
third-party transactions, if it is determined that the expected realizable value of the
investment is less than the carrying value. in reaching that determination, many factors
are considered including, but not limited to, the operating cash flows and financial
performance of the companies or properties relative to budgets or projections, trends
within sectors and/or regions, underlying business models, expected exit timing and
strategy, and any specific rights or terms associated with the investment, such as
conversion features and liquidation preferences.
the parent companys public principal investments, which tend to be large, concentrated
holdings that result from initial public offerings or other corporate transactions, are
valued using quoted market prices discounted based on predetermined written policies for
nontransferability and illiquidity.
the parent companys investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg is carried at
fair value, which is derived from a model that incorporates smfgs common stock price and
credit spreads, the impact of nontransferability and illiquidity, and the downside
protection on the conversion strike price. the parent companys investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg is generally nontransferable, but is freely
convertible into smfg common stock. restrictions on the parent companys ability to hedge
or sell one-third of the common stock underlying its investment in smfg lapsed in february
2005. as of november2005, the parent company was fully hedged with respect to these
unrestricted shares. under the parent companys initial agreement with smfg, restrictions
on the parent companys ability to hedge or sell the remaining shares of common stock
underlying its investment in smfg lapse in equal installments on february7, 2006 and
february7, 2007. in connection with a public offering by smfg of its common stock,
the parent company has separately agreed with smfg that the restrictions that were to
lapse on february7, 2006 will instead lapse on march9,
2006. effective february1, 2006, the conversion price of the parent companys smfg preferred stock into shares of
smfg common stock is 320,900. this price is subject to downward adjustment if the price
of smfg common stock at the time of conversion is less than the conversion price (subject
to a floor of 105,800).
merchant banking overrides. the
parent company is entitled to receive merchant banking overrides
(i.e., an increased share of a funds income and gains) when the
return on the funds
f-6
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
investments exceeds certain threshold returns.
overrides are based on investment performance over the life of each
merchant banking fund, and future investment underperformance may
require amounts of override previously distributed to the parent
company to be returned to the funds. accordingly, overrides are
recognized in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
only when all material contingencies have been resolved. overrides
are included in principal investments in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of earnings.
goodwill
goodwill is the cost of acquired
companies in excess of the fair value of identifiable net assets at
acquisition date. in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards (sfas)no.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, goodwill is tested at least annually for
impairment. an impairment loss is triggered if the estimated fair
value of an operating segment is less than its estimated net book
value. such loss is calculated as the difference between the
estimated fair value of goodwill and its carrying value.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization, are
included in other assets in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition.
property and equipment placed in
service prior to december1, 2001 are depreciated under the
accelerated cost recovery method. property and equipment placed in
service on or after december1, 2001 are depreciated on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset. leasehold
improvements for which the useful life of the improvement is
shorter than the term of the lease are amortized under the
accelerated cost recovery method if placed in service prior to
december1, 2001. all other leasehold improvements are
amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the
improvement or the term of the lease, whichever is shorter.
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment are tested for potential impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups
carrying value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with sfasno.144.
an impairment loss, calculated as the difference
between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset
or asset group, is recognized if the sum of the expected
undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset group is
less than the corresponding carrying value.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
non-u.s.currencies are translated at rates of exchange
prevailing on the date of the condensed nonconsolidated statements
of financial condition, and revenues and expenses are translated at
average rates of exchange for the fiscal year. the parent company
seeks to reduce its net investment exposure to fluctuations in
foreign exchange rates through the use of foreign currency forward
contracts and foreign currency-denominated debt. for foreign
currency forward contracts, hedge effectiveness is assessed based
on changes in forward exchange rates; accordingly, forward points
are reflected as a component of the currency translation adjustment
in accumulated other comprehensive income in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition. for foreign
currency-denominated debt, hedge effectiveness is assessed based on
changes in spot rates. foreign currency remeasurement gains or
losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are included in
the condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings.
f-7
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
income taxes
deferred tax assets and liabilities
are recognized for temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of the parent companys assets and
liabilities. valuation allowances are established to reduce
deferred tax assets to the amount that more likely than not will be
realized. the parent companys tax assets and liabilities are
presented as a component of other assets and other liabilities
and accrued expenses, respectively, in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition. tax provisions
are computed in accordance with sfasno.109, accounting
for income taxes. contingent liabilities related to income taxes
are recorded when the criteria for loss recognition under sfasno.5,
accounting for contingencies, as amended, have been
met.
cash and cash equivalents
the parent company defines cash
equivalents as highly liquid overnight deposits held in the
ordinary course of business.
affiliate transactions
substantially all of the firms
unsecured liquidity is raised by the parent company. the parent
company then lends the necessary funds to its subsidiaries and
affiliates, some of which are regulated, to meet their financing
and capital requirements. in addition, the parent company advances
its regulated subsidiaries the necessary capital to meet their
regulatory requirements. such funding is included in loans to
affiliates and subordinated loans to affiliates in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition. intercompany
exposure is managed by requiring senior and subordinated
intercompany loans to have maturities equal to or shorter than the
maturities of the aggregate borrowings of the parent company. this
policy ensures that the subsidiaries obligations to the parent
company will generally mature in advance of the parent companys
third-party borrowings. in addition, many of the subsidiaries and
affiliates pledge collateral at loan value to cover their
intercompany borrowings (other than subordinated debt) in order to
mitigate parent company liquidity risk. equity investments in
subsidiaries are generally funded with equity capital and included
in investments in subsidiaries in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition.
the parent company enters into
derivative contracts with affiliates to hedge its net investment in
non-u.s.operations and to manage the interest rate and
currency exposure on its long-term borrowings and certain
short-term borrowings. to manage exposure on its borrowings, the
parent company uses derivatives to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. the parent company applies
fair-value hedge accounting to derivative contracts that hedge the
benchmark interest rate (i.e., london interbank offered rate
(libor)) on its fixed rate long-term borrowings. derivative
balances with affiliates, included in financial instruments owned,
at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition, were $2.79billion and $464million,
and $7.40billion and $139million, as of
november2005 and november2004, respectively.
interest income is largely generated
from loans made to affiliates.
the parent company also allocates
substantially all rental and other costs relating to properties
occupied by certain subsidiaries and affiliates. the parent company
additionally allocates the cost of stock-based compensation
programs to subsidiaries and affiliates relating to costs
associated with employees of those subsidiaries and affiliates.
f-8
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
note2.
short-term borrowings
the parent company obtains
third-party unsecured short-term borrowings primarily through the
issuance of promissory notes, commercial paper and bank loans.
short-term borrowings also include the portion of long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement date
and certain long-term borrowings that are redeemable within one
year of the financial statement date at the option of the holder.
the carrying value of these short-term obligations approximates
fair value due to their short-term nature.
short-term borrowings with third
parties are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
17,339
$
19,513
commercial paper
5,098
4,040
bank loans and other
3,634
3,197
current portion of long-term borrowings
13,905
12,878
total(1)
$
39,976
$
39,628
(1)
as of november2005 and november2004, the
weighted average interest rates for short-term
borrowings, including commercial paper, were 4.17% and
2.61%, respectively. the weighted average interest rates,
after giving effect to hedging activities, were 4.16% and
2.24% as of november2005 and november2004, respectively.
in addition, the parent company may
borrow overnight funds from certain subsidiaries and affiliates on
an unsecured basis. as of november2005 and november2004, such
amounts were $1.44billion and $871million, respectively,
and included in unsecured short-term borrowings with
affiliates in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of
financial condition.
note3.
long-term borrowings
the parent company obtains unsecured
long-term borrowings, which consist principally of senior
borrowings with maturities extending to 2035.
long-term borrowings with third
parties are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
33,053
$
30,799
non-u.s.dollar
15,739
11,408
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
22,065
18,046
non-u.s.dollar
8,899
5,138
total
$
79,756
$
65,391
(1)
as of november2005 and november2004, interest
rates on u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged
from 3.88% to 12.00% and from 2.85% to 12.00%,
respectively. as of november2005 and november2004,
interest rates on non-u.s.dollar fixed rate
obligations ranged from 0.67% to 8.88% and from 0.70% to
8.88%, respectively.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the
federal funds rate. certain equity-linked and indexed instruments
are included in floating rate obligations.
f-9
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
long-term borrowings with third
parties by fiscal maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2005(1)(2)
2004(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
9,289
$
1,777
$
11,066
11,193
11,961
6,122
6,819
4,705
2,286
6,991
2,721
2,538
5,259
6,091
2,610
8,701
6,275
2,583
8,858
5,192
4,388
9,580
1,248
2,919
4,167
2011-thereafter
27,937
14,586
42,523
23,190
6,032
29,222
total
$
55,118
$
24,638
$
79,756
$
48,845
$
16,546
$
65,391
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year of
the financial statement date and certain long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the
financial statement date at the option of the holder are
included as short-term borrowings in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
(2)
long-term borrowings repayable at the option of
the parent company are reflected at their contractual
maturity dates. certain long-term borrowings that are
redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holder
are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
the parent company enters into
derivative contracts with affiliates, such as interest rate futures
contracts, interest rate swap agreements, currency swap agreements,
equity-linked and indexed contracts, to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. accordingly, the aggregate
carrying value of these long-term borrowings and related hedges
approximates fair value.
the effective weighted average
interest rates for long-term borrowings with third parties, after
hedging activities, are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
6.76
%
$
10.68
%
floating rate obligations
79,419
4.49
64,946
2.50
total
$
79,756
4.50
$
65,391
2.56
f-10
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
long-term borrowings with affiliates
are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
$
non-u.s.dollar
1,120
floating rate obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
1,797
1,797
non-u.s.dollar
total
$
3,470
$
3,608
(1)
as of both november2005 and november2004, the
interest rate on u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations
was 5.78%. as of november2005 and november2004,
interest rates on non-u.s.dollar fixed rate
obligations ranged from 4.68% to 6.00% and 3.35% to
6.17%, respectively.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on
libor or the federal funds rate.
long-term borrowings with affiliates
by fiscal maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2005(1)
2004(1)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
$
$
2011-thereafter
2,182
2,182
2,181
2,181
total
$
2,479
$
$
3,470
$
2,478
$
1,130
$
3,608
(1)
long-term borrowings maturing within one year of
the financial statement date and certain long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the
financial statement date at the option of the holder are
included as short-term borrowings in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
deferrable interest junior subordinated debentures
in february2004, goldman sachs
capital i (the trust), a wholly owned delaware statutory trust, was
formed by the parent company for the exclusive purposes of (i)issuing
$2.75billion of guaranteed preferred beneficial
interests and $85million of common beneficial interests in the
trust, (ii)investing the proceeds from the sale to purchase
junior subordinated debentures from the parent company and (iii)engaging
in only those other activities necessary or
incidental to these purposes. the preferred beneficial interests
were purchased by third parties, and, as of november2005, the
parent company held all of the common beneficial interests.
the parent company has the right,
from time to time, to defer payment of interest on the junior
subordinated debentures, and, therefore, cause payment of dividends
on the trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in
each case for up to ten consecutive semiannual periods, and during
any such extension period the parent company will not be permitted
to, among other things,
f-11
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
pay dividends on or make certain
repurchases of its common stock. the trust is not permitted to pay
any distributions on the common beneficial interests held by the
parent company unless all dividends payable on the preferred
beneficial interests have been paid in full.
note4.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
commitments
letters of credit. the parent company
provides letters of credit issued by various banks to
counterparties in lieu of securities or cash to satisfy various
collateral requirements. letters of credit outstanding were $25million
as of both november2005 and november2004.
merchant banking commitments. the
parent company acts as an investor in merchant banking
transactions, which includes making long-term investments in equity
and debt securities in privately negotiated transactions, corporate
acquisitions and real estate transactions. in connection with these
activities, the parent company had commitments to invest up to $3.49billion
and $1.04billion in corporate and real estate
investment funds as of november2005 and november2004,
respectively.
construction-related commitments. the
parent company had construction-related commitments of $19million
as of both november2005 and november2004.
other. in august2005, the parent
company entered into an agreement to acquire the variable annuity
and variable life insurance business of the hanover insurance
group, inc. (formerly allmerica financial corporation), including
its wholly owned life insurance subsidiary, allmerica financial
life insurance and annuity company. the transaction closed on
december30, 2005 at a purchase price of approximately $271million
upfront and an estimated $34million over three years,
subject to final adjustments.
the parent company had other purchase
commitments of $10million as of november2004.
leases. the parent company has
contractual obligations under long-term noncancelable lease
agreements, principally for office space, expiring on various dates
through 2029. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation
provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges.
future minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals,
which are generally reimbursed by affiliates, are set forth below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2011-thereafter
total
$
1,381
f-12
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
contingencies
the parent company is involved in a
number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings
concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of its
businesses. management believes, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on the parent
companys financial condition, but may be material to the parent
companys operating results for any particular period, depending,
in part, upon the operating results for such period. given the
inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome of the parent
companys litigation and regulatory matters, particularly in cases
or proceedings in which substantial or indeterminate damages or
fines are sought, the parent company cannot estimate losses or
ranges of losses for cases or proceedings where there is only a
reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred.
guarantees
effective january30, 2006, the
parent company has guaranteed the payment obligations of goldman,
sachs& co., its principal u.s. broker-dealer subsidiary (other
than nonrecourse payment obligations). in addition, the parent
company guarantees many of the obligations of its other
consolidated subsidiaries on a transaction-by-transaction basis, as
negotiated with the counterparty. the parent company is unable to
develop an estimate of the maximum payout under its subsidiary
guarantees; however, because these guaranteed obligations are also
obligations of consolidated subsidiaries and included in the
consolidated statements of financial condition or disclosed in note6
to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on form10-k, the parent companys
liabilities as guarantor are not separately disclosed herein.
in connection with certain asset
sales and securitization transactions, the parent company may
guarantee the collection of contractual cash flows. in connection
with its merchant banking activities, the parent company may issue
loan guarantees to secure financing. in addition, the parent
company provides letters of credit and other guarantees, on a
limited basis, to enable clients to enhance their credit standing
and complete transactions.
in connection with the parent
companys establishment of the trust, the parent company
effectively provided for the full and unconditional guarantee of
the beneficial interests in the trust held by third parties. timely
payment by the parent company of interest on the junior
subordinated debentures and other amounts due and performance of
its other obligations under the transaction documents will be
sufficient to cover payments due by the trust on its beneficial
interests. as a result, management believes that it is unlikely the
parent company will have to make payments related to the trust
other than those required under the junior subordinated debentures
and in connection with certain expenses incurred by the trust.
f-13
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
the following tables set forth
certain information about the parent companys guarantees as of
november2005 and november2004:
as of november 2005
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(2)
carrying
2007 -
2009 -
2011 -
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
guarantees of trust preferred
beneficial interest(1)
$
$
$
$
$
6,851
$
7,723
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and
other guarantees
as of november 2004
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(2)
carrying
2006 -
2008 -
2010 -
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
guarantees of trust preferred
beneficial interest(1)
$
$
$
$
$
7,025
$
7,897
guarantee of the collection of contractual cash flows
merchant banking fund-related commitments
letters of credit and
other guarantees
(1)
includes the guarantee of all payments scheduled
to be made over the life of the trust, which could be
shortened in the event the parent company redeemed the
junior subordinated debentures issued to fund the trust.
(see note5 to the consolidated financial statements
in partii, item8 of the annual report on form10-k
for further information regarding the trust.)
(2)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated losses in connection with these contracts.
in the normal course of its business,
the parent company indemnifies and guarantees certain service
providers, such as clearing and custody agents, trustees and
administrators, against specified potential losses in connection
with their acting as an agent of, or providing services to, the
parent company or its subsidiaries or affiliates. the parent
company also indemnifies some clients against potential losses
incurred in the event specified third-party service providers,
including sub-custodians and third-party brokers, improperly
execute transactions. the parent company is unable to develop an
estimate of the maximum payout under these guarantees and
indemnifications. however, management believes that it is unlikely
the parent company will have to make material payments under these
arrangements, and no liabilities related to these guarantees and
indemnifications have been recognized in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition as of november
2005 and november2004.
f-14
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
the parent company provides
representations and warranties to counterparties in connection with
a variety of commercial transactions and occasionally indemnifies
them against potential losses caused by the breach of those
representations and warranties. the parent company may also provide
indemnifications protecting against changes in or adverse
application of certain u.s.tax laws in connection with
ordinary-course transactions such as securities issuances,
borrowings or derivatives. in addition, the parent company may
provide indemnifications to some counterparties to protect them in
the event additional taxes are owed or payments are withheld, due
either to a change in or an adverse application of certain non-u.s.
tax laws. these indemnifications generally are standard contractual
terms and are entered into in the normal course of business.
generally, there are no stated or notional amounts included in
these indemnifications, and the contingencies triggering the
obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur. the parent
company is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout
under these guarantees and indemnifications. however, management
believes that it is unlikely the parent company will have to make
any material payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities
related to these arrangements have been recognized in the condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition as of november
2005 and november2004.
note5.
shareholders equity
dividends declared per common share
were $1.00 in fiscal 2005, $1.00 in fiscal 2004 and $0.74 in fiscal
2003. on december14, 2005, the board of directors of the
parent company (the board) declared a dividend of $0.25per
share to be paid on february23, 2006 to common shareholders of
record on january24, 2006.
during fiscal 2005, the parent
company issued 70,000shares of preferred stock in three series
as set forth in the following table:
preferred stock by series
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
description
date issued
issued
authorized
redemption date
(in millions)
a
perpetual floating rate
april25, 2005
30,000
50,000
april25, 2010
$
non-cumulative
b
perpetual 6.20%
october31, 2005
32,000
50,000
october31, 2010
non-cumulative
c
perpetual floating rate
october31, 2005
8,000
25,000
october31, 2010
non-cumulative
70,000
125,000
$
1,750
each share of preferred stock has a
par value of $0.01, has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is
represented by 1,000 depositary shares and is redeemable at the
parent companys option at a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus
declared and unpaid dividends. the parent companys ability to
declare or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise
acquire, its common stock is subject to certain restrictions in the
event that the parent company fails to pay or set aside full
dividends on the preferred stock for the latest completed dividend
period. all preferred stock also has a preference over the parent
companys common stock upon liquidation.
f-15
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements (continued)
dividends declared per share of seriesa
preferred stock were $578.72 in fiscal 2005. on december14,
2005, the board declared a dividend per preferred share of
$323.28, $430.56 and $353.68 for seriesa, seriesb and
seriesc preferred stock, respectively, to be paid on february10,
2006 to preferred shareholders of record on january26,
2006.
during fiscal 2005, the parent
company repurchased 63.7million shares of its common stock at
a total cost of $7.11billion, and during fiscal 2004, the
parent company repurchased 18.7million shares of its common
stock at a total cost of $1.81billion. the average price paid
per share for repurchased shares was $111.57 and $96.29 for the
years ended november2005 and november2004, respectively. in
addition, to satisfy minimum statutory employee tax withholding
requirements related to the delivery of shares underlying
restricted stock units, the parent company cancelled 1.6million
restricted stock units at a total cost of $163million
in fiscal 2005, and it cancelled 9.1million restricted stock
units at a total cost of $870million in fiscal 2004.
f-16
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf
by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/david a. viniar
name: david a. viniar
title: chief financial officer
date: february7, 2006
ii-1
table of contents
power of attorney
know all persons by these presents,
that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and
appoints henry m. paulson,jr., lloyd c. blankfein, david a.
viniar, gregory k. palm and esta e. stecher, and each of them
severally, his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact with power
of substitution and resubstitution to sign in his or her name,
place and stead, in any and all capacities, to do any and all
things and execute any and all instruments that such attorney may
deem necessary or advisable under the securities exchange act of
1934 and any rules, regulations and requirements of the u.s.securities
and exchange commission in connection with the annual
report on form10-k and any and all amendments hereto, as fully
for all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in
person, and hereby ratifies and confirms all said attorneys-in-fact
and agents, each acting alone, and his or her substitute or
substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the
securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below
by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
capacity
date
/s/
henry m. paulson,jr.
director, chairman and chiefexecutive officer (principalexecutive officer)
february7, 2006
henry m. paulson,jr.
/s/
lloyd c. blankfein
director
february7, 2006
lloyd c. blankfein
/s/
lord browne of madingley
director
february7, 2006
lord browne of madingley
/s/
john h. bryan
director
february7, 2006
john h. bryan
/s/
claes dahlbck
director
february7, 2006
claes dahlbck
/s/
stephen friedman
director
february7, 2006
stephen friedman
/s/
william w. george
director
february7, 2006
william w. george
/s/
james a. johnson
director
february7, 2006
james a. johnson
/s/
lois d. juliber
director
february7, 2006
lois d. juliber
/s/
edward m. liddy
director
february7, 2006
edward m. liddy
/s/
ruth j. simmons
director
february7, 2006
ruth j. simmons
/s/
david a. viniar
chief financial officer(principal financial officer)
february7, 2006
david a. viniar
/s/
sarah e. smith
principal accounting officer
february7, 2006
sarah e. smith
ii-2
