10-k
y29219e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
november24, 2006
commission file number:
001-14965
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-4019460
(state
or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s.
employer
identification no.)
85 broad street
new york, n.y.
(address of principal executive
offices)
(zip code)
(212)902-1000
(registrants telephone
number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the
act:
title of each class:
name of each exchange on which registered:
common stock, par value
$.01per share, and attached shareholder protection
rights
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each
representing 1/1,000thinterest in a share of floating rate
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesa
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each
representing 1/1,000thinterest in a share of 6.20%
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesb
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each
representing 1/1,000thinterest in a share of floating rate
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesc
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each
representing 1/1,000thinterest in a share of floating rate
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesd
new york stock exchange
medium-term notes,
seriesb, 0.25% exchangeable notes due 2007; index-linked
notes due 2013; index-linked notes due april 2013; index-linked
notes due may 2013; index-linked notes due july 2010; and
index-linked notes due 2011
american stock exchange
medium-term notes,
seriesb, 7.35%notes due 2009; 7.80%notes due
2010; floating rate notes due 2008; and floating rate notes due
new york stock exchange
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the
act: none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer,
as defined in rule405 of the securities act.
yesxnoo
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the act.
yesonox
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all
reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesxnoo
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of
regulations-k is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of the
annual report on
form10-k or any
amendment to the annual report on
form10-k.x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated
filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see
definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated
filer in
rule12b-2 of the
exchange act. (check one):
large accelerated
filerxaccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filero
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as
defined in
rule12b-2 of the
exchange act).
yesonox
as of
may26, 2006 the aggregate market value of the common stock
of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant was
approximately $63.3billion.
as of
january26, 2007 there were 411,359,918shares of the
registrants common stock outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference: portions of the goldman sachs
group, inc.s proxy statement for its 2007 annual meeting
of shareholders to be held on march27, 2007 are
incorporated by reference in the annual report on
form10-k in
response to partiii, items10,11, 12, 13 and 14.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
annual report on
form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24, 2006
index
page
form10-k item number:
no.
parti
item1.
business
introduction
cautionary
statement pursuant to the private securities litigation reform
act of 1995
segment
operating results
business
segments
global
investment research
technology
business
continuity and information security
employees
competition
regulation
item1a.
risk
factors
item1b.
unresolved
staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal
proceedings
item4.
submission of
matters to a vote of security holders
executive
officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
partii
item5.
market for
registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected
financial data
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and
disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a.
controls and
procedures
item9b.
other
information
partiii
item10.
directors and
executive officers of the registrant
item11.
executive
compensation
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions
item14.
principal
accountant fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits,
financial statement schedules
index to
financial statements and financial statement schedule
items15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
f-1
signatures
ii-1
power of attorney
ii-2
ex-10.30: form of rsu award agreement (subject to restrictions)
ex-10.31: form of rsu award agreement(not subject to restrictions)
ex-10.36: form of year-end option award agreement
ex-10.37: form of year-end rsu award agreement
ex-10.39:form of non-employee director option agreement
ex-10.40: form of non-employee director rsu agreement
ex-10.41: description of non-employee director compensation
ex-10.43: form of one-time rsu award agreement
ex-10.49: form of signature card for 2006 year-end awards
ex-10.50: form of employment agreement for post-ipo participating managing directors
ex-10.51: form of second amendment to the agreement re: noncompetition and other covenants
ex-12.1: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges and ratios of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends
ex-21.1: list of significant subsidiaries
ex-23.1: consent of independent registered public accounting firm
ex-31.1: rule 13a-14(a) certifications
ex-32.1: section 1350 certifications
ex-99.1: report of independent registered public accounting firm on selected financial data
table of contents
parti
item1.
business
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global investment banking, securities
and investment management firm that provides a wide range of
services worldwide to a substantial and diversified client base
that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments
and high-net-worth individuals. as of november24, 2006, we
operated offices in over 25countries and approximately 42%
of our 26,467employees were based outside the united
states.
goldman sachs is the successor to a commercial paper business
founded in 1869 by marcus goldman. on may7, 1999, we
converted from a partnership to a corporation and completed an
initial public offering of our common stock.
our activities are divided into three segments:
(i)investment banking, (ii)trading and principal
investments and (iii)asset management and securities
services.
all references to 2006, 2005 and 2004 refer to our fiscal years
ended, or the dates, as the context requires, november24,
2006, november25, 2005, and november26, 2004,
respectively.
when we use the terms goldman sachs, the
firm, we, us and our,
we mean the goldman sachs group, inc., a delaware corporation,
and its consolidated subsidiaries. references herein to the
annual report on
form10-k are to
our annual report on
form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24, 2006.
financial information concerning our business segments and
geographic regions for each of 2006, 2005 and 2004 is set forth
in managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, and the consolidated
financial statements and the notes thereto, which are in
partii, items7, 7a and 8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
our internet address is www.gs.com and the investor
relations section of our web site is located at
www.gs.com/our_firm/investor_relations/. we
make available free of charge, on or through the investor
relations section of our web site, annual reports on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q and
current reports on
form8-k and
amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, as well as proxy statements, as soon as reasonably
practicable after we electronically file such material with, or
furnish it to, the u.s.securities and exchange commission.
also posted on our web site, and available in print upon request
of any shareholder to our investor relations department, are our
certificate of incorporation and by-laws, charters for our audit
committee, compensation committee, and corporate governance and
nominating committee, our policy regarding director independence
determinations, our policy on reporting of concerns regarding
accounting and other matters, our corporate governance
guidelines and our code of business conduct and ethics governing
our directors, officers and employees. within the time period
required by the sec and the new york stock exchange, we will
post on our web site any amendment to the code of business
conduct and ethics and any waiver applicable to any executive
officer, director or senior financial officer (as defined in the
code). in addition, our web site includes information concerning
purchases and sales of our equity securities by our executive
officers and directors, as well as disclosure relating to
certain non-gaap financial measures (as defined in the
secs regulationg) that we may make public orally,
telephonically, by webcast, by broadcast or by similar means
from time to time.
our investor relations department can be contacted at the
goldman sachs group, inc., 85broad street,
17thfloor, new york, new york 10004, attn: investor
relations, telephone:
212-902-0300,
e-mail:
gs-investor-relations@gs.com.
table of contents
cautionary statement pursuant to the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by reference in the annual
report on
form10-k, and
from time to time our management may make, statements that may
constitute forward-looking statements within the
meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are
not historical facts but instead represent only our beliefs
regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are
inherently uncertain and outside our control. these statements
include statements other than historical information or
statements of current condition and may relate to our future
plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may
also include our belief regarding the effect of various legal
proceedings, as set forth under legal proceedings in
parti, item3 of the annual report on
form10-k, as well
as statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our
liquidity policies, statements about trends in or growth
opportunities for our businesses and statements about our
investment banking transaction backlog, in partii,
item7 of the annual report on
form10-k. by
identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are
alerting you to the possibility that our actual results may
differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results
indicated in these forward-looking statements. important factors
that could cause actual results to differ from those in the
forward-looking statements include, among others, those
discussed below and under risk factors in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k and
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations in partii,
item7 of the annual report on
form10-k.
in the case of statements about our investment banking
transaction backlog, such statements are subject to the risk
that the terms of these transactions may be modified or that
they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net revenues,
if any, that we actually earn from these transactions may
differ, possibly materially, from those currently expected.
important factors that could result in a modification of the
terms of a transaction or a transaction not being completed
include, in the case of underwriting transactions, a decline in
general economic conditions, outbreak of hostilities, volatility
in the securities markets generally or an adverse development
with respect to the issuer of the securities and, in the case of
financial advisory transactions, a decline in the securities
markets, an adverse development with respect to a party to the
transaction or a failure to obtain a required regulatory
approval.
table of contents
segment operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking
net revenues
$
5,629
$
3,671
$
3,374
operating expenses
4,062
3,258
2,973
pre-tax earnings
$
1,567
$
$
trading and principal
net
revenues(1)
$
25,562
$
16,818
$
13,728
investments
operating
expenses(1)
14,962
10,600
8,688
pre-tax earnings
$
10,600
$
6,218
$
5,040
asset management and
net revenues
$
6,474
$
4,749
$
3,849
securities services
operating expenses
4,036
3,070
2,430
pre-tax earnings
$
2,438
$
1,679
$
1,419
total
net
revenues(1)
$
37,665
$
25,238
$
20,951
operating
expenses(1)(2)
23,105
16,965
14,275
pre-tax earnings
$
14,560
$
8,273
$
6,676
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to our reported pre-tax
earnings. see managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
results of operations financial overview
operating expenses operating expenses and
employees in partii, item7 of the annual
report on
form10-k for
further discussion of the effect of this reclassification.
(2)
includes the following expenses that have not been allocated to
our segments: (i)net provisions for a number of litigation
and regulatory proceedings of $45million, $37million
and $103million for the years ended november 2006,
november 2005 and november 2004, respectively;
(ii)$62million in connection with the establishment
of our joint venture in china for the year ended november 2004;
and (iii)the amortization of employee initial public
offering awards, net of forfeitures, of $19million for the
year ended november 2004.
(1)includes
a net provision of $45million for a number of litigation
and regulatory proceedings, which has not been allocated to our
segments.
table of contents
business segments
the primary products and activities of our business segments are
set forth in the following chart:
business segment/component
primary products and activities
investment
banking:
financial
advisory
mergers and
acquisitions advisory services
financial restructuring
advisory services
underwriting
equity and debt
underwriting
trading and principal
investments:
fixed income, currency
and commodities
commodities and
commodity derivatives, including power generation activities
credit products,
including trading and investing in credit derivatives,
investment-grade corporate securities, high-yield securities,
bank and secured loans, municipal securities, emerging market
and distressed debt, public and private equity securities and
real estate
currencies and currency
derivatives
interest rate products,
including interest rate derivatives, global government
securities and money market instruments, including matched book
positions
mortgage-related
securities and loan products and other asset-backed instruments
equities
equity securities and
derivatives
securities, futures and
options clearing services
specialist and
market-making activities in equity securities and options
insurance activities
principal
investments
principal investments
in connection with merchant banking activities
investment in the
convertible preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial group,
inc.
investment in the
ordinary shares of industrial and commercial bank of china
limited
asset management and
securities services:
asset
management
asset management,
advisory services and investment products (primarily through
separate accounts and funds) across all major asset classes,
including money markets, fixed income, equities and alternative
investments (including hedge funds, private equity, real estate,
currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies), for
institutional and individual investors (including high-net-worth
clients, as well as retail clients through third-party channels)
management of merchant
banking funds
securities
services
prime brokerage
financing services
securities lending
table of contents
investment banking
investment banking represented 15% of 2006net revenues. we
provide a broad range of investment banking services to a
diverse group of corporations, financial institutions,
investment funds, governments and individuals and seek to
develop and maintain long-term relationships with these clients
as their lead investment bank.
our current structure, which is organized by regional, industry
and product groups, seeks to combine client-focused investment
bankers with execution and industry expertise. we continually
assess and adapt our organization to meet the demands of our
clients in each geographic region. through our commitment to
teamwork, we believe that we provide services in an integrated
fashion for the benefit of our clients.
our goal is to make available to our clients the entire
resources of the firm in a seamless fashion, with investment
banking serving as front of the house. to accomplish
this objective, we focus on coordination among our equity and
debt underwriting businesses and our corporate risk and
liability management businesses. this coordination is intended
to assist our investment banking clients in managing their asset
and liability exposures.
our investment banking segment is divided into two components:
financial advisory and underwriting.
financial advisory
financial advisory includes advisory assignments with respect to
mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense
activities, restructurings and spin-offs. our mergers and
acquisitions capabilities are evidenced by our significant share
of assignments in large, complex transactions for which we
provide multiple services, including one-stop
acquisition financing and cross-border structuring expertise, as
well as services in other areas of the firm, such as interest
rate and currency hedging.
underwriting
underwriting includes public offerings and private placements of
a wide range of securities and other financial instruments,
including common and preferred stock, convertible and
exchangeable securities, investment-grade debt, high-yield debt,
sovereign and emerging market debt, municipal debt, bank loans,
asset-backed securities and real estate-related securities, such
as mortgage-related securities and the securities of real estate
investment trusts.
equity underwriting. equity underwriting has been a
long-term core strength of goldman sachs. as with mergers and
acquisitions, we have been particularly successful in winning
mandates for large, complex transactions. we believe our
leadership in worldwide initial public offerings and
table of contents
worldwide public common stock offerings reflects our expertise
in complex transactions, prior experience and distribution
capabilities.
debt underwriting. we engage in the underwriting and
origination of various types of debt instruments, including
investment-grade debt securities, high-yield debt securities,
bank and bridge loans and emerging market debt securities, which
instruments may be issued by, among others, corporate, sovereign
and agency issuers. in addition, we underwrite and originate
structured securities, which include mortgage-related securities
and other asset-backed securities and collateralized debt
obligations.
trading and principal investments
trading and principal investments represented 68% of
2006net revenues. trading and principal investments
facilitates client transactions with a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals and takes proprietary positions
through market making in, trading of and investing in fixed
income and equity products, currencies, commodities and
derivatives on these products. in addition, we engage in
specialist and market-making activities on equities and options
exchanges, and we clear client transactions on major stock,
options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection with our
merchant banking and other investing activities, we make
principal investments directly and through funds that we raise
and manage.
to meet the needs of our clients, trading and principal
investments is diversified across a wide range of products. we
believe our willingness and ability to take risk to facilitate
client transactions distinguishes us from many of our
competitors and substantially enhances our client relationships.
our trading and principal investments segment is divided into
three components: fixed income, currency and commodities;
equities; and principal investments.
fixed income, currency and commodities and equities
fixed income, currency and commodities (ficc)and equities
are large and diversified operations through which we engage in
a variety of customer-driven and proprietary trading and
investing activities.
in our customer-driven businesses, ficc and equities strive to
deliver high-quality service by offering broad market-making and
market knowledge to our clients on a global basis. in addition,
we use our expertise to take positions in markets, by committing
capital and taking risk, to facilitate client transactions and
to provide liquidity. our willingness to make markets, commit
capital and take risk in a broad range of fixed income,
currency, commodity and equity products and their derivatives is
crucial to our client relationships and to support our
underwriting business by providing secondary market liquidity.
table of contents
a core activity in ficc and equities is market making in a broad
array of securities and products. for example, we are a primary
dealer in many of the largest government bond markets around the
world, including the united states, japan and the united
kingdom. we are a member of the major futures exchanges, and
also have interbank dealer status in the currency markets in new
york, london, tokyo and hong kong.
we generate trading net revenues from our customer-driven
businesses in three ways:
first, in large, highly liquid markets, we undertake a high
volume of transactions for modest spreads and fees.
second, by capitalizing on our strong relationships and capital
position, we undertake transactions in less liquid markets where
spreads and fees are generally larger.
finally, we structure and execute transactions that address
complex client needs.
our ficc and equities businesses operate in close coordination
to provide clients with services and cross-market knowledge and
expertise.
in our proprietary activities in both ficc and equities, we
assume a variety of risks and devote resources to identify,
analyze and benefit from these exposures. we capitalize on our
analytical models to analyze information and make informed
trading judgments, and we seek to benefit from perceived
disparities in the value of assets in the trading markets and
from macroeconomic and issuer-specific trends.
ficc
our ficc business makes markets in and trades interest rate and
credit products, mortgage-related securities and loan products
and other asset-backed instruments, currencies and commodities,
structures and enters into a wide variety of derivative
transactions, and engages in proprietary trading and investing.
ficc has five principal businesses: commodities; credit
products; currencies; interest rate products, including money
market instruments; and mortgage-related securities and loan
products and other asset-backed instruments.
commodities. we make markets in, and trade for our
clients and our own account, a wide variety of commodities and
commodity derivatives, including oil and oil products, metals,
natural gas and electricity, and forest products. we are also a
member of or have relationships with major commodities exchanges
worldwide.
as part of our commodities business, we acquire and dispose of
interests in, and engage in the development and operation of,
electric power generation facilities. as of january15,
2007, we owned interests in 19 power generation facilities
located in the united states. of these facilities, seven are
fueled by natural gas, eight by coal and four by waste coal.
most of our power plants have contracted to sell their
electricity to utilities under long-term agreements. we seek to
generate attractive risk-adjusted returns from our portfolio of
power plants that have entered into these contracts by using our
commodities trading and capital markets expertise to selectively
restructure the underlying power sale contracts and to refinance
related project-level debt.
credit products. we offer to and trade for our clients a
broad array of credit and credit-linked products all over the
world, including credit derivatives, investment-grade corporate
securities, high-yield securities, bank and secured loans
(origination and trading), municipal securities, and emerging
market and distressed debt. for example, we enter, as principal,
into complex structured transactions designed to meet client
needs.
table of contents
in addition, we increasingly provide credit through bridge and
other loan facilities to a broad range of clients. commitments
that are extended for contingent acquisition financing are often
short-term in nature, as borrowers often replace them with other
funding sources. as part of our ongoing credit origination
activities, we may seek to reduce our credit risk on commitments
by syndicating all or substantial portions of commitments to
other investors or, upon funding, by securitizing the positions
through investment vehicles sold to other investors. revenues
from any syndications of these commitments are included in the
debt underwriting business in our investment banking segment.
see managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations contractual
obligations and commitments in partii, item7
of the annual report on
form10-k for
additional information on our commitments.
our credit products business includes making significant
long-term and short-term investments for our own account
(sometimes investing together with our merchant banking funds)
in a broad array of asset classes (including distressed debt)
globally. we opportunistically invest in debt and equity
securities and secured loans, and in private equity, real estate
and other assets.
currencies. we act as a dealer in foreign exchange and
trade for our clients and ourselves in most currencies on
exchanges and in cash and derivative markets globally.
interest rate products. we trade and make markets in a
variety of interest rate products, including interest rate
swaps, options and other derivatives, and government bonds, as
well as money market instruments, such as commercial paper,
treasury bills, repurchase agreements and other highly liquid
securities and instruments. this business includes our matched
book, which consists of short-term collateralized financing
transactions.
mortgage business. we make markets in and trade for our
clients and ourselves commercial and residential
mortgage-related securities and loan products (including prime,
subprime and other nontraditional mortgages) and other
asset-backed instruments. we regularly acquire large proprietary
positions in these products with a view toward securitizing the
underlying positions. we also originate and service commercial
mortgages and service residential mortgages.
equities
we make markets in, trade and act as a specialist for equities
and equity-related products, structure and enter into equity
derivative transactions, and engage in proprietary trading. in
addition, we engage in insurance activities. we generate
commissions from executing and clearing client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide through our
equities customer franchise and clearing activities.
equities includes three principal businesses: our customer
franchise business, principal strategies and specialist
activities.
customer franchise business. our customer franchise
business includes primarily customer-driven activities in the
shares, convertible securities and equity derivatives markets.
these activities also include clearing client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide, as well as
our options specialist and market-making businesses. our
customer franchise business increasingly involves providing our
clients with access to electronic low-touch equity
trading platforms, and electronic trades now account for the
majority of our customer trading activity in this business.
however, a majority of our net revenues in this business
continues to be derived from our traditional
high-touch, non-automated handling of more complex
trades. we expect both types of trading activities to remain
important components of our customer franchise business.
table of contents
we trade equity securities and equity-related products,
including convertible securities, options, futures and
over-the-counter
(otc)derivative instruments, on a global basis as an
agent, as a market maker or otherwise as a principal. as a
principal, we facilitate client transactions, often by
committing capital and taking risk, to provide liquidity to
clients with large blocks of stocks or options. for example, we
are active in the execution of large block trades. we also
execute transactions as agent and offer clients direct
electronic access to trading markets.
we are a member of most of the worlds major stock, options
and futures exchanges and marketplaces, including those located
in new york, chicago, london, paris, frankfurt, tokyo and hong
kong.
in the options and futures markets, we structure, distribute and
execute derivatives on market indices, industry groups and
individual company stocks to facilitate client transactions and
our proprietary activities. we develop strategies and render
advice with respect to portfolio hedging and restructuring and
asset allocation transactions. we also create specially tailored
instruments to enable sophisticated investors to undertake
hedging strategies and to establish or liquidate investment
positions. we are one of the leading participants in the trading
and development of equity derivative instruments. we are an
active participant in the trading of futures and options on most
of the major exchanges in the united states, europe and asia. in
options, we are a specialist and market maker on the
international securities exchange, the chicago board options
exchange and nyse arca and a market maker on the boston options
exchange, the philadelphia stock exchange and the american stock
exchange.
principal strategies. our principal strategies business
is a multi-strategy proprietary investment business that invests
and trades for our own account. principal strategies trades and
invests our capital across global markets employing strategies
that are primarily focused on public markets. most strategies
involve fundamental equities and relative value trading (which
involves trading strategies designed to take advantage of
perceived discrepancies in the relative value of financial
instruments, including equity, equity-related and debt
instruments). other strategies involve event-driven investments
(which focus on event-oriented special situations such as
corporate restructurings, bankruptcies, recapitalizations,
mergers and acquisitions, and legal and regulatory events) as
well as convertible bond trading, various types of volatility
trading and principal finance (which includes private structured
investments in public or private companies).
specialist activities. our specialist activities business
consists of our stock and exchange-traded funds
(etf)specialist and market-making businesses. we engage in
specialist and market-making activities on equities exchanges.
in the united states, we are one of the leading stock
specialists on the nyse. for etfs, we are a specialist on the
nyse, the american stock exchange and nyse arca.
insurance activities. through our insurance subsidiaries,
we own closed blocks of variable annuity and variable life
insurance contracts. in 2006, we began to participate
opportunistically in both the life and annuity reinsurance and
property catastrophe reinsurance businesses.
principal investments
principal investments primarily represents net revenues from
four primary sources: returns on corporate and real estate
investments, overrides on corporate and real estate investments,
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of sumitomo
mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)and our investment in
the ordinary shares of industrial and commercial bank of china
limited (icbc).
returns on corporate and real estate investments. as of
november 2006, the aggregate carrying value of our principal
investments held directly or through our merchant banking funds,
excluding our investment in the convertible preferred stock of
smfg and the ordinary shares of icbc, was $4.26billion,
comprised of corporate principal investments with an aggregate
carrying value of $3.68billion and real estate investments
with an aggregate carrying value of $588million.
table of contents
in addition, as of november 2006, we had outstanding unfunded
equity capital commitments of up to $6.36billion.
overrides. consists of the increased share of the income
and gains derived from our merchant banking funds when the
return on a funds investments over the life of the fund
exceeds certain threshold returns (typically referred to as an
override). overrides are recognized in net revenues
when all material contingencies have been resolved.
smfg. our investment in the convertible preferred stock
of smfg is generally nontransferable without the consent of smfg
but is freely convertible into smfg common stock. as of november
2006, we had hedged two-thirds of the common stock underlying
our investment in smfg. restrictions on our ability to hedge or
sell the remaining shares will lapse on
february7,2007. as of november2006, the
carrying value of our investment in the smfg preferred stock was
$4.51billion. see note2 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k for
further discussion of our investment in smfg.
icbc. our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc was
acquired on april28, 2006. the ordinary shares acquired
from icbc are subject to transfer restrictions that, among other
things, prohibit any sale, disposition or other transfer until
april28,2009. from april28,2009 to
october20, 2009, we may transfer up to 50% of the
aggregate ordinary shares of icbc that we owned as of
october20, 2006. we may transfer the remaining shares
after october20, 2009. as of november 2006, the carrying
value of our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc was
$5.19billion. a portion of our interest is held by
investment funds managed by goldman sachs. for further
information regarding our investment in the ordinary shares of
icbc, see managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
critical accounting policies fair value
principal investments in partii, item7 of the
annual report on
form10-k.
asset management and securities services
asset management and securities services represented 17% of
2006net revenues. our asset management business provides
investment advisory and financial planning services and offers
investment products (primarily through separate accounts and
funds) to a diverse group of institutions and individuals
worldwide and primarily generates revenues in the form of
management and incentive fees. securities services provides
prime brokerage services, financing services and securities
lending services to institutional clients, including hedge
funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth individuals worldwide, and generates revenues
primarily in the form of interest rate spreads or fees.
our asset management and securities services segment is divided
into two components: asset management and securities services.
table of contents
asset management
we offer a broad array of investment strategies, advice and
planning. we provide asset management services and offer
investment products (primarily through separate accounts and
funds) across all major asset classes: money markets, fixed
income, equities and alternative investments (including hedge
funds, private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and
asset allocation strategies). through our subsidiary, the ayco
company, l.p. (ayco), we also provide fee-based financial
counseling and financial education in the united states.
assets under management (aum)typically generate fees as a
percentage of asset value. in certain circumstances, we are also
entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of a
funds return or when the return on assets under management
exceeds specified benchmark returns or other performance
targets. incentive fees are recognized when the performance
period ends and they are no longer subject to adjustment. we
have numerous incentive fee arrangements, many of which have
annual performance periods that end on december31. for
that reason, incentive fees have been seasonally weighted to our
first quarter.
aum includes our mutual funds, alternative investment funds and
separately managed accounts for institutional and individual
investors. alternative investments include our merchant banking
funds, which generate revenues as described below under
management of merchant banking funds. aum does not
include assets in brokerage accounts, which generate
commissions, mark-ups and spreads. net revenues from brokerage
accounts are included in our trading and principal investments
segment. increasingly, many of our individual clients
brokerage accounts pay fees based on the assets in their
accounts rather than commissions on transactional activity in
the accounts. aum also does not include non-fee-paying assets,
including money market assets that were transferred to goldman
sachs bank usa (gs bank) during 2006.
the amount of aum is set forth in the graph below. in the
following graph, as well as in the following tables,
substantially all assets under management are valued as of
november30.
assets under management
(in billions)
table of contents
the following table sets forth aum by asset class:
assets under management by asset
class(1)
(in billions)
as of november30
asset class
alternative
investments(2)
$145
$110
$95
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$676
$532
$452
(1)
in the first quarter of 2006, we changed the methodology for
classifying certain non-money market assets. the changes were
made primarily to reclassify certain assets allocated to
external investment managers out of alternative investment
assets and to reclassify currency funds into alternative
investment assets. the changes did not impact total assets under
management and prior periods have been reclassified to conform
to the current presentation.
(2)
primarily includes hedge funds, private equity, real estate,
currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
clients. our clients are institutions and individuals,
including both high-net-worth and retail investors. we access
institutional and high-net-worth clients through both direct and
third-party channels and retail clients primarily through
third-party channels. our institutional clients include pension
funds, governmental organizations, corporations, insurance
companies, banks, foundations and endowments. in third-party
distribution channels, we distribute our mutual funds,
alternative investment funds and separately managed accounts
through brokerage firms, banks, insurance companies and other
financial intermediaries. our clients are located worldwide.
the table below sets forth the amount of aum by distribution
channel and client category:
assets under management by distribution
channel(1)
(in billions)
as of november30
distribution channel
directly distributed
institutional
$296
$226
$183
high-net-worth
individuals
third-party distributed
institutional,
high-net-worth individuals and retail
total
$676
$532
$452
(1)
the primary investment vehicles for these assets under
management are separately managed accounts and commingled
vehicles, such as mutual funds and private investment funds.
management of merchant banking funds. goldman sachs
sponsors numerous corporate and real estate private investment
funds. our strategy with respect to these funds generally is to
invest opportunistically to build a portfolio of investments
that is diversified by industry, product type, geographic
region, and transaction structure and type. our corporate
investment funds pursue, on a
table of contents
global basis, long-term investments in equity and debt
securities in privately negotiated transactions, leveraged
buyouts, acquisitions and investments in funds managed by
external parties. our real estate investment funds invest in
real estate operating companies, debt and equity interests in
real estate assets, and other real estate-related investments.
since inception, we have raised $70billion of committed
equity capital in these funds, of which $51billion relates
to our corporate funds and $19billion relates to our real
estate funds. as of november 2006, $45billion of the
committed equity capital was funded and the amount of aum
remaining in these funds after distributions was
$44billion.
merchant banking activities generate three primary revenue
streams. first, we receive a management fee that is generally a
percentage of a funds committed capital, invested capital,
total gross acquisition cost or asset value. these annual
management fees are included in our asset management net
revenues. second, goldman sachs, as a substantial investor in
some of these funds, is allocated its proportionate share of the
funds unrealized appreciation or depreciation arising from
changes in fair value as well as gains and losses upon
realization. third, after a fund has achieved a minimum return
for fund investors, we receive an increased share of the
funds income and gains that is a percentage of the income
and gains from the funds investments. the second and third
of these revenue streams are included in principal investments
within our trading and principal investments segment.
securities services
securities services provides prime brokerage services, financing
services and securities lending services to institutional
clients, including hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and
foundations, and to high-net-worth individuals worldwide.
prime brokerage services. we offer prime brokerage
services to our clients, allowing them the flexibility to trade
with most brokers while maintaining a single source for
financing and consolidated portfolio reports. our prime
brokerage business provides clearing and custody in 45 markets
and provides consolidated multi-currency accounting and
reporting, offshore fund administration and other ancillary
services.
financing services. a central element of our prime
brokerage business involves providing financing to our clients
for their securities trading activities through margin and
securities loans that are collateralized by securities, cash or
other acceptable collateral.
securities lending services. securities lending services
principally involve the borrowing and lending of securities to
cover clients and goldman sachs short sales and
otherwise to make deliveries into the market. in addition, we
are an active participant in the
broker-to-broker
securities lending business and the third-party agency lending
business. net revenues in securities lending services are, as a
general matter, weighted toward our second and third quarters
each year due to seasonally higher activity levels in europe.
global investment research
global investment research provides fundamental research on
companies, industries, economies, currencies, commodities and
macro strategy research on a worldwide basis.
global investment research employs a team approach that as of
november 2006 provided research coverage of approximately
2,750companies worldwide and over 50 national economies.
this is accomplished by the following departments:
the equity research departments provide fundamental analysis,
earnings forecasts and investment opinions for equity securities;
the credit research department provides fundamental analysis,
forecasts and investment opinions as to investment-grade and
high-yield corporate bonds and credit derivatives;
table of contents
the economic research department formulates macroeconomic
forecasts for economic activity, foreign exchange and interest
rates;
the commodities research department provides research on the
commodity markets;and
the strategy research department provides equity market
forecasts, opinions on both asset and industry sector
allocation, equity trading strategies, credit trading strategies
and options research.
further information regarding research at goldman sachs is
provided below under regulation
regulations applicable in and outside the united states
and legal proceedings research independence
matters in parti, item3 of the annual report
on form10-k.
technology
goldman sachs is committed to the ongoing development,
maintenance and use of technology throughout the organization.
our technology initiatives can be broadly categorized into four
efforts:
enhancing client service through increased connectivity and the
provision of value-added, tailored products and services;
improving our trading, execution and clearing capabilities;
risk management;and
overall efficiency, productivity and control.
we have tailored our services to our clients by providing them
with electronic access to our products and services. in
particular, we provide global electronic trading and information
distribution capabilities covering many of our fixed income,
currency, commodity, equity and mutual fund products around the
world.
electronic commerce and technology have changed and will
continue to change the ways that securities and other financial
products are traded, distributed and settled. this creates both
opportunities and challenges for our businesses. we remain
committed to being at the forefront of technological innovation
in the global capital markets.
business continuity and information security
business continuity and information security are high priorities
for goldman sachs. our business continuity program has been
developed to provide reasonable assurance of business continuity
in the event of disruptions at the firms critical
facilities and to comply with nyse and national association of
securities dealers, inc. regulatory requirements. the key
elements of the program are crisis management, business
recovery, systems and data recovery, people recovery facilities
and process improvement. in the area of information security, we
have developed and implemented a framework of principles,
policies and technology to protect the information assets of the
firm and our clients. safeguards are applied to maintain the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information
resources.
employees
management believes that a major strength and principal reason
for the success of goldman sachs is the quality and dedication
of our people and the shared sense of being part of a team. we
strive to maintain a work environment that fosters
professionalism, excellence, diversity, cooperation among our
employees worldwide and high standards of business ethics.
instilling the goldman sachs culture in all employees is a
continuous process, in which training plays an important part.
all employees are offered the opportunity to participate in
education and
table of contents
periodic seminars that we sponsor at various locations
throughout the world. another important part of instilling the
goldman sachs culture is our employee review process. employees
are reviewed by supervisors, co-workers and employees they
supervise in a 360-degree review process that is integral to our
team approach.
as of november 2006, we had 26,467 employees, including 1,326
employees of goldman sachs consolidated property
management and loan servicing subsidiaries and excluding 3,868
employees of certain consolidated entities that are held for
investment purposes only. consolidated entities held for
investment purposes include entities that are held strictly for
capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and are
engaged in activities that are not closely related to our
principal businesses.
competition
the financial services industry and all of our
businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect
them to remain so. our competitors are other brokers and
dealers, investment banking firms, commercial banks, insurance
companies, investment advisers, mutual funds, hedge funds,
private equity funds and merchant banks. we compete with some of
our competitors globally and with others on a regional, product
or niche basis. our competition is based on a number of factors,
including transaction execution, our products and services,
innovation, reputation and price.
we also face intense competition in attracting and retaining
qualified employees. our ability to continue to compete
effectively in our businesses will depend upon our ability to
attract new employees and retain and motivate our existing
employees.
over time, there has been substantial consolidation and
convergence among companies in the financial services industry,
due in part to u.s.federal legislation that has expanded
the activities permissible for firms affiliated with a
u.s.bank. in particular, a number of large commercial
banks, insurance companies and other broad-based financial
services firms have established or acquired broker-dealers or
have merged with other financial institutions. many of these
firms have the ability to offer a wide range of products, from
loans, deposit-taking and insurance to brokerage, asset
management and investment banking services, which may enhance
their competitive position. they also have the ability to
support investment banking and securities products with
commercial banking, insurance and other financial services
revenues in an effort to gain market share, which has resulted
in pricing pressure in certain of our businesses and could
result in pricing pressure in other of our businesses.
moreover, we have faced, and expect to continue to face,
pressure to retain market share by committing capital to
businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns that may
not be commensurate with their risks. in particular, corporate
clients increasingly seek such commitments (such as agreements
to participate in their commercial paper backstop or other loan
facilities) from financial services firms in connection with
investment banking and other assignments. we provide these
commitments either through our william street entities,
primarily for investment-grade clients, or through goldman sachs
credit partners l.p. or our other subsidiaries, primarily for
other clients. with respect to substantially all of the william
street commitments, smfg provides us with credit loss protection
that is generally limited to 95% of the first loss we realize on
approved loan commitments, up to a maximum of
$1.00billion. in addition, subject to the satisfaction of
certain conditions, upon our request, smfg will provide
protection for 70% of the second loss on such commitments, up to
a maximum of $1.13billion. we also use other financial
instruments to mitigate credit risks related to certain william
street commitments not covered by smfg. see
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations in partii,
item7 of the annual report on
form10-k and
note6 to our consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for more
information regarding the william street entities and for a
description of the credit loss protection provided by smfg. an
increasing number of our commitments in connection with
investment banking and other assignments do not meet the
table of contents
criteria established for the william street entities and do not
benefit from the smfg loss protection. these commitments are
issued through goldman sachs credit partners l.p. or our other
subsidiaries.
the trend toward consolidation and convergence has significantly
increased the capital base and geographic reach of some of our
competitors. this trend has also hastened the globalization of
the securities and other financial services markets. as a
result, we have had to commit capital to support our
international operations and to execute large global
transactions. to take advantage of some of our most significant
challenges and opportunities, we will have to compete
successfully with financial institutions that are larger and
better capitalized and that may have a stronger local presence
and longer operating history outside the united states.
we have experienced intense price competition in some of our
businesses in recent years. there has been considerable pressure
in the pricing of block trades. also, equity and debt
underwriting discounts, as well as trading spreads, have been
under pressure for a number of years and the ability to execute
trades electronically, through the internet and through other
alternative trading systems, has increased the pressure on
trading commissions. it appears that this trend toward
electronic and other low-touch, low-commission
trading will continue. we believe that we will continue to
experience competitive pressures in these and other areas in the
future as some of our competitors seek to obtain market share by
reducing prices.
regulation
goldman sachs, as a participant in the securities and commodity
futures and options industries, is subject to extensive
regulation in the united states and the other countries in which
we operate. as a matter of public policy, regulatory bodies
around the world are charged with safeguarding the integrity of
the securities and other financial markets and with protecting
the interests of clients participating in those markets. they
are not, however, charged with protecting the interests of
goldman sachs shareholders or creditors.
broker-dealers, in particular, are subject to regulations that
cover all aspects of the securities business, including sales
methods, trade practices, use and safekeeping of clients
funds and securities, capital structure, recordkeeping, the
financing of clients purchases, and the conduct of
directors, officers and employees. a number of our affiliates
are regulated by investment advisory laws in the countries in
which we operate. see risk factors our
businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and
pervasive regulation around the world in parti,
item1a of the annual report on
form10-k for a
further discussion of the effect that regulation may have on our
businesses.
regulation in the united states
in the united states, the sec is the federal agency responsible
for the administration of the federal securities laws. the
goldman sachs group, inc. is subject to regulation by the sec as
a consolidated supervised entity. as such, it is subject to
group-wide supervision and examination by the sec and to minimum
capital requirements on a consolidated basis. as part of a
consolidated supervised entity, goldman, sachs& co.
(gs&co.), our principal u.s.broker-dealer, is
permitted to calculate its regulatory capital requirements in
accordance with the market and credit risk standards of
appendixe of
rule15c3-1 under
the securities exchange act of 1934.
gs&co. is registered as a broker-dealer and as an investment
adviser with the sec and as a broker-dealer in all
50states and the district of columbia. self-regulatory
organizations, such as the nyse and nasd, adopt rules that apply
to, and examine, broker-dealers such as gs&co. in addition,
state securities and other regulators also have regulatory or
oversight authority over gs&co. similarly, our businesses
are also subject to regulation by various
non-u.s.governmental
and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory authorities in
virtually all countries where we have offices. goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec)and two of its
subsidiaries are registered
table of contents
u.s.broker-dealers and are regulated by the sec and nyse,
and gsec is also regulated by the nasd. goldman sachs financial
markets, l.p. is registered with the sec as an otc derivatives
dealer and conducts certain otc derivatives businesses.
the nyse and the nasd, which have regulatory authority over a
large amount of our businesses and activities, have announced
that they intend to merge their regulatory operations into a
single regulatory body, expected to begin operations in the
second quarter of 2007.
the commodity futures and commodity options industry in the
united states is subject to regulation under the commodity
exchange act. the commodity futures trading commission is the
federal agency charged with the administration of the commodity
exchange act. several of goldman sachs subsidiaries,
including gs&co. and gsec, are registered with the cftc and
act as futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators or
commodity trading advisors and are subject to the commodity
exchange act. the rules and regulations of various
self-regulatory organizations, such as the chicago board of
trade and the chicago mercantile exchange, other futures
exchanges and the national futures association, also govern the
commodity futures and commodity options businesses of these
entities.
gs&co. and gsec are subject to
rule15c3-1 of the
sec and rule1.17 of the cftc, which specify uniform
minimum net capital requirements and also effectively require
that a significant part of the registrants assets be kept
in relatively liquid form. gs&co. and gsec have elected to
compute their minimum capital requirements in accordance with
the alternative net capital requirement as permitted
by rule15c3-1. as
of november 2006, gs&co. and gsec had net capital in excess
of their minimum capital requirements. in addition to its
alternative minimum net capital requirements, gs&co. is also
required to hold tentative net capital in excess of
$1billion and net capital in excess of $500million
in accordance with the market and credit risk standards of
appendixe of
rule15c3-1.
gs&co. is required to notify the sec in the event that its
tentative net capital is less than $5billion. as of
november 2006, gs&co. had tentative net capital and net
capital in excess of both the minimum and the notification
requirements. these net capital requirements may have the effect
of prohibiting these entities from distributing or withdrawing
capital and may require prior notice to the sec for certain
withdrawals of capital. see note15 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
goldman sachs has established three limited purpose trust
companies under state or federal law. they are not permitted to
and do not accept deposits (other than as incidental to their
trust activities) or make loans and, as a result, are not
considered to be banks for purposes of the bank holding company
act, nor are they insured by the fdic or subject to the
community reinvestment act. these entities and their regulators
are: the goldman sachs trust company, n.a., a national bank that
is limited to having only trust powers, is regulated by the
office of the comptroller of the currency and is a member bank
of the federal reserve system; the goldman sachs trust company,
a new york limited purpose trust company that is regulated by
the new york state banking department; and the goldman sachs
trust company of delaware, a delaware limited purpose trust
company that is regulated by the office of the delaware state
bank commissioner.
goldman sachs has established gs bank, a wholly owned industrial
bank, to extend credit and to take deposits, other than demand
deposits. gs bank is regulated by the fdic and the state of utah
department of financial institutions and is subject to minimum
capital requirements. as of november 2006, gs bank was in
compliance with all regulatory capital requirements. because it
does not accept demand deposits, gs bank is not considered to be
a bank for purposes of the bank holding company act. the
deposits maintained at gs bank are insured by the fdic to the
extent provided by law.
j.aron& company is authorized by the federal
energy regulatory commission to sell wholesale physical power at
market-based rates. as a ferc-authorized power marketer, j.
aron& company is subject to regulation under the
federal power act and ferc regulations.
table of contents
in addition, as a result of our interests in electric power
generation facilities, we are subject to extensive and evolving
energy, environmental and other governmental laws and
regulations, as discussed under risk factors
our power generation interests subject us to the risks
associated with owning power generation facilities in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
our u.s.insurance subsidiaries are subject to state
insurance regulation in the states in which they are domiciled
and in the other states in which they are licensed. a number of
our other businesses, including our lending and mortgage
businesses, require us to obtain licenses and adhere to
applicable regulations in the states in which we conduct these
businesses.
the usa patriot act of 2001 contains anti-money laundering and
financial transparency laws and mandates the implementation of
various new regulations applicable to broker-dealers and other
financial services companies, including standards for verifying
client identification at account opening, and obligations to
monitor client transactions and report suspicious activities.
through these and other provisions, the usa patriot act of 2001
seeks to promote the identification of parties that may be
involved in terrorism or money laundering. anti-money laundering
laws outside the united states contain some similar provisions.
the obligation of financial institutions, including goldman
sachs, to identify their clients, to watch for and report
suspicious transactions, to respond to requests for information
by regulatory authorities and law enforcement agencies, and to
share information with other financial institutions, has
required the implementation and maintenance of internal
practices, procedures and controls that have increased, and may
continue to increase, our costs, and any failure with respect to
our programs in this area could subject us to substantial
liability and regulatory fines.
regulationoutside the united states
goldman sachs provides investment services in and from the
united kingdom under the regulation of the financial services
authority (fsa). goldman sachs international (gsi), our
regulated u.k.broker-dealer, is subject to the capital
requirements of the fsa. as of november 2006, gsi was in
compliance with the fsa capital requirements. other
subsidiaries, including goldman sachs international bank, are
also regulated by the fsa.
various goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking and
regulatory authorities of the other european countries in which
goldman sachs operates, including, among others, the federal
financial supervisory authority (bafin) and the bundesbank in
germany, banque de france and the autorit des marchs
financiers in france, banca ditalia and the commissione
nazionale per le societ e la borsa (consob)in italy,
the federal financial markets service in russia and the swiss
federal banking commission. goldman sachs entities are also
regulated by the european securities, derivatives and
commodities exchanges of which they are members.
the investment services that are subject to oversight by the fsa
and other european regulators are regulated in accordance with
european union directives requiring, among other things,
compliance with certain capital adequacy standards, customer
protection requirements and conduct of business rules. these
standards, requirements and rules are similarly implemented,
under the same directives, throughout the european union and are
broadly comparable in scope and purpose to the regulatory
capital and customer protection requirements imposed under the
sec and cftc rules. some european union directives also permit
local regulation in each jurisdiction, including those in which
we operate, to be more restrictive than the requirements of such
directives and these local requirements can result in certain
competitive disadvantages to goldman sachs.
the european unions markets in financial instruments
directive (directive 2004/39/ec) will affect several of our
subsidiaries by imposing detailed pan-european requirements in
areas such as internal organization (including conflict
management, outsourcing and recordkeeping), best execution,
real-time disclosure of completed transactions in shares,
quoting obligations for internalized client orders in shares,
transaction reporting to regulators, client classification and
documentation, and
table of contents
regulation of investment services related to commodity
derivatives. european union member states were required to adopt
national laws, regulations and administrative provisions
complying with the directive by january31, 2007 and must
apply these laws, regulations and provisions by
november1,2007. the united kingdom has met the
adopting deadline and is expected to meet the deadline for
applying the laws and regulations. therefore, we anticipate that
we will be subject to substantial new requirements beginning
november1, 2007, which could lead to business disruptions
or require us to change certain of our business practices.
certain other member states have not yet adopted the required
laws and regulations and may not meet the november1, 2007
deadline for applying them. while we are preparing for
compliance with the implementing laws and regulations, we remain
subject to continuing regulatory uncertainty concerning the
national implementing laws and regulations.
goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl), our regulated japanese
broker-dealer, is subject to the capital requirements of
japans financial services agency. as of november 2006,
gsjcl was in compliance with its capital adequacy requirements.
gsjcl is also regulated by the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka
securities exchange, the tokyo financial exchange, the japan
securities dealers association, the tokyo commodity exchange and
the ministry of economy, trade and industry in japan. prior to
october1, 2006, goldman sachs (japan) ltd., the
predecessor to gsjcl, was our primary regulated subsidiary based
in japan.
also in asia, the securities and futures commission in hong
kong, the monetary authority of singapore, the china securities
regulatory commission and the korean financial supervisory
service, among others, regulate various of our subsidiaries and
also have capital standards and other requirements comparable to
the rules of the sec.
various goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking and
regulatory authorities of other
non-u.s.countries
in which goldman sachs operates, including, among others,
brazil, india and dubai. in addition, certain of our insurance
subsidiaries are regulated by the bermuda registrar of companies.
regulations applicable in and outside the united states
the u.s. and
non-u.s.government
agencies, regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations,
as well as state securities commissions in the united states,
are empowered to conduct administrative proceedings that can
result in censure, fine, the issuance of cease and desist
orders, or the suspension or expulsion of a broker-dealer or its
directors, officers or employees. from time to time, our
subsidiaries have been subject to investigations and
proceedings, and sanctions have been imposed for infractions of
various regulations relating to our activities, none of which
has had a material adverse effect on us or our businesses.
in 2004, the basel committee on banking supervision issued the
baselii capital standards, which are designed to promote
enhanced risk management practices among large, international
financial services firms by aligning regulatory capital
requirements more closely with the underlying risks faced by
these firms. under the currently proposed time schedule, gsi, as
well as our other subsidiaries in the united kingdom and
elsewhere in europe, would become subject to the baselii
requirements on january1, 2008. the consolidated
supervised entity rules described above under
regulation in the united states, which
provide for group-wide supervision, are consistent with
baselii. complying with these new standards has required
us to develop and apply new and sophisticated measurement
techniques to determine our regulatory capital adequacy. as an
increasing number of financial institutions become subject to
baselii, new interpretations may arise, and harmonization
among regulators could then impact the regulatory capital
requirements under which we operate as a consolidated supervised
entity, as well as the requirements for some of our regulated
subsidiaries.
our specialist businesses are subject to extensive regulation by
a number of securities exchanges. the rules of these exchanges
generally require our specialists to maintain orderly
table of contents
markets in the securities in which they are specialists. these
requirements, in turn, may require us to commit significant
amounts of capital to our specialist businesses.
the research areas of investment banks have been and remain the
subject of regulatory scrutiny. the sec, nyse and nasd have
adopted rules imposing restrictions on the interaction between
equity research analysts and investment banking personnel at
member securities firms. various
non-u.s.jurisdictions
have imposed both substantive and disclosure-based requirements
with respect to research and may impose additional regulations.
in 2003, gs&co. agreed to a global settlement with certain
federal and state securities regulators and self-regulatory
organizations to resolve investigations into equity research
analysts alleged conflicts of interest. the global
settlement includes certain restrictions and undertakings that
have imposed additional costs and limitations on the conduct of
our businesses, including restrictions on the interaction
between research and investment banking departments.
in connection with the research settlement, we have also
subscribed to a voluntary initiative imposing restrictions on
the allocation of shares in initial public offerings to
executives and directors of public companies. the fsa in the
united kingdom has imposed requirements on the conduct of the
allocation process in equity and fixed income securities
offerings (including initial public offerings and secondary
distributions). the sec, nyse and nasd have proposed rules that
would further affect the manner in which securities are
distributed and allocated in registered public offerings. we
cannot fully predict the practical effect that these proposed
requirements will have on our business, and the sec, nyse, nasd
and
non-u.s.regulators,
such as the fsa, may adopt additional and more stringent rules
with respect to offering procedures and the management of
conflicts of interest in the future.
our investment management businesses are subject to significant
regulation in numerous jurisdictions around the world relating
to, among other things, the safeguarding of client assets and
our management of client funds.
as discussed above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to
regulatory capital requirements in jurisdictions throughout the
world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold
capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency
requirements or internal policies, including policies concerning
the minimum amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based
upon its underlying risk.
certain of our businesses are subject to compliance with
regulations enacted by u.s.federal and state governments,
the european union or other jurisdictions and/or enacted by
various regulatory organizations or exchanges relating to the
privacy of client information, and any failure to comply with
these regulations could expose us to liability and/or
reputational damage.
item1a.risk factors
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in
our businesses, including market, liquidity, credit,
operational, legal and regulatory risks. the following are some
of the more important factors that could affect our businesses.
our businesses may be adversely affected by conditions in
the global financial markets and economic conditions
generally.
our business, by its nature, does not produce predictable
earnings. while we have achieved record earnings per common
share in each of our last three fiscal years, reflecting a
favorable trading and investing environment and an increase in
investment banking activity, an adverse change in these market
conditions may adversely affect our results of operations.
our businesses are materially affected by conditions in the
global financial markets and economic conditions generally, and
these conditions may change suddenly and dramatically. a
favorable business environment is generally characterized by,
among other factors, high global gross domestic product growth,
stable geopolitical conditions, transparent and efficient
capital markets, low
table of contents
inflation, high business and investor confidence, and strong
business earnings. unfavorable or uncertain economic and market
conditions, which can be caused by outbreaks of hostilities or
other geopolitical instability, declines in business confidence,
increases in inflation, corporate, political or other scandals
that reduce investor confidence in capital markets, natural
disasters or pandemics or a combination of these or other
factors, have adversely affected, and may in the future
adversely affect, our business and profitability in many ways,
including the following:
we have been operating in a low interest rate market for the
past several years. increasing or high interest rates and/or
widening credit spreads, especially if such changes are rapid,
may create a less favorable environment for certain of our
businesses.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of
our businesses and generally maintain large trading, specialist
and investing positions. market fluctuations and volatility may
adversely affect the value of those positions, including, but
not limited to, our interest rate and credit products, currency,
commodity and equity positions, and our merchant banking
investments, or may reduce our willingness to enter into new
transactions. from time to time, we have incurred significant
trading losses in periods of market turbulence. conversely,
certain of our trading businesses depend on market volatility to
provide trading and arbitrage opportunities, and decreases in
volatility may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect
the results of these businesses.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings
and mergers and acquisitions may have an adverse effect on our
revenues and, because we may be unable to reduce expenses
correspondingly, our profit margins. in particular, because a
significant portion of our investment banking revenues are
derived from our participation in large transactions, a decrease
in the number of large transactions due to uncertain or
unfavorable market conditions may adversely affect our
investment banking business.
pricing and other competitive pressures have continued, even as
the volume and number of investment banking transactions have
increased. in addition, the trend in the underwriting business
toward multiple book runners and co-managers handling
transactions, where previously there would have been a single
book runner, has adversely affected our business and reduced our
revenues.
reductions in the level of the equity markets or increases in
interest rates tend to reduce the value of our clients
portfolios, which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for
managing assets. increases in interest rates or attractive
conditions in other investments could cause our clients to
transfer their assets out of our funds or other products. even
in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or market
conditions, investment performance by our asset management
business below the performance of benchmarks or competitors
could result in a decline in assets under management and in the
incentive and management fees we receive as well as reputational
damage that might make it more difficult to attract new
investors.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant
losses in our market-making, proprietary trading and investing,
block trading, merchant banking, underwriting and lending
businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand our
proprietary trading and investing businesses or commit capital
to facilitate customer-driven business. for example, in recent
years large blocks of securities have increasingly been sold in
block trades rather than on a marketed basis, which increases
the risk that goldman sachs may be unable to resell the
purchased securities at favorable prices and may incur
significant losses as a result. moreover, because of
concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic
and market conditions are generally favorable for others in the
industry. we also regularly enter into large transactions as
part of our trading businesses. the number and size of such
transactions may affect our results of operations in a given
period.
table of contents
the volume of transactions that we execute for our clients and
as a specialist or market maker may decline, which would reduce
the revenues we receive from commissions and spreads. in
addition, competitive pressures and other industry factors,
including the increasing use by our clients of low-cost
electronic trading, could cause a reduction in commissions and
spreads. in our specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock
exchange rules to maintain an orderly market, including by
purchasing shares in a declining market. this may result in
trading losses and an increased need for liquidity. weakness in
global equity markets and the trading of securities in multiple
markets and on multiple exchanges could adversely impact our
trading businesses and impair the value of our goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets. in addition, competitive
pressures have been particularly intense in the context of block
trades.
the emergence of a pandemic or other widespread health
emergency, or concerns over the possibility of such an
emergency, could create economic and financial disruptions in
emerging markets and other areas throughout the world, and could
lead to operational difficulties (including travel limitations)
that could impair our ability to manage our businesses around
the world. in addition, unforeseen or catastrophic events,
including health emergencies, terrorist attacks or natural
disasters, could expose our insurance subsidiaries to
significant losses.
we may incur losses as a result of ineffective risk
management processes and strategies.
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a
variety of separate but complementary financial, credit,
operational, compliance and legal reporting systems. our trading
risk management process seeks to balance our ability to profit
from trading positions with our exposure to potential losses.
while we employ a broad and diversified set of risk monitoring
and risk mitigation techniques, those techniques and the
judgments that accompany their application cannot anticipate
every economic and financial outcome or the specifics and timing
of such outcomes. thus, we may, in the course of our activities,
incur losses.
the models that we use to assess and control our risk exposures
reflect assumptions about the degrees of correlation or lack
thereof among prices of various asset classes or other market
indicators, and in times of market stress or other unforeseen
circumstances previously uncorrelated indicators may become
correlated, or conversely previously correlated indicators may
move in different directions. in the past, these types of market
movements have at times limited the effectiveness of our hedging
strategies and have caused us to incur significant losses, and
they may do so in the future.
market volatility has been relatively low in recent years. an
increase in volatility would increase our measured risk, which
might cause us to reduce our proprietary positions or to reduce
certain of our business activities. in such circumstances, we
may not be able to reduce our positions or our exposure in a
timely, cost-effective way or in a manner sufficient to offset
the increase in measured risk.
for a further discussion of our risk management policies and
procedures, see managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations
risk management in partii, item7 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
our liquidity and businesses may be adversely affected by
an inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell
assets, by a reduction in our credit ratings or by an inability
of the goldman sachs group, inc. to access funds from its
subsidiaries.
liquidity is essential to our businesses. our liquidity could be
impaired by an inability to access secured and/or unsecured debt
markets, an inability to sell assets or unforeseen outflows of
cash or collateral. this situation may arise due to
circumstances that we may be unable to control, such as a
general market disruption or an operational problem that affects
third parties or us. the financial
table of contents
instruments that we hold and the contracts to which we are a
party are increasingly complex, as we employ structured products
to benefit our clients and ourselves, and these complex
structured products often do not have readily available markets
to access in times of liquidity stress. growth of our
proprietary investing activities may lead to situations where
the holdings from these activities represent a significant
portion of specific markets, which could restrict liquidity for
our positions. further, our ability to sell assets may be
impaired if other market participants are seeking to sell
similar assets at the same time.
our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a reduction
in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and
competitive position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our
access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under
certain bilateral provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions,
counterparties could be permitted to terminate contracts with
goldman sachs or require us to post additional collateral.
termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our
liquidity by requiring us to find other sources of financing or
to make significant cash payments or securities movements.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is a holding company and,
therefore, depends on dividends, distributions and other
payments from its subsidiaries to fund dividend payments and to
fund all payments on its obligations, including debt
obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including gs&co., are
subject to laws that authorize regulatory bodies to block or
reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to the goldman
sachs group, inc. regulatory action of that kind could impede
access to funds that the goldman sachs group, inc. needs to make
payments on obligations, including debt obligations, or dividend
payments.
our businesses, profitability and liquidity may be
adversely affected by a deterioration in the credit quality of,
or defaults by, third parties who owe us money, securities or
other assets.
we are exposed to the risk that third parties that owe us money,
securities or other assets will not perform their obligations.
these parties may default on their obligations to us due to
bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational failure or other
reasons. we are also subject to the risk that our rights against
third parties may not be enforceable in all circumstances. in
addition, a deterioration in the credit quality of third parties
whose securities or obligations we hold could result in losses
and/or adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or
otherwise use those securities or obligations for liquidity
purposes. a significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our
counterparties could also have a negative impact on our results.
the amount and duration of our credit exposures have been
increasing over the past several years, as has the breadth of
the entities to which we have credit exposures. as a clearing
member firm, we finance our client positions, and we could be
held responsible for the defaults or misconduct of our clients.
in addition, we have experienced, due to competitive factors,
pressure to extend and price credit at levels that may not
always fully compensate us for the risks we take. in particular,
corporate clients sometimes seek to require credit commitments
from us in connection with investment banking and other
assignments. while our activities expose us to many different
industries and counterparties, we routinely execute a high
volume of transactions with counterparties in the financial
services industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial
banks, investment funds and other institutional clients,
resulting in significant credit concentration with respect to
this industry. in the ordinary course of business, we may also
be subject to a concentration of credit risk to a particular
counterparty, borrower or issuer.
although we regularly review credit exposures to specific
clients and counterparties and to specific industries, countries
and regions that we believe may present credit concerns, default
risk may arise from events or circumstances that are difficult
to detect or foresee. in addition, concerns about, or a default
by, one institution could lead to significant liquidity
problems, losses or defaults by other institutions, which in
turn could adversely affect goldman sachs.
table of contents
we face enhanced risks as new business initiatives lead us
to transact with a broader array of clients, with new asset
classes and in new markets.
a number of our recent and planned business initiatives and
expansions of existing businesses may bring us into contact,
directly or indirectly, with individuals and entities that are
not within our traditional client base and with new asset
classes and new markets. for example, we have begun providing
loans to small and mid-sized businesses, increased our exposure
to subprime mortgages and are transacting business and investing
in new emerging markets. in addition, we are increasingly
offering complex structured products and alternative investments
to a wider investor base, both directly and through third-party
distribution channels. furthermore, a number of our businesses,
including our proprietary investing and merchant banking
activities, cause us to directly or indirectly own interests in,
or otherwise become affiliated with the ownership and operation
of, public services, such as airports, toll roads, shipping
ports and electric power generation facilities, both within and
outside the united states. these business activities expose us
to new and enhanced risks, including reputational concerns
arising from dealing with less sophisticated counterparties and
investors, greater regulatory scrutiny of these activities,
increased credit-related and operational risks, risks arising
from accidents or acts of terrorism, and reputational concerns
with the manner in which these assets are being operated or held.
derivative transactions may expose us to unexpected risk
and potential losses.
we are party to a large number of derivative transactions,
including credit derivatives, that require that we deliver to
the counterparty the underlying security, loan or other
obligation in order to receive payment. in a number of cases, we
do not hold the underlying security, loan or other obligation
and may have difficulty obtaining, or be unable to obtain, the
underlying security, loan or other obligation through the
physical settlement of other transactions. as a result, we are
subject to the risk that we may not be able to obtain the
security, loan or other obligation within the required
contractual time frame for delivery. this could cause us to
forfeit the payments due to us under these contracts or result
in settlement delays with the attendant credit and operational
risk as well as increased costs to the firm.
derivative contracts and other transactions entered into with
third parties are not always confirmed by the counterparties on
a timely basis. while the transaction remains unconfirmed, we
are subject to heightened credit and operational risk and in the
event of a default may find it more difficult to enforce the
contract.
a failure in our operational systems or infrastructure, or
those of third parties, could impair our liquidity, disrupt our
businesses, damage our reputation and cause losses.
shortcomings or failures in our internal processes, people or
systems could lead to impairment of our liquidity, financial
loss, disruption of our businesses, liability to clients,
regulatory intervention or reputational damage. our businesses
are highly dependent on our ability to process, on a daily
basis, a large number of transactions, many of which are highly
complex, across numerous and diverse markets in many currencies.
these transactions often must adhere to client-specific
guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory standards. our
financial, accounting, data processing or other operating
systems and facilities may fail to operate properly or become
disabled as a result of events that are wholly or partially
beyond our control, adversely affecting our ability to process
these transactions. the inability of our systems to accommodate
an increasing volume of transactions could also constrain our
ability to expand our businesses.
we also face the risk of operational failure or termination of
any of the clearing agents, exchanges, clearing houses or other
financial intermediaries we use to facilitate our securities
transactions, and as our interconnectivity with our clients
grows, we will increasingly face the risk of operational failure
with respect to our clients systems. in recent years,
there has been significant consolidation among clearing agents,
exchanges and clearing houses, which has increased our
table of contents
exposure to operational failure or termination of the particular
financial intermediaries that we use and could affect our
ability to find adequate and cost-effective alternatives in the
event of any such failure or termination. any such failure or
termination could adversely affect our ability to effect
transactions, service our clients and manage our exposure to
risk.
despite the contingency plans and facilities we have in place,
our ability to conduct business may be adversely impacted by a
disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses
and the communities in which we are located. this may include a
disruption involving electrical, communications, transportation
or other services used by goldman sachs or third parties with
which we conduct business. these disruptions may occur, for
example, as a result of events that affect only the buildings of
goldman sachs or such third parties, or as a result of events
with a broader impact globally, regionally or in the cities
where those buildings are located. nearly all of our employees
in our primary locations, including new york, london, frankfurt,
hong kong, tokyo and bangalore, work in close proximity to one
another, in one or more buildings. if a disruption occurs in one
location and our employees in that location are unable to occupy
our offices or communicate with or travel to other locations,
our ability to service and interact with our clients may suffer,
and we may not be able to successfully implement contingency
plans that depend on communication or travel.
our operations rely on the secure processing, storage and
transmission of confidential and other information in our
computer systems and networks. although we take protective
measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances warrant,
our computer systems, software and networks may be vulnerable to
unauthorized access, computer viruses or other malicious code
and other events that could have a security impact. if one or
more of such events occur, this potentially could jeopardize our
or our clients or counterparties confidential and
other information processed and stored in, and transmitted
through, our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause
interruptions or malfunctions in our, our clients, our
counterparties or third parties operations, which
could result in significant losses or reputational damage. we
may be required to expend significant additional resources to
modify our protective measures or to investigate and remediate
vulnerabilities or other exposures, and we may be subject to
litigation and financial losses that are either not insured
against or not fully covered through any insurance maintained by
us.
we routinely transmit and receive personal, confidential and
proprietary information by email and other electronic means. we
have discussed and worked with clients and counterparties to
develop secure transmission capabilities, but we do not have in
place secure capabilities for all of our clients and
counterparties. an interception or mishandling of personal,
confidential or proprietary information being sent to or
received from a client or counterparty could result in legal
liability, regulatory action and reputational harm. we are
exposed to similar risks arising from the interception of
personal, confidential or proprietary information sent to or
received from, or the misuse or mishandling of personal,
confidential or proprietary information by, vendors, service
providers and other third parties who may receive such
information from us, and our efforts to ensure that these third
parties have appropriate controls in place may not be successful.
conflicts of interest are increasing and a failure to
appropriately deal with conflicts of interest could adversely
affect our businesses.
our reputation is one of our most important assets. as we have
expanded the scope of our businesses and our client base, we
increasingly have to address potential conflicts of interest,
including situations where our services to a particular client
or our own proprietary investments or other interests conflict,
or are perceived to conflict, with the interests of another
client, as well as situations where one or more of our
businesses have access to material non-public information that
may not be shared with other businesses within the firm.
the sec, the nasd, other federal and state regulators and
regulators outside the united states, including in the united
kingdom and japan, have announced their intention to increase
their
table of contents
scrutiny of potential conflicts of interest, including through
detailed examinations of specific transactions. there have been
recent public reports that the department of justice is
conducting an investigation regarding joint participation by
certain private equity firms and other financial institutions in
certain leveraged buyouts, referred to as club
deals. in addition, certain complaints filed against firms
other than goldman sachs allege the violation of antitrust laws
arising from their club deal arrangements. a number
of class action complaints have also been filed in connection
with certain specific club deal transactions which
name the relevant club deal participants among the
defendants, including goldman sachs affiliates in several cases,
and generally allege that the transactions constitute a breach
of fiduciary duty by the target company and that the
club participants aided and abetted such breach. we
may become subject to further litigation or regulatory scrutiny
in the future in this regard.
we have extensive procedures and controls that are designed to
address conflicts of interest, including those designed to
prevent the improper sharing of information among our
businesses. however, appropriately dealing with conflicts of
interest is complex and difficult, and our reputation could be
damaged and the willingness of clients to enter into
transactions in which such a conflict might arise may be
affected if we fail, or appear to fail, to deal appropriately
with conflicts of interest. in addition, potential or perceived
conflicts could give rise to litigation or enforcement actions.
our businesses and those of our clients are subject to
extensive and pervasive regulation around the world.
goldman sachs, as a participant in the financial services
industry, is subject to extensive regulation in jurisdictions
around the world. we face the risk of significant intervention
by regulatory authorities in all jurisdictions in which we
conduct our businesses. among other things, we could be fined,
prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities or
subject to limitations or conditions on our business activities.
new laws or regulations or changes in enforcement of existing
laws or regulations applicable to our businesses or those of our
clients may also adversely affect our businesses. regulatory
changes could lead to business disruptions, could require us to
change certain of our business practices and could expose us to
additional costs and liabilities as well as reputational harm.
for a discussion of the extensive regulation to which our
businesses are subject, see business
regulation in parti, item1 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
firms in the financial services industry have been operating in
a difficult regulatory environment. the industry has experienced
increased scrutiny from a variety of regulators, both within and
outside the united states. penalties and fines sought by
regulatory authorities have increased substantially over the
last several years, and certain regulators have been more likely
in recent years to commence enforcement actions. for example,
regulators, both within and outside the united states, continue
to scrutinize complex, structured finance transactions and have
brought enforcement actions against a number of financial
institutions in connection with such transactions. we seek to
create innovative solutions to address our clients needs,
and we have entered into, and continue to enter into, structured
transactions with clients.
this environment has led some of our clients to be less willing
to engage in transactions that may carry a risk of increased
scrutiny by regulators and has created uncertainty with respect
to a number of transactions that had historically been entered
into by financial services firms, including our firm, and that
were generally believed to be permissible and appropriate. this
environment also has led us and our competitors to modify
transaction structures and, in some cases, to limit or cease our
execution of some types of transactions. while we have policies
and procedures in place that are intended to ensure that the
transactions we enter into are appropriately reviewed and comply
with applicable laws and regulations, it is possible that
certain transactions could give rise to litigation or
enforcement actions or that the regulatory scrutiny of, and
litigation in connection with, transactions
table of contents
will make our clients less willing to enter into these
transactions with us, and will adversely affect our business.
substantial legal liability or significant regulatory
action against goldman sachs could have material adverse
financial effects or cause significant reputational harm to
goldman sachs, which in turn could seriously harm our business
prospects.
we face significant legal risks in our businesses, and the
volume of claims and amount of damages and penalties claimed in
litigation and regulatory proceedings against financial
institutions remain high. see legal proceedings in
parti, item3 of the annual report on
form10-k for a
discussion of certain legal proceedings in which we are involved.
for example, federal and state authorities and other regulatory
entities, including the nasd, have made informational requests
regarding market timing, late trading and other activities
broadly across all of the major fund companies and
broker-dealers, including goldman sachs. while we believe that
we have in place reasonable measures to detect and deter
disruptive and abusive trading practices and comply with
applicable legal and regulatory requirements, we cannot predict
the course that these inquiries and areas of focus may take or
the impact that any new laws or regulations governing mutual
funds may have on our businesses.
also, in march 2004, certain nyse specialist firms, including
our specialist unit, agreed to a settlement with the sec and
nyse to resolve charges that the firms violated certain federal
securities laws and nyse rules in connection with their
activities as nyse specialists during the years 1999 through
2003. the settlement did not resolve the related civil actions
discussed under legal proceedings specialist
matters in parti, item3 of the annual report
on form10-k, or
potential regulatory charges against individuals. in addition,
we have received requests for information from regional stock
exchanges and options exchanges regarding specialist activities.
as a result of the settlement and any related developments,
other investigations or any new laws or regulations governing
specialists, our specialist businesses may be adversely affected
and the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
related to these businesses may be impaired.
there have been a number of highly publicized cases involving
fraud or other misconduct by employees in the financial services
industry in recent years, and we run the risk that employee
misconduct could occur. it is not always possible to deter or
prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we take to
prevent and detect this activity may not be effective in all
cases.
the financial services industry is highly
competitive.
the financial services industry and all of our
businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect
them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number of
factors, including transaction execution, our products and
services, innovation, reputation and price. we believe that we
will continue to experience pricing pressures in the future as
some of our competitors seek to increase market share by
reducing prices. over time, there has been substantial
consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial
services industry. u.s.federal legislation, which
significantly expanded the activities permissible for firms
affiliated with a u.s.bank, has accelerated this
consolidation and further increased competition. this trend
toward consolidation and convergence has significantly increased
the capital base and geographic reach of our competitors. this
trend has also hastened the globalization of the securities and
other financial services markets. as a result, we have had to
commit capital to support our international operations and to
execute large global transactions. as our business expands into
new business areas and new geographical regions, we will face
competitors with more experience and more established
relationships with clients, regulators and industry participants
in the relevant market, which could adversely affect our ability
to expand.
table of contents
the growth of electronic trading and the introduction of
new technology may adversely affect our business and may
increase competition.
technology is fundamental to our business and our industry. the
growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new
technologies is changing our businesses and presenting us with
new challenges. securities, futures and options transactions are
increasingly occurring electronically, both on our own systems
and through other alternative trading systems, and it appears
that the trend toward alternative trading systems will continue
and probably accelerate. some of these alternative trading
systems compete with our trading businesses, including our
specialist businesses, and we may experience continued
competitive pressures in these and other areas. in addition, the
increased use by our clients of low-cost electronic trading
systems and direct electronic access to trading markets could
cause a reduction in commissions and spreads. the nyses
adoption of its hybrid market for trading securities may
increase pressure on our equities business as customers execute
more of their nyse-related trades electronically. we have
invested significant resources into the development of
electronic trading systems and expect to continue to do so, but
there is no assurance that the revenues generated by these
systems will yield an adequate return on our investment,
particularly given the relatively lower commissions arising from
electronic trades.
our businesses may be adversely affected if we are unable
to hire and retain qualified employees.
competition from within the financial services industry and from
businesses outside the financial services industry, such as
hedge funds, private equity funds and venture capital funds, for
qualified employees is intense, particularly in emerging
markets. our performance is largely dependent on the talents and
efforts of highly skilled individuals; therefore, our continued
ability to compete effectively in our businesses and to expand
into new business areas depends on our ability to attract new
employees and to retain and motivate our existing employees. in
addition, current and future laws (including laws relating to
immigration and outsourcing) may restrict our ability to move
responsibilities or personnel from one jurisdiction to another.
this may impact our ability to take advantage of business
opportunities or potential efficiencies.
our power generation interests subject us to the risks
associated with owning power generation facilities.
the operation of our power generation facilities may be
disrupted for many reasons, many of which are outside our
control, including the breakdown or failure of power generation
equipment, transmission lines or other equipment or processes,
and performance below expected levels of output or efficiency.
in addition, these facilities could be adversely affected by the
failure of any of third-party suppliers or service providers to
perform their contractual obligations, including the failure to
obtain raw materials necessary for operation at reasonable
prices. market conditions or other factors could cause a failure
to satisfy or obtain waivers under agreements with third
parties, including lenders and utilities, which impose
significant obligations on our subsidiaries that own such
facilities. the occurrence of any of such events may prevent the
affected facilities from performing under applicable power sales
agreements, may impair their operations or financial results and
may result in litigation or other reputational harm.
our power generation facilities are subject to extensive and
evolving federal, state and local energy, environmental and
other governmental laws and regulations, including environmental
laws and regulations relating to, among others, air quality,
water quality, waste management, natural resources, site
remediation and health and safety. in the past several years,
intensified scrutiny of the energy market by federal, state and
local authorities and the public has resulted in increased
regulatory and legal proceedings involving companies engaged in
electric power generation. in addition, we may incur substantial
costs in complying with current or future laws and regulations
relating to power generation, including having to commit
significant capital toward environmental monitoring,
installation of pollution control equipment, payment of emission
fees, and application for,
table of contents
and holding of, permits and licenses at our power generation
facilities. in certain instances, compliance with applicable
laws and regulations may require us to cease or curtail
operations of one or more of our power generation facilities.
our power generation facilities are also subject to the risk of
unforeseen or catastrophic events, including terrorist attacks,
natural disasters or other hostile or catastrophic events. we
may not have insurance against these risks or other risks,
including environmental risks, that such facilities face, and,
in cases in which we do have insurance, the insurance proceeds
may be inadequate to cover our losses. our overall businesses
and reputation may be adversely affected by legal and regulatory
proceedings, particularly those related to the environmental
matters, arising out of our power generation business, as well
as by the occurrence of unforeseen or catastrophic events.
in conducting our businesses around the world, we are
subject to political, economic, legal, operational and other
risks that are inherent in operating in many countries.
in conducting our businesses and maintaining and supporting our
global operations, we are subject to risks of possible
nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital
controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental
actions, as well as the outbreak of hostilities. in many
countries, the laws and regulations applicable to the securities
and financial services industries are uncertain and evolving,
and it may be difficult for us to determine the exact
requirements of local laws in every market. our inability to
remain in compliance with local laws in a particular market
could have a significant and negative effect not only on our
businesses in that market but also on our reputation generally.
we are also subject to the enhanced risk that transactions we
structure might not be legally enforceable in all cases.
our businesses and operations are increasingly involved in
emerging markets throughout the world, and we expect this trend
to continue. in the last several years, various emerging market
countries have experienced severe economic and financial
disruptions, including significant devaluations of their
currencies, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or
negative growth rates in their economies. the possible effects
of any of these conditions include an adverse impact on our
businesses and increased volatility in financial markets
generally.
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
there are no material unresolved written comments that were
received from the sec staff 180days or more before the end
of our fiscal year relating to our periodic or current reports
under the securities exchange act of 1934.
item2.
properties
our principal executive offices are located at 85 broad street,
new york, new york, and comprise approximately one million
rentable square feet of leased space, pursuant to a lease
agreement expiring in june 2008 (with options to renew for up to
20additional years). we also occupy over
680,000rentable square feet at one new york plaza under
lease agreements expiring primarily in 2009 (with options to
renew for up to five additional years), and we lease space at
various other locations in the new york metropolitan area. in
total, we lease approximately 3.9million rentable square
feet in the new york metropolitan area.
in august 2005, we leased from battery park city authority a
parcel of land in lower manhattan, pursuant to a ground lease.
we are currently constructing a 2.1million
gross-square-foot office building on the site that will serve as
our world headquarters. under the lease, battery park city
authority holds title to all improvements, including the office
building, subject to goldman sachs right of exclusive
possession and use for the
64-year duration of the
lease.
under the terms of the ground lease, we are required to make a
lump-sum ground rent payment of $161million by june 2007
and to make additional periodic payments during the term of the
lease. we are obligated under the ground lease to construct the
office building by 2011 (subject
table of contents
to extensions in the case of force majeure) in accordance with
certain pre-approved design standards. construction began on the
building in november 2005, and we expect initial occupancy of
the building by 2009. the building is projected to cost between
$2.3billion and $2.5billion, including acquisition,
development, fitout and furnishings, financing and other related
costs.
we are receiving a number of benefits from the city and state of
new york based on our agreement to construct our world
headquarters in lower manhattan. these benefits are subject to
recoupment or recapture if we do not proceed in accordance with
our agreements with the city and state of new york.
we own an office building at 30 hudson street in jersey city,
new jersey, which includes approximately 1.6million gross
square feet of office space, and we own over 300,000square
feet of additional space spread among three locations in new
york and new jersey. we have additional offices in the u.s. and
elsewhere in the americas, which together comprise approximately
2.3million rentable square feet of leased space.
in europe, the middle east and africa, we have offices that
total approximately 2.0million rentable square feet. our
european headquarters is located in london at peterborough
court, pursuant to a lease expiring in 2026. in total, we lease
approximately 1.6million rentable square feet in london
through various leases, relating to various properties.
in asia, we have offices that total approximately
1.2million rentable square feet. our headquarters in this
region are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in
hong kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently
lease approximately 390,000rentable square feet through a
lease that will expire in 2018. in hong kong, we currently lease
approximately 220,000rentable square feet under lease
agreements, the majority of which will expire in fiscal 2012.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office
space held in excess of our current requirements. this excess
space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is
being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied
space that we may exit in the future. we regularly evaluate our
current and future space capacity in relation to current and
projected staffing levels. we may incur exit costs in 2007 and
thereafter to the extent we (i)reduce our space capacity
or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties in the
locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of
existing space that had been held for potential growth. these
exit costs may be material to our results of operations in a
given period.
item3.
legal proceedings
we are involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and
arbitration proceedings (including those described below)
concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of our
businesses. we believe, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our
financial condition, but might be material to our operating
results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the
operating results for such period. given the range of litigation
and investigations presently under way, our litigation expenses
can be expected to remain high.
ipo process matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co.
are among the numerous financial services companies that have
been named as defendants in a variety of lawsuits alleging
improprieties in the process by which those companies
participated in the underwriting of public offerings in recent
years.
certain purported class actions have been brought in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york,
beginning on november3, 1998, by purchasers of securities
in public offerings as well as certain purported issuers of such
offerings, that allege that the defendants have conspired to fix
at 7% the discount that underwriting syndicates receive from
issuers of shares in certain
table of contents
offerings in violation of federal antitrust laws. on
march15, 1999, the purchaser plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint seeking treble damages as well as
injunctive relief. the defendants moved to dismiss the
consolidated amended complaint on april29, 1999. on
february9, 2001, the federal district court granted with
prejudice the defendants motion to dismiss the claims
asserted by the purchasers of securities on the ground that they
lacked antitrust standing. the plaintiffs in those actions
appealed, and by a decision dated december13, 2002, the
u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit vacated the
dismissal on the ground that the lower court had engaged in
improper fact-finding on the motion and remanded for
consideration of other potential bases for dismissal. on
september28, 2001, the defendants moved to dismiss the
complaints filed by the issuer plaintiffs on statute of
limitations grounds. on september25, 2002, the federal
district court denied the underwriter defendants motion to
dismiss. on march26, 2003, defendants moved to dismiss the
claims asserted by both the issuers and the purchasers of
securities on preemption grounds, but the motion was denied on
june27, 2003. on june24, 2003, defendants filed a
motion to dismiss the claims asserted by the purchasers of
securities on standing grounds, and on february24, 2004,
the district court granted the motion to dismiss as to the
purchasers damages claims. plaintiffs in both actions
moved for class certification on september16, 2004 and for
summary judgment on november16, 2005, and by a decision
dated april18, 2006, the district court denied class
certification with respect to the damages claims asserted by the
issuers of securities. the issuer plaintiffs have petitioned the
u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit to review that
certification decision on an interlocutory basis, and the
petition was granted on august1, 2006.
goldman, sachs& co. is one of numerous financial
services firms that have been named as defendants in purported
class actions filed beginning on march9, 2001 in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
by purchasers of securities in public offerings, who claim that
the defendants engaged in a conspiracy to tie
allocations in certain offerings to higher customer brokerage
commission rates as well as purchase orders in the aftermarket,
in violation of federal antitrust laws. the plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended complaint on january2, 2002 seeking
treble damages as well as injunctive relief. the defendants
moved to dismiss the consolidated amended complaint on
may24, 2002, and the motion was granted by a decision
dated november3,2003. plaintiffs appealed, and by a
decision dated september28, 2005, the u.s.court of
appeals for the second circuit reversed and remanded the action.
on march8, 2006, the underwriter defendants filed a
petition for certiorari with the u.s.supreme court
seeking review of the appellate decision, and the petition was
granted by order dated december7, 2006. goldman,
sachs& co. has also, together with other underwriters
in certain offerings as well as the issuers and certain of their
officers and directors, been named as a defendant in a number of
related lawsuits alleging, among other things, that the
prospectuses for the offerings violated the federal securities
laws by failing to disclose the existence of the alleged
tying arrangements and that the alleged arrangements
resulted in market manipulation. on july1, 2002, the
underwriter defendants moved to dismiss those complaints. by an
opinion and order dated february19, 2003, the federal
district court denied the motion to dismiss in all material
respects relating to the underwriter defendants. by a decision
dated october13, 2004, the federal district court
generally granted plaintiffs motion for class
certification in six focus cases. the underwriter
defendants petitioned the u.s.court of appeals for the
second circuit to review that certification decision on an
interlocutory basis, and the appellate court agreed to review
the decision by order dated june30, 2005. on
december5, 2006, the second circuit reversed the district
courts order granting class certification and remanded;
plaintiffs sought rehearing and rehearing en banc on
january5, 2007. on june10,2004, plaintiffs
entered into a definitive settlement agreement with respect to
their claims against the issuer defendants and the issuers
present or former officers and directors named in the lawsuits.
on june14, 2004, those parties jointly moved for approval
of the proposed settlement, and the district court granted
preliminary approval by a decision dated february15, 2005.
on april20,2006, plaintiffs announced that they had
entered into a definitive settlement agreement with respect to
their claims against j.p.morgan securities, inc. arising
from lawsuits alleging that (i)the prospectuses for
certain offerings violated the federal securities laws by
failing to disclose the
table of contents
existence of alleged arrangements to tie allocations
to higher customer brokerage commission rates as well as
purchase orders in the aftermarket, and (ii)such alleged
underlying tying arrangements violated federal and
state antitrust laws. the settlement, pursuant to which
j.p.morgan securities, inc. will pay $425million, is
subject to, among other things, documentation and court approval.
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in
an action commenced on may15,2002 in new york
supreme court, new york county, by an official committee of
unsecured creditors on behalf of etoys, inc., alleging that the
firm intentionally underpriced etoys, inc.s initial public
offering. the action seeks, among other things, unspecified
compensatory damages resulting from the alleged lower amount of
offering proceeds. on august1, 2002, goldman,
sachs& co. moved to dismiss the complaint. on
may2, 2003, the court granted goldman, sachs&
co.s motion to dismiss as to five of the claims; plaintiff
appealed from the dismissal of the five claims, and goldman,
sachs& co. appealed from the denial of its motion as
to the remaining claim. by a decision dated may20, 2004,
the new york appellate division, first department affirmed in
part and reversed in part the lower courts ruling on the
firms motion to dismiss, permitting all claims to proceed
except the claim for fraud, as to which the appellate court
granted leave to replead. the appellate division granted leave
to appeal, and by a decision dated june7, 2005, the new
york court of appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part the
appellate divisions decision, dismissing claims for breach
of contract, professional malpractice and unjust enrichment, but
permitting claims for breach of fiduciary duty and fraud to
continue. on remand to the lower court, goldman,
sachs& co. moved to dismiss the claims that survived
the appeal or, in the alternative, for summary judgment, but the
motion was denied by a decision dated march21, 2006.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and certain of its affiliates
have, together with various underwriters in certain offerings,
received subpoenas and requests for documents and information
from various governmental agencies and self-regulatory
organizations in connection with investigations relating to the
public offering process. goldman sachs has cooperated with the
investigations. on january25, 2005, in connection with an
investigation by the sec of certain allocation practices
employed by goldman, sachs& co. and other firms, the
sec announced a settlement pursuant to which goldman,
sachs& co., without admitting or denying the
allegations, (i)consented to the entry of an order
permanently enjoining goldman, sachs& co. from
violating rule101 of regulationm of the securities
exchange act of 1934, by inducing or attempting to induce
customers receiving ipo allocations to buy additional shares in
the aftermarket; and (ii)agreed to pay a penalty of
$40million. in connection with effectuation of the
settlement, the sec filed a civil action against goldman,
sachs& co. in the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york on january25, 2005, and the
district court entered a final judgment on
february7,2005 approving the settlement and granting
the permanent injunctive relief.
stock options litigation
hull trading co. l.l.c. and spear, leeds& kellogg,
l.p. (now known as goldman sachs execution& clearing,
l.p.), affiliates of the goldman sachs group, inc., are among
the numerous market makers in listed equity options that have
been named as defendants, together with five national securities
exchanges, in a purported class action brought in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
on behalf of persons who purchased or sold listed equity
options. the consolidated class action complaint, filed on
october4, 1999 (which consolidated certain previously
pending actions and added hull trading co. l.l.c. and other
market makers as defendants), generally alleges that the
defendants engaged in a conspiracy to preclude the multiple
listing of certain equity options on the exchanges and seeks
treble damages under the antitrust laws as well as injunctive
relief. certain of the parties, including hull trading co.
l.l.c. and spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p., have entered
into a stipulation of settlement, subject to court approval,
which originally required hull trading co. l.l.c. to pay an
aggregate of $2.48million and spear, leeds&
kellogg, l.p. an aggregate of $19.59million. on
february14, 2001, the federal district court granted the
table of contents
motion of certain non-settling defendants for summary judgment.
by a decision dated april24, 2001, the district court
ruled that in light of that order granting summary judgment, the
court lacked jurisdiction to entertain the proposed settlement.
plaintiffs appealed, and by a decision dated january9,
2003, the u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit
affirmed the grant of summary judgment, but held that the
decision did not divest the lower court of jurisdiction to
entertain the proposed settlement, and remanded for further
proceedings. by an order dated march17, 2003, the
u.s.court of appeals denied plaintiffs motion for
rehearing or rehearing en banc of the courts
january9, 2003 decision. on october26, 2005, certain
defendants, including spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p. and
hull trading co. l.l.c., reached an agreement to modify and
restate the original settlement agreement, reducing the overall
settlement payments by certain market maker defendants by
approximately 25% of the original amounts. by an order dated
february8, 2006, the federal district court entered an
order that, among other things, preliminarily approved the
proposed modified settlement. the federal district court
approved the settlement by an order dated
december4,2006.
iridium securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in
two purported class action lawsuits commenced, beginning on
may26, 1999, in the u.s.district court for the
district of columbia brought on behalf of purchasers of
classa common stock of iridium world communications, ltd.
in a january 1999 underwritten secondary offering of
7,500,000shares of classa common stock at a price of
$33.50per share, as well as in the secondary market.
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote 996,500shares of
common stock and goldman sachs international underwrote
320,625shares of common stock for a total offering price
of approximately $44million.
the defendants in the actions include iridium, certain of its
officers and directors, motorola, inc. (an investor in iridium)
and the lead underwriters in the offering, including goldman,
sachs& co. the complaints in both actions allege
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws and seek compensatory and/or rescissory damages.
on may13, 2002, plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended
complaint alleging substantively identical claims as the
original complaints.
on july15,2002, the defendants moved to dismiss the
consolidated amended complaint, and by a decision dated
august31, 2004, the motion was denied. on april15,
2005, plaintiffs moved for class certification, and the district
court granted the motion, certifying two subclasses, by a
decision dated january9, 2006. on september30, 2005,
the underwriter defendants moved for summary judgment, and by a
decision dated september15, 2006, the federal district
court denied the motion as to claims under section11 of
the securities act of 1933, but granted summary judgment
dismissing claims under section12(a)(2) of the securities
act against goldman, sachs& co. and all but one of the
other underwriter defendants. on november3, 2006, the
underwriter defendants entered into an agreement to settle all
claims against them for a settlement payment of
$8.25million. the settlement is subject to, among other
things, documentation and court approval.
on august13, 1999, iridium world communications, ltd.
filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
world online litigation
several lawsuits have been commenced in the netherlands courts
based on alleged misstatements and omissions relating to the
initial public offering of world online in march 2000. goldman
sachs and abn amro rothschild served as joint global
coordinators of the approximately
2.9billion
offering. goldman sachs international
underwrote20,268,846shares and goldman,
sachs& co. underwrote6,756,282shares for a
total offering price of approximately
1.16billion.
on september11, 2000, several dutch world online
shareholders as well as a dutch entity purporting to represent
the interests of certain world online shareholders commenced a
proceeding in amsterdam district court against abn amro
bank n.v., also acting under the name of abn amro
rothschild, alleging misrepresentations and omissions
relating to the initial public offering of
table of contents
world online. the lawsuit seeks, among other things, the return
of the purchase price of the shares purchased by the plaintiffs
or unspecified damages. by a decision dated
may7,2003, the court held that the claims failed and
dismissed the complaint. the plaintiffs appealed, and by a
decision dated october7,2004, the amsterdam court of
appeal affirmed dismissal of the complaint.
in march 2001, a dutch shareholders association initiated legal
proceedings in amsterdam district court in connection with the
world online offering. goldman sachs international is named as a
defendant in the writ served on its dutch attorneys on
march14,2001. the amount of damages sought is not
specified in the writ. goldman sachs international filed its
statement of defense on january16,2002 and a
rejoinder on january14,2003. by a decision dated
december17,2003, the court rejected the claims
against goldman sachs international, but found world online
liable in an amount to be determined. on
march12,2004, the dutch shareholders association
appealed from the dismissal of their claims against goldman
sachs international. oral hearings took place on
november13,2006.
owens corning bondholder litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in a
purported class action filed on april27,2001 in the
u.s.district court for the district of massachusetts
arising from a 1998 offering by owens corning of two series of
its notes. the defendants include certain of owens
cornings officers and directors and the underwriters for
the offering (including goldman, sachs& co., which was
the lead manager in the offering). the offering included a total
of $550million principal amount of notes, of which
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote $275million.
the lawsuit, brought by certain institutional purchasers of the
notes, alleges that the prospectus issued in connection with the
offering was false and misleading in violation of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws. the plaintiffs are
seeking, among other things, unspecified damages. the
underwriter defendants moved to dismiss the complaint on
november14,2001. by a decision dated
august26,2002, the federal district court denied the
underwriter defendants motion to dismiss, and by a
decision dated march9,2004, granted plaintiffs
motion for class certification. on november4,2005,
the underwriter defendants reached an agreement in principle to
settle all claims against them for an aggregate payment of
$8.25million, of which goldman, sachs& co. will
contribute approximately $2.5million. subsequently, on
september22, 2006, the remaining defendants advised the
court that they had entered into a separate settlement agreement
in principle. all settlements remain subject to, among other
things, documentation and court approval.
on october5,2000, owens corning filed for protection
under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
research independence matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and its affiliates, together with
other financial services firms, have received requests for
information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations in connection with their review of
research independence issues. goldman sachs has cooperated with
the requests. see business
regulation regulations applicable in and outside the
united states in parti, item1 of the annual
report on
form10-k for a
discussion of our global research settlement.
goldman, sachs& co. is one of several investment firms
that have been named as defendants in substantively identical
purported class actions filed in the u.s.district court
for the southern district of new york alleging violations of the
federal securities laws in connection with research coverage of
certain issuers and seeking compensatory damages. in one such
action, relating to coverage of rslcommunications, inc.
commenced on july5,2003, goldman, sachs&
co. moved to dismiss the complaint on
january13,2004, and the motion was denied by a
decision dated may21,2004. on
november9,2004, plaintiffs moved for class
certification, and the district court granted the motion by a
decision dated july27,2005. defendants petitioned
the u.s.court of
table of contents
appeals for the second circuit to review that certification
decision on an interlocutory basis. the appellate court, by an
order dated december22,2005, denied the petition in
part and otherwise held the petition in abeyance for
consideration by the panel assigned to review the certification
decision in the action described under ipo process
matters above, and, by an order dated january26,
2007, granted the petition, vacated the district courts
class certification and remanded for reconsideration in light of
the appellate courts certification decision in such
action. goldman, sachs& co. is also a defendant in
several actions relating to research coverage of exodus
communications, inc. that commenced beginning in may 2003. the
actions were consolidated, and on march15,2004,
goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss, and the motion
was granted with leave to replead on april17,2006.
plaintiff filed a second amended complaint on
may17,2006. on july7,2006, defendants
moved to dismiss the second amended complaint.
a purported shareholder derivative action was filed in new york
supreme court, new york county on june13,2003
against the goldman sachs group, inc. and its board of
directors, which, as amended, alleges that the directors
breached their fiduciary duties in connection with the
firms research as well as the firms ipo allocations
practices. an amended complaint was filed on
march3,2004, which was further amended on
june14,2005.
the goldman sachs group, inc., goldman, sachs& co. and
henrym. paulson,jr., the former chairman and chief
executive officer of the goldman sachs group, inc., have been
named as defendants in a purported class action filed originally
on july18,2003 in the u.s.district court for
the district of nevada on behalf of purchasers of the goldman
sachs group, inc. stock from july1,1999 through
may7,2002. the complaint alleges that defendants
breached their fiduciary duties and violated the federal
securities laws in connection with the firms research
activities. the complaint seeks, among other things, unspecified
compensatory damages and/or rescission. the action was
transferred on consent to the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york, defendants moved to dismiss the
amended complaint on august30,2004, and the district
court granted the motion with leave to amend by order dated
february17,2005. plaintiffs filed a second amended
complaint on february25,2005, and defendants filed a
motion to dismiss on march24,2005. in a decision
dated september29,2006, the federal district court
granted mr.paulsons motion to dismiss with leave to
replead but otherwise denied the motion.
enron litigation matters
goldman sachs affiliates are defendants in certain actions
arising relating to enron corp., which filed for protection
under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on
december2,2001.
goldman, sachs& co. and
co-managing
underwriters have been named as defendants in certain purported
securities class and individual actions commenced beginning on
december14,2001 in the u.s.district court for
the southern district of texas and california superior court
brought by purchasers of $222,500,000 of exchangeable notes of
enron corp. in august1999. the notes were mandatorily
exchangeable in 2002 into shares of enron oil& gas
company held by enron corp. or their cash equivalent. the
complaints also name as defendants the goldman sachs group, inc.
as well as certain past and present officers and directors of
enron corp. and the companys outside accounting firm. the
complaints generally allege violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws and/or state law,
and seek compensatory damages. goldman, sachs& co.
underwrote $111,250,000 principal amount of the notes. the
goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the class action complaint in the texas federal
court on march15,2004, and by a decision dated
december5,2005, the motion was granted as to the
goldman sachs group, inc. but denied as to goldman,
sachs& co. one of the plaintiffs moved for class
certification on august11, 2006. goldman, sachs&
co. moved for judgment on the pleadings against one plaintiff on
august21, 2006, and against all plaintiffs on
october11,2006. plaintiffs in various consolidated
actions relating to enron entered into a
table of contents
settlement with banc of america securities llc on july2,
2004 and with citigroup, inc. on june10,2005,
including with respect to claims relating to the exchangeable
notes offering, as to which affiliates of those settling
defendants were two of the three underwriters (together with
goldman, sachs& co.). the settling parties have yet to
announce what portion of the settlement will apply to the
exchangeable notes offering.
several funds which allegedly sustained investment losses of
approximately $125million in connection with secondary
market purchases of the exchangeable notes as well as zero
coupon convertible notes of enron corp. commenced an action in
the u.s.district court for the southern district of new
york on january16,2002. as amended, the lawsuit
names as defendants the underwriters of the august 1999 offering
and the companys outside accounting firm, and alleges
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws, fraud and misrepresentation. by an order dated
june24,2002, the judicial panel on multidistrict
litigation entered an order transferring that action to the
texas federal district court for purposes of coordinated or
consolidated pretrial proceedings with other matters relating to
enron corp. on march20,2002, goldman,
sachs& co. moved to dismiss the complaint. by a
decision dated december10,2003, the motion was
granted in part and denied in part. goldman, sachs&
co. sought clarification and reconsideration of the decision,
and on june13,2005, the federal district court
granted goldman, sachs& co.s motion for
reconsideration and provided for further briefing on goldman,
sachs& co.s motion to dismiss. on
august18, 2006, the funds moved for leave to file a second
amended complaint, and the district court granted the motion on
january22, 2007.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co.
have been named as defendants in two substantively identical
purported class actions filed on june5,2003 in
oregon circuit court, multnomah county, on behalf of former
shareholders of portland general corporation. the complaints
generally allege that defendants breached their fiduciary duties
in connection with portland generals 1997 merger with
enron corp., in respect of which goldman, sachs& co.
acted as financial advisor to portland general. the defendants
also include arthur andersen, llp, andersen-u.s., and certain
former officers and directors of portland general. the
complaints seek unspecified compensatory damages. in
july2003, defendants removed the actions to the
u.s.district court for the district of oregon, and the
actions were transferred by the judicial panel on multidistrict
litigation to the u.s.district court for the southern
district of texas for coordinated proceedings with other actions
relating to enron corp. on february25,2004, the
goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the action, and on august5,2004,
the federal district court granted the motion to dismiss and
denied plaintiffs motion to remand the actions to state
court. on october14,2004, plaintiffs moved for
reconsideration, and on november10,2004, the motion
was denied. on august28,2006, the other defendants
entered into a stipulation dismissing all remaining claims, but
judgment has yet to be entered.
goldman, sachs& co. is among numerous defendants in
two substantively identical actions filed in the
u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york
beginning in november 2003 seeking to recover as fraudulent
transfers and/or preferences payments made by enron corp. in
repurchasing its commercial paper shortly before its bankruptcy
filing. goldman, sachs& co., which had acted as a
commercial paper dealer for enron corp., resold to enron corp.
approximately $30million of commercial paper as principal,
and as an agent facilitated enron corp.s repurchase of
additional commercial paper from various customers who have also
been named as defendants. goldman, sachs& co. moved to
dismiss the complaints on february19,2004, but the
bankruptcy court denied the motion as well as similar motions by
other defendants by a decision dated june15,2005. on
august1,2005, various defendants including goldman,
sachs& co. petitioned to have the denial of their
motion to dismiss reviewed by the u.s.district court for
the southern district of new york.
table of contents
exodus securities litigation
by an amended complaint dated july11,2002, goldman,
sachs& co. and the other lead underwriters for the
february 2001 offering of 13,000,000shares of common stock
and $575,000,000 of
51/4%convertible
subordinated notes of exodus communications, inc. were added as
defendants in a purported class action pending in the
u.s.district court for the northern district of
california. the complaint, which also names as defendants
certain officers and directors of exodus communications, inc.,
alleges violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws and seeks compensatory damages. on
october23,2002, the underwriter defendants moved to
dismiss the complaint. by a decision dated
august19,2003, the district court granted the
defendants motion to dismiss with leave to replead, and
the plaintiffs filed a third amended complaint on
january15,2004. on march12,2004, the
underwriter defendants moved to dismiss the third amended
complaint, and by a decision dated august5,2005, the
district court denied the motion. the underwriter defendants
moved for reconsideration and clarification on
august30,2005, but the motion was denied by an order
dated september12,2005. by a decision dated
june2,2006, the district court granted summary
judgment dismissing the complaint on the grounds that the
plaintiffs purchases of exodus securities were not
traceable. on may5,2006 and may19,2006,
two new putative plaintiffs filed motions to intervene,
respectively, those motions were denied by a decision dated
august14,2006, and a motion by the putative
intervenors to vacate the resulting judgment was denied by a
decision dated october26,2006. plaintiffs filed an
appeal on november27,2006, and the underwriter
defendants
cross-appealed on
december11,2006 to the extent that certain earlier
grounds for dismissal had been rejected by the district court.
goldman, sachs& co.
underwrote5,200,000shares of common stock for a
total offering price of approximately $96,200,000, and
$230,000,000 principal amount of the notes.
on september26,2001, exodus communications, inc.
filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
montana power litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and the goldman sachs group, inc.
have been named as defendants in a purported class action
commenced originally on october1, 2001 in montana district
court, second judicial district on behalf of former shareholders
of montana power company. the complaint generally alleges that
montana power company violated montana law by failing to procure
shareholder approval of certain corporate strategies and
transactions, that the companys board breached its
fiduciary duties in pursuing those strategies and transactions,
and that goldman, sachs& co. aided and abetted the
boards breaches and rendered negligent advice in its role
as financial advisor to the company. the complaint seeks, among
other things, compensatory damages. in addition to goldman,
sachs& co. and the goldman sachs group, inc., the
defendants include montana power company, certain of its
officers and directors, an outside law firm for the montana
power company, and certain companies that purchased assets from
montana power company and its affiliates. the montana state
court denied motions to dismiss by a decision dated
august1,2002. on july18,2003, following
the bankruptcies of certain defendants in the action, defendants
removed the action to federal court, the u.s.district
court for the district of montana, butte division.
on october26,2004, a creditors committee of touch
america holdings, inc. brought an action against goldman,
sachs& co., the goldman sachs group, inc., and a
former outside law firm for montana power company in montana
district court, second judicial district. the complaint asserts
that touch america holdings, inc. is the successor to montana
power corporation and alleges substantially the same claims as
in the purported class action. defendants removed the action to
federal court on november19,2004. on
january14,2005, defendants moved to dismiss the
complaint, but the motion was denied by a decision dated
june10,2005.
table of contents
global crossing and asia global crossing securities
litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in a
consolidated class action lawsuit in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york relating to various
securities offerings by global crossing, ltd. and asia global
crossing ltd. in which goldman, sachs& co. acted as an
underwriter. the claims had originally been asserted in separate
actions, reflected in an amended complaint filed on
january28, 2003 as to global crossing, ltd. and in a
complaint filed on november8, 2002 as to asia global
crossing ltd., but the claims were consolidated into a single
amended complaint on august11, 2003, which was further
amended on march22, 2004 (including to drop the goldman
sachs group, inc. as a defendant). the consolidated action
includes claims relating to global crossing, ltd.s
concurrent april 2000 offerings of 43million shares of
common stock at $33per share and 4.6million shares
of
63/4%
cumulative preferred stock at $250per share, as well as
asia global crossing ltd.s october 2000 initial public
offering of 68,500,000shares of common stock at a price of
$7per share. goldman, sachs& co. acted as a
co-lead underwriter of both global crossing, ltd. offerings,
underwriting 12.9million shares of common stock and
1,840,000shares of convertible preferred stock for a total
offering price of approximately $886million. goldman,
sachs& co.underwrote 20,670,000shares of
common stock in the asia global crossing ltd. offering for a
total offering price of approximately $145million. the
claims assert violations of the disclosure requirements of the
federal securities laws as to such offerings and seek
compensatory and/or rescissory damages. in addition to the lead
and other underwriters in the offerings, the defendants as to
such claims originally included certain officers and directors
of global crossing, ltd. and asia global crossing ltd. as well
as the companies former outside auditors.
on april21, 2003, the underwriter defendants as to the
global crossing, ltd. offerings moved to dismiss the claims
relating to such offerings; the motion was denied in significant
part by a decision dated december18, 2003. on
july23, 2004, the underwriter defendants as to the asia
global crossing ltd. offering moved to dismiss the claims
relating to that offering. on march1, 2005, plaintiffs
entered into a definitive settlement agreement with citigroup,
inc. and certain related parties, including as to claims
asserted against such parties in respect of the various
offerings in which goldman, sachs& co. participated
for a total payment of $75million. the various officer and
director defendants as well as the former auditors had
separately entered into settlement agreements earlier. on
march23, 2006, the remaining underwriter defendants
(including goldman, sachs& co.) agreed in principle to
settle all claims for a payment of $82.5million (of which
goldman, sachs& co. contributed approximately
one-half), those underwriter defendants entered into a
definitive settlement agreement on july24, 2006, and that
settlement was approved by the federal district court on
october27, 2006.
global crossing, ltd. filed for protection under the
u.s.bankruptcy laws on january28, 2002, and asia
global crossing ltd. filed for such protection on
november17, 2002.
adelphia communications fraudulent conveyance litigations
goldman, sachs& co. is among numerous entities named
as defendants in two adversary proceedings commenced in the
u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new
york, one on july6, 2003 by a creditors committee, and the
second on or about july31, 2003 by an equity committee of
adelphia communications, inc. the nearly identical complaints
seek, among other things, to recover, as fraudulent conveyances,
payments made allegedly by adelphia communications, inc. and its
affiliates to certain brokerage firms, including approximately
$62.9million allegedly paid to goldman, sachs&
co., in respect of margin calls made in the ordinary course of
business on accounts owned by members of the family that
formerly controlled adelphia communications, inc.
table of contents
specialist matters
spear, leeds& kellogg specialists llc (slks)and
certain affiliates have received requests for information from
various governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations
as part of an industry-wide investigation relating to activities
of floor specialists in recent years. goldman sachs has
cooperated with the requests.
on march30, 2004, a final global settlement with the sec
and the nyse was announced covering certain activities during
the years 1999 through 2003 of certain specialist firms on the
nyse, including slks. without admitting or denying the
allegations, slks and the other specialist firms entered into
settlements to resolve these sec and nyse investigations of the
firms with respect to those activities. the slks settlement
involves, among other things, (i)findings by the sec and
the nyse that slks violated certain federal securities laws and
nyse rules, and in some cases failed to supervise certain
individual specialists, in connection with trades that allegedly
disadvantaged customer orders, (ii)a cease and desist
order against slks, (iii)a censure of slks,
(iv)slks agreement to pay an aggregate of
$45.3million in disgorgement and a penalty to be used to
compensate customers, (v)certain undertakings with respect
to slks systems and procedures, and (vi)slks
retention of an independent consultant to review and evaluate
certain of slks compliance systems, policies and
procedures. comparable findings were made and sanctions imposed
in the settlements with other specialist firms. the settlement
did not resolve the related private civil actions against slks
and other firms or regulatory investigations involving
individuals or conduct on other exchanges.
slks, spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p. and the goldman
sachs group, inc. are among numerous defendants named in
purported class actions brought beginning in october 2003 on
behalf of investors in the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york alleging violations of the federal
securities laws and state common law in connection with nyse
floor specialist activities. the actions seek unspecified
compensatory damages, restitution and disgorgement on behalf of
purchasers and sellers of unspecified securities between
october17, 1998 and october15, 2003. plaintiffs
filed a consolidated amended complaint on september16,
2004, defendants moved to dismiss the amended complaint on
november16, 2004, and the motion was granted in part and
denied in part by a decision dated december13, 2005.
treasury matters
on september4, 2003, the sec announced that goldman,
sachs& co. had settled an administrative proceeding
arising from certain trading in u.s.treasury bonds over an
approximately eight-minute period after goldman,
sachs& co. received an october31, 2001 telephone
call from a washington,d.c.-based political consultant
concerning a forthcoming treasury refunding announcement. the
administrative complaint alleged that goldman, sachs&
co. (i)violated section15(c)(1) and
rule15c1-2 of the
securities exchange act of 1934 as a result of the trading and
(ii)violated section15(f) of the securities exchange
act of 1934 by failing to maintain policies and procedures
specifically addressed to the possible misuse of information
obtained by consultants from confidential government sources.
without admitting or denying the allegations, goldman,
sachs& co. consented to the entry of an order that,
among other things, (i)censured goldman, sachs&
co.; (ii)directed goldman, sachs& co. to cease
and desist from committing or causing any violations of
section15(c)(1)(a) and (c)and 15(f) of, and
rule15c1-2 under,
the securities exchange act of 1934; (iii)ordered goldman,
sachs& co. to pay disgorgement and prejudgment
interest in the amount of $1,742,642, and a civil monetary
penalty of $5million; and (iv)directed goldman,
sachs& co. to conduct a review of its policies and
procedures and adopt, implement and maintain policies and
procedures consistent with the order and that review. goldman,
sachs& co. also undertook to pay $2,562,740 in
disgorgement and interest relating to certain trading in
u.s.treasury bond futures during the same eight-minute
period.
table of contents
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in a
purported class action filed on march10, 2004 in the
u.s.district court for the northern district of illinois
on behalf of holders of short positions in
30-year
u.s.treasury futures and options on the morning of
october31, 2001. the complaint alleges that the firm
purchased 30-year bonds
and futures prior to the treasurys refunding announcement
that morning based on non-public information about that
announcement, and that such purchases increased the costs of
covering such short positions. the complaint also names as
defendants the washington,d.c.-based political consultant
who allegedly was the source of the information, a former
goldman, sachs& co. economist who allegedly received
the information, and another company and one of its employees
who also allegedly received and traded on the information prior
to its public announcement. the complaint alleges violations of
the federal commodities and antitrust laws, as well as illinois
statutory and common law, and seeks, among other things,
unspecified damages including treble damages under the antitrust
laws. on june28,2004, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to dismiss the complaint, and by a decision dated
march28,2005, the district court dismissed the
antitrust and illinois state law claims but permitted the
federal commodities law claims to proceed. on
december20,2006, plaintiff moved for class
certification.
mutual fundmatters
goldman, sachs& co. and certain mutual fund affiliates
have received subpoenas and requests for information from
various governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations
including the sec as part of the industry-wide investigation
relating to the practices of mutual funds and their customers.
goldman, sachs& co. and its affiliates have cooperated
with such requests.
the goldman sachs group, inc., goldman, sachs& co. and
various asset management affiliates and employees have been
named as defendants in several putative consolidated class and
derivative actions commenced in the u.s.district court for
the southern district of new york beginning in april2004
by purported shareholders of certain goldman sachs mutual funds.
the consolidated complaint also names as nominal defendants
certain of the goldman sachs family of mutual funds. the cases
are brought on behalf of all persons or entities that held
shares in these mutual funds between april2,1999 and
january9,2004, and allege violations of the
investment company act of 1940, the investment advisers act of
1940 and common law breaches of fiduciary duty. the complaint
alleges, among other things, that goldman sachs charged the
mutual funds improper
rule12b-1 fees,
paid excessive brokerage commissions and made other undisclosed
payments to brokers in exchange for selling shares of the mutual
funds, and made untrue statements of material fact in
registration statements and reports filed pursuant to the
investment company act. the complaint further alleges that the
funds trustees, officers and directors breached their
fiduciary duties by, among other things, failing to prevent such
violations. the complaint seeks compensatory and punitive
damages; rescission of the funds investment advisory
agreements with goldman sachs and recovery of fees paid; an
accounting of all fund-related fees, commissions and other
payments; restitution of all unlawfully or
discriminatorily-obtained fees and charges; and costs and
expenses incurred in connection with these lawsuits. defendants
moved to dismiss the complaint on may2,2005, and the
motion was granted by a memorandum and order dated
january13,2006, and plaintiffs appealed on
february22,2006. on march31,2006,
plaintiffs withdrew their appeal from active consideration but
may reactivate the appeal within 15days after entry of a
mandate in an appeal involving other parties but similar issues,
or not later than march30,2007.
table of contents
refco securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and the other lead underwriters
for the august 2005 initial public offering of
26,500,000shares of common stock of refco inc. are among
the defendants in various putative class actions filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
beginning in october 2005 by refco inc. investors in response to
certain publicly reported events that culminated in the
october17,2005 filing by refco inc. and certain
affiliates for protection under u.s.bankruptcy laws. the
actions, which have been consolidated, allege violations of the
disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and seek
compensatory damages. in addition to the underwriters, the
consolidated complaint names as defendants refco inc. and
certain of its affiliates, certain officers and directors of
refco inc., thomash. lee partners, l.p. (which held a
majority of refco inc.s equity through certain funds it
manages), grant thornton (refco inc.s outside auditor),
and bawag p.s.k. bank fur arbeit und wirtschaft und
osterreichische postsparkasse aktiengesellschaft (bawag). on
september8, 2006, lead plaintiffs filed a motion for
preliminary approval of a proposed settlement with bawag, and
various defendants (including the underwriters) have objected to
certain terms of the settlement. by a decision dated
january9, 2007, the district court denied preliminary
approval of the settlement, based on such objection. goldman,
sachs& co. underwrote5,639,200shares of
common stock at a price of $22per share for a total
offering price of approximately $124million.
a purported shareholder derivative action was filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
on november2, 2005 on behalf of the goldman sachs group,
inc. against certain of its officers and directors. the
complaint alleges that the individual defendants breached their
fiduciary duties by failing to ensure that adequate due
diligence was conducted in connection with the refco inc.
initial public offering.
goldman, sachs& co. has, together with other
underwriters of the refco inc. initial public offering, received
requests for information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations. goldman, sachs& co. is
cooperating with those requests.
short-selling litigation
the goldman sachs group, inc., goldman, sachs& co. and
goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p. are among the
numerous financial services firms that have been named as
defendants in a purported class action filed on april12,
2006 in the u.s.district court for the southern district
of new york by customers who engaged in short-selling
transactions in equity securities since april12, 2000. the
amended complaint generally alleges that the customers were
charged fees in connection with the short sales but that the
applicable securities were not necessarily borrowed to effect
delivery, resulting in failed deliveries, and that the
defendants conspired to set a minimum threshold borrowing rate
for securities designated as hard to borrow. the complaint
asserts a claim under the federal antitrust laws, as well as
claims under the new york business law and common law, and seeks
treble damages as well as injunctive relief.
table of contents
fannie mae litigation
goldman, sachs& co. was added as a defendant in an
amended complaint filed on august14, 2006 in a purported
class action, and the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman,
sachs& co. were added as defendants in an amended
complaint filed on september1, 2006 in a separate
shareholder derivative action, both pending in the
u.s.district court for the district of columbia. the
complaints allegations generally arise from allegations
concerning fannie maes accounting practices and, insofar
as they relate to the goldman sachs defendants, assert
violations of the federal securities laws and common law in
connection with certain fannie mae-sponsored remic transactions
that were allegedly arranged by goldman, sachs& co.
the other defendants include fannie mae, certain of its past and
present officers and directors, accountants and other financial
services firms. on november28, 2006, the plaintiffs in the
derivative action voluntarily dismissed the goldman sachs
defendants without prejudice, subject to an agreement to toll
the statute of limitations. goldman, sachs& co. moved
to dismiss the class action claims on november13, 2006.
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
there were no matters submitted to a vote of security holders
during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended
november24,2006.
table of contents
executive officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
set forth below are the name, age, present title, principal
occupation and certain biographical information for our
executive officers as of february1, 2007, all of whom have
been appointed by and serve at the pleasure of our board of
directors.
lloyd c. blankfein, 52
mr.blankfein has been our chairman and chief executive
officer since june 2006, and a director since april 2003.
previously, he had been our president and chief operating
officer since january2004. prior to that, from april 2002
until january2004, he was a vice chairman of goldman
sachs, with management responsibility for goldman sachs
fixed income, currency and commodities division (ficc)and
equities division. prior to becoming a vice chairman, he had
served as co-head of
ficc since its formation in 1997. from 1994 to 1997, he headed
or co-headed the
currency and commodities division. mr.blankfein is not on
the board of any public company other than goldman sachs. he is
affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including as a
member of the harvard university committee on university
resources, the advisory board of the tsinghua university school
of economics and management and the governing board of the
indian school of business, an overseer of the weill medical
college of cornell university, and a director of the partnership
for new york city, catalyst and the robin hood foundation.
alan m. cohen, 56
mr.cohen has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our global head of compliance since
february2004. from 1991 until january 2004, he was a
partner in the law firm of omelveny& myers llp.
mr.cohen is also a board member of the chelsea piers
scholarship fund, a non-profit organization.
gary d. cohn, 46
mr.cohn has been our president and
co-chief operating
officer and a director since june 2006. previously, he had been
the co-head of goldman
sachs global securities businesses since january 2004. he
also had been the
co-head of equities
since 2003 and the
co-head of ficc since
september 2002. from march 2002 to september 2002, he served as
co-chief operating
officer of ficc. prior to that, beginning in 1999, mr.cohn
managed the ficc macro businesses. from 1996 to 1999, he was the
global head of goldman sachs commodities business.
mr.cohn is not on the board of any public company other
than goldman sachs. he is affiliated with certain non-profit
organizations, including as a member of the treasury borrowing
advisory committee of the securities industry and financial
markets association and as a trustee of the gilmour academy, the
nyu child study center, the nyu hospital, the nyu medical
school, the harlem childrens zone, columbia grammar and
preparatory school and american university.
edward c. forst, 46
mr.forst has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our chief administrative officer since
february2004. prior to that, he was our chief of staff for
ficc from november 2003 to february 2004 (after having served in
that position earlier from july 2000 to march 2002), our chief
of staff for the equities division from august 2003 to february
2004, and co-head of
global credit markets in ficc from march 2002 to august 2003.
prior to july 2000, mr.forst served as
co-head of our global
bank debt business. mr.forst serves as
co-chair of the
securities industry and financial markets association. he also
serves as a trustee of the woods hole oceanographic institution,
a non-profit
organization, and as
co-chair of the harvard
university committee on student excellence and opportunity.
table of contents
kevin w. kennedy, 58
mr.kennedy has been our executive vice
president human capital management since december
2001. from 1999 until 2001, he served as a member of the
executive office. from 1994 to 1999, he served as head of the
americas group, in the investment banking division, and, from
1988 to 1994, as head of corporate finance. mr.kennedy is
a life trustee and a former chairman of the board of hamilton
college, a managing director and secretary and treasurer of the
board of the metropolitan opera, a trustee of the new york
public library, a member of the board of directors of the
wallace foundation and an honorary trustee of the chewonki
foundation.
gregory k. palm, 58
mr.palm has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs since may 1999, and our general counsel and head or
co-head of the legal
department since may 1992.
esta e. stecher, 49
ms.stecher has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our general counsel and
co-head of the legal
department since december 2000. from 1994 to 2000, she was head
of the firms tax department, over which she continues to
have senior oversight responsibility. she is also a trustee of
columbia university.
david a. viniar, 51
mr.viniar has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our chief financial officer since may1999. he
has been the head of operations, technology, finance and
services division since december2002. he was head of the
finance division and
co-head of credit risk
management and advisory and firmwide risk from
december2001 to december2002. mr.viniar was
co-head of operations,
finance and resources from march1999 to
december2001. he was chief financial officer of the
goldman sachs group, l.p. from march1999 to may1999.
from july1998 until march1999, he was deputy chief
financial officer and from 1994 until july1998,
hewas head of finance, with responsibility for controllers
and treasury. from 1992 to 1994, he was head of treasury and
prior to that was in the structured finance department of
investment banking. he also serves on the board of trustees of
union college.
john s. weinberg, 49
mr.weinberg has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs
since june 2006. he has been
co-head of goldman
sachs investment banking division since december 2002.
from january 2002 to december 2002, he was
co-head of the
investment banking division in the americas. prior to that, he
served as co-head of
the investment banking services department since 1997. he is
affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including as a
board member at the new
york-presbyterian
hospital, the steppingstone foundation, the greenwich country
day school and community
anti-drug coalitions of
america.
jon winkelried, 47
mr.winkelried has been our president and
co-chief operating
officer and a director since june 2006. previously, he had been
the co-head of goldman
sachs investment banking division since january 2005. from
2000 to 2005, he was
co-head of ficc. from
1999 to 2000, he was head of ficc in europe. from 1995 to 1999,
he was responsible for goldman sachs leveraged finance
business. mr.winkelried is not on the board of any public
company other than goldman sachs. he is also a trustee of the
university of chicago.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related
stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market on which our common stock is traded is the
nyse. information relating to the high and low sales prices per
share of our common stock, as reported by the consolidated tape
association, for each full quarterly period during fiscal 2005
and 2006 is set forth under the heading supplemental
financial information common stock price range
in partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k. as of
january26, 2007, there were 6,804 holders of record of our
common stock.
during fiscal 2005 and 2006, dividends of $0.25per share
of common stock were declared on december15,2004,
march16,2005, june15,2005,
september19,2005 and december14,2005,
and dividends of $0.35per share of common stock were
declared on march13,2006, june12,2006
and september11,2006. the holders of our common
stock share proportionately on a per share basis in all
dividends and other distributions on common stock declared by
our board of directors.
the declaration of dividends by goldman sachs is subject to the
discretion of our board of directors. our board of directors
will take into account such matters as general business
conditions, our financial results, capital requirements,
contractual, legal and regulatory restrictions on the payment of
dividends by us to our shareholders or by our subsidiaries to
us, the effect on our debt ratings and such other factors as our
board of directors may deem relevant. see
businessregulation in parti,
item1 of the annual report on
form10-k for a
discussion of potential regulatory limitations on our receipt of
funds from our regulated subsidiaries.
the table below sets forth the information with respect to
purchases made by or on behalf of the goldman sachs group, inc.
or any affiliated purchaser (as defined in
rule10b-18(a)(3)
under the securities exchange act of 1934), of our common stock
during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended
november24,2006.
total number of
maximum number
total
average
shares purchased
of shares that may
number
price
as part of publicly
yet be purchased
of shares
paid per
announced plans
under the plans or
period
purchased(2)
share
or programs(3)
programs(3)
month#1
(august26, 2006 to
september29, 2006)
7,109,500
$
165.99
7,109,500
66,231,884
month#2
(september30, 2006 to
october27, 2006)
11,668,000
$
179.68
11,668,000
54,563,884
month#3
(october28, 2006 to
november24, 2006)
1,994,971
$
188.26
1,994,971
52,568,913
total(1)
20,772,471
$
175.82
20,772,471
(1)
goldman sachs generally does not repurchase shares of its common
stock as part of the repurchase program during self-imposed
black-out periods, which run from the last two weeks
of a fiscal quarter through and including the date of the
earnings release for such quarter.
(2)
no shares were purchased other than through our publicly
announced repurchase program during the fourth quarter of our
fiscal year ended november24, 2006.
(3)
on march21, 2000, we announced that our board of directors
had approved a repurchase program, pursuant to which up to
15million shares of our common stock may be repurchased.
this repurchase program was increased byan aggregate of
220million shares by resolutions of our board of directors
adopted on june18, 2001, march18, 2002,
november20,2002, january30, 2004,
january25, 2005, september16, 2005 and
september11,2006. we use our repurchase program to
help maintain the appropriate level of common equity and to
substantially offset
table of contents
increases in share count over
time resulting from employee share-based compensation. the
repurchase program is effected primarily through regular
open-market purchases and is influenced by our overall capital
position (the comparison of our capital requirements to our
current level of available capital), general market conditions
and the prevailing price and trading volumes of our common
stock. the total remaining authorization under the repurchase
program was 39,890,613 shares as of january26, 2007. the
repurchase program has no set expiration or termination date.
information relating to compensation plans under which equity
securities of the registrant are authorized for issuance is set
forth in partiii, item12 of the annual report on
form10-k.
item6.
selected financial data
the selected financial data table is set forth under
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations
index
page
no.
introduction
executive
overview
business
environment
certain risk
factors that may affect our business
critical
accounting policies
fair value
goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets
use of
estimates
results of
operations
financial
overview
segment
operating results
geographic
data
off-balance-sheet
arrangements
equity
capital
contractual
obligations and commitments
risk
management
risk
management structure
market risk
credit risk
credit risk on
derivatives
liquidity and
funding risk
operational
risk
recent
accounting developments
table of contents
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global investment banking, securities
and investment management firm that provides a wide range of
services worldwide to a substantial and diversified client base
that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments
and high-net-worth individuals.
our activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking. we provide a broad range of
investment banking services to a diverse group of corporations,
financial institutions, investment funds, governments and
individuals.
trading and principal investments. we facilitate client
transactions with a diverse group of corporations, financial
institutions, investment funds, governments and individuals and
take proprietary positions through market making in, trading of
and investing in fixed income and equity products, currencies,
commodities and derivatives on these products. in addition, we
engage in specialist and market-making activities on equities
and options exchanges and we clear client transactions on major
stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection
with our merchant banking and other investing activities, we
make principal investments directly and through funds that we
raise and manage.
asset management and securities services. we provide
investment advisory and financial planning services and offer
investment products (primarily through separate accounts and
funds) across all major asset classes to a diverse group of
institutions and individuals worldwide and provide prime
brokerage services, financing services and securities lending
services to institutional clients, including hedge funds, mutual
funds, pension funds and foundations, and to high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
unless specifically stated otherwise, all references to 2006,
2005 and 2004 refer to our fiscal years ended, or the dates, as
the context requires, november24, 2006, november25,
2005 and november26, 2004, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman sachs, we,
us and our, we mean the goldman sachs
group, inc. (group inc.), a delaware corporation, and its
consolidated subsidiaries. references herein to the annual
report on
form10-k are to
our annual report on
form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24, 2006.
in this discussion, we have included statements that may
constitute forward-looking statements within the
meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are
not historical facts but instead represent only our beliefs
regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are
inherently uncertain and outside our control. these statements
may relate to our future plans and objectives, among other
things. by identifying these statements for you in this manner,
we are alerting you to the possibility that our actual results
may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results
indicated in these forward-looking statements. important factors
that could cause our results to differ, possibly materially,
from those indicated in the forward-looking statements include,
among others, those discussed below under
certain risk factors that may affect our
business as well as risk factors in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k and
cautionary statement pursuant to the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995 in parti, item1
of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
executive overview
our diluted earnings per common share were $19.69 for 2006,
compared with $11.21 for 2005. return on average tangible common
shareholders
equity(1)
was 39.8% and return on average common shareholders equity
was 32.8%. excluding non-cash expenses of $637million
related to the accounting for certain share-based awards under
sfasno.123-r(2),
diluted earnings per common share for the year were
$20.57(2),
return on average tangible common shareholders
equity(1)was
41.8%(2)and
return on average common shareholders equity was
34.4%(2).
in 2006, we generated record diluted earnings per common share,
which exceeded the prior year record results by 76%. each of our
three segments achieved record results. the increase in trading
and principal investments reflected significantly higher net
revenues in fixed income, currency and commodities (ficc),
equities and principal investments. the increase in ficc
reflected particularly strong performances across all major
businesses. during 2006, ficc operated in an environment
characterized by strong customer-driven activity and favorable
market opportunities. the increase in equities primarily
reflected significantly higher net revenues in our customer
franchise business. during 2006, equities operated in a
favorable environment characterized by strong customer-driven
activity, generally higher equity prices and favorable market
opportunities, although volatility levels were generally low. in
ficc and equities, as a result of the favorable trading and
investing opportunities for our clients and ourselves, we
increased our market risk, particularly in equity products, to
capitalize on these opportunities. we grew our balance sheet as
needed to support these opportunities as well as to support
increased activity in securities services. the increase in
principal investments reflected a significant gain related to
our investment in the ordinary shares of industrial and
commercial bank of china limited (icbc)and higher gains
and overrides from other principal investments, partially offset
by a smaller, but still significant, gain related to our
investment in the convertible preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui
financial group, inc. (smfg). the increase in investment banking
was due to significantly higher net revenues in underwriting and
financial advisory, as we benefited from strong client activity
levels, reflecting favorable equity and financing markets,
strong ceo confidence and growth in financial sponsor activity.
the increase in asset management and securities services was
primarily due to higher assets under management and
significantly higher incentive fees, as well as significantly
higher global customer balances in securities services. assets
under management increased $144billion or 27% to a record
$676billion, including net asset inflows of
$94billion during 2006.
looking forward to 2007, our investment banking backlog at the
end of 2006 was at its highest level since
2000(3).
in addition to potential growth in the businesses and geographic
areas in which we currently operate, the expansion of the
economies of china, india, russia and brazil, as well as those
of the middle east offer new opportunities for us to increase
our presence in those markets. in investment banking, there is
growth potential to broaden our client base by providing
strategic and financing advice and capital to
middle-market
companies. we also see opportunities to advise governments and
investors on the sale and purchase of public infrastructure
assets. in addition, we are building a private banking
capability as part of our strategy to provide a
full-range of services
to our private wealth management clients.
though we generated record operating results in 2006, our
business, by its nature, does not produce predictable earnings.
our results in any given period can be materially affected by
conditions in global financial markets and economic conditions
generally. for a further discussion of the factors that may
affect our future operating results, see
certain risk factors that may affect our
business below as well as risk factors in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
(1)
return on average tangible common shareholders equity is
computed by dividing net earnings applicable to common
shareholders by average monthly tangible common
shareholders equity. see results of
operations financial overview below for
further information regarding our calculation of return on
average tangible common shareholders equity.
table of contents
(2)
statement of financial accounting standards
(sfas)no.123-r,
share-based payment, focuses primarily on accounting
for transactions in which an entity obtains employee services in
exchange for share-based payments. in the first quarter of 2006,
we adopted
sfasno.123-r,
which requires that share-based awards held by employees that
were
retirement-eligible,
including those subject to non-compete agreements, be expensed
in the year of grant. in addition to expensing current year
awards, prior year awards must continue to be amortized over the
relevant service period. therefore, our compensation and
benefits expenses in 2006 included (and, to a lesser extent,
2007 and 2008 will include) both amortization of prior year
share-based awards held by employees that were
retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
and new awards granted to those employees. we believe that
presenting our results excluding the impact of the continued
amortization of these prior year share-based awards increases
the comparability of
period-to-period
operating results and allows for a more meaningful
representation of the relationship of current period
compensation to net revenues.
the following tables set forth a reconciliation of diluted
earnings per common share, common shareholders equity and
net earnings applicable to common shareholders, as reported, to
these items excluding the impact of the continued amortization
of these prior year share-based awards held by employees that
were retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r:
year ended
november 2006
diluted earnings per common share
$
19.69
impact of the continued
amortization of prior year share-based awards, net of tax
0.88
diluted earnings per common share,
excluding the impact of the continued amortization of prior year
share-based awards
$
20.57
average for the
year ended
november 2006
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
31,048
preferred stock
(2,400
)
common shareholders equity
28,648
impact of the continued
amortization of prior year share-based awards, net of tax
(122
)
common shareholders equity,
excluding the impact of the continued amortization of prior year
share-based awards
28,526
goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts (see
footnote1 above)
(5,013
)
tangible common shareholders
equity (see footnote1 above), excluding the impact of the
continued amortization of prior year share-based awards
$
23,513
year ended
november 2006
(in millions)
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders
$
9,398
impact of the continued
amortization of prior year share-based awards, net of tax
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders, excluding the impact of the continued amortization
of prior year share-based awards
$
9,819
(3)
our investment banking backlog represents an estimate of our
future net revenues from investment banking transactions where
we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than
not.
table of contents
business environment
as an investment banking, securities and investment management
firm, our businesses are materially affected by conditions in
the financial markets and economic conditions generally, both in
the united states and elsewhere around the world. a favorable
business environment is generally characterized by, among other
factors, high global gross domestic product growth, stable
geopolitical conditions, transparent and efficient capital
markets, low inflation, high business and investor confidence
and strong business earnings. these factors provide a positive
climate for our investment banking activities, for many of our
trading businesses and for wealth creation, which contributes to
growth in our asset management business. although global
short-term interest rates rose to modest levels and yield curves
continued to flatten in 2006, economic conditions remained
favorable, as global equity prices generally rose, core
inflation was broadly contained and corporate activity
strengthened. for a further discussion of how market conditions
can affect our businesses, see certain risk
factors that may affect our business below as well as
risk factors in parti, item1a of the
annual report on
form10-k. a
further discussion of the business environment in 2006 is set
forth below.
global. after solid economic growth in 2005, the global
economy grew at a strong pace in 2006, particularly during the
first half of the year. however, during the second half of the
year, economic growth in the united states and japan showed some
signs of deceleration, while the pace of growth in the eurozone
economy appeared to strengthen. corporate activity was very
strong, as mergers and acquisitions and equity and debt
underwriting volumes increased significantly compared with 2005.
the u.s.federal reserve continued to raise rates in the
first half of the year, increasing its federal funds target rate
by a total of 125basis points. despite the increase in
short-term rates, fixed income markets were favorable as
long-term bond yields remained low and the credit environment
remained strong. oil prices remained high throughout the year,
despite declining during our fourth quarter, but this did not
appear to materially affect consumer spending or global growth.
in the currency markets, the u.s.dollar weakened against
most major currencies, as well as against such emerging market
currencies as the brazilian real, chinese yuan and korean won.
united states. the u.s.economy grew at a strong
pace during the year as financial conditions remained supportive
of economic activity. real gross domestic product rose by 3.4%
in the 2006 calendar year, driven principally by strength in the
industrial sector, solid consumer expenditure growth and a
strong labor market. this growth occurred despite a decline in
the housing market and residential investment. after slowing
modestly in the beginning of 2006, the rate of inflation
increased, particularly in the second quarter, as energy prices
rose significantly. measures of core inflation also accelerated,
although they eased towards the end of the calendar year. in
response to the strong economic growth and rising inflation, the
u.s.federal reserve raised its federal funds target rate
by 25basis points in each of its meetings in 2006 through
june, bringing the rate to 5.25%. however, the federal reserve
kept rates unchanged for the remainder of the year as the pace
of growth moderated, reflecting a decline in the
u.s.housing market and the delayed effects of higher
interest rates and energy prices. despite the rise in short-term
interest rates, the
10-year
u.s.treasury note yield ended the year only 12basis
points higher at 4.55%. the dow jones industrial average,
s&p 500 index and nasdaq composite index increased by 12%,
10% and 9%, respectively, during our fiscal year.
europe. the pace of economic growth in europe accelerated
as real gross domestic product in the eurozone economy grew by
approximately 2.7% in the 2006 calendar year. despite a higher
euro, economic conditions in the eurozone countries improved
throughout the year, and consumer sentiment began to improve as
a result of lower unemployment levels and higher domestic
demand. after leaving rates unchanged for over two years, the
european central bank raised interest rates by a total of
125basis points during our 2006 fiscal year, bringing its
policy rate to 3.25%. in the united kingdom, real gross domestic
product growth accelerated to approximately 2.7% in the 2006
calendar year, primarily reflecting strong investment spending.
the bank of england increased interest rates by 50basis
points to 5.00%, after having reduced rates by 25basis
points in 2005.
table of contents
long-term bond yields in both the eurozone and the united
kingdom ended our fiscal year modestly higher. reflecting the
improvement in economic growth, european equity markets
increased significantly during our fiscal year.
asia. japans economy grew at a relatively strong
pace for the second year in a row, with real gross domestic
product increasing by approximately 2.2% in the 2006 calendar
year. the recovery in private investment and domestic demand
continued to drive much of the improvement in the first part of
the year, while exports drove real gross domestic product growth
toward the end of the calendar year. the unemployment rate fell
to 4.2% in 2006 from 4.4% in calendar 2005. the bank of japan
ended its zero interest rate policy, which had been in place
since early 2001, and raised the target overnight call rate by
25basis points during our fiscal year. the yield on
10-year japanese
government bonds increased slightly, ending our fiscal year up
17basis points. despite slightly higher
short- and long-term
interest rates, financial conditions remained supportive of
economic activity. the yen appreciated slightly against the
u.s.dollar, but declined against most other major
currencies, while the nikkei 225 index increased 6% during our
fiscal year.
elsewhere in asia, chinas real gross domestic product
growth remained robust, with growth particularly reliant on net
exports, as demonstrated by chinas large current account
surplus. china continued to allow its currency to appreciate
modestly, with evidence of acceleration during the second half
of the calendar year, ending our fiscal year nearly 3% higher
against the u.s.dollar. other currencies in the region
also strengthened against the u.s.dollar, including the
korean won, philippine peso and the taiwan dollar. growth in
india also remained strong, which, together with china,
supported growth throughout the region. equity markets across
the region generally rose, with markets in china, india, hong
kong, south korea and taiwan all posting significant gains
during our fiscal year.
certain risk factors that may affect our business
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in
our businesses, including market, liquidity, credit,
operational, legal and regulatory risks. for a discussion of how
management seeks to manage some of these risks, see
risk management below. a summary of the
more important factors that could affect our business follows
below. for a further discussion of these and other important
factors that could affect our business, see risk
factors in parti, item1a of the annual report
on form10-k.
market conditions and market risk. our businesses are
materially affected by conditions in the global financial
markets and economic conditions generally, and these conditions
may change suddenly and dramatically. a favorable business
environment is generally characterized by, among other factors,
high global gross domestic product growth, stable geopolitical
conditions, transparent and efficient capital markets, low
inflation, high business and investor confidence and strong
business earnings. unfavorable or uncertain economic and market
conditions, which can be caused by outbreaks of hostilities or
other geopolitical instability, declines in business confidence,
increases in inflation, corporate, political or other scandals
that reduce investor confidence in capital markets, natural
disasters or pandemics or a combination of these or other
factors, have adversely affected, and may in the future
adversely affect, our business and profitability in many ways,
including the following:
we have been operating in a low interest rate market for the
past several years. increasing or high interest rates and/or
widening credit spreads, especially if such changes are rapid,
may create a less favorable environment for certain of our
businesses.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of
our businesses and generally maintain large trading, specialist
and investing positions. market fluctuations and volatility may
adversely affect the value of those positions, including, but
not limited to, our interest rate and credit products, currency,
commodity and equity positions and our merchant banking
investments, or may reduce our willingness to enter into new
transactions. from time
table of contents
to time, we have incurred significant trading losses in periods
of market turbulence. conversely, certain of our trading
businesses depend on market volatility to provide trading and
arbitrage opportunities, and decreases in volatility may reduce
these opportunities and adversely affect the results of these
businesses.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings
and mergers and acquisitions may have an adverse effect on our
revenues and, because we may be unable to reduce expenses
correspondingly, our profit margins. in particular, because a
significant portion of our investment banking revenues are
derived from our participation in large transactions, a decrease
in the number of large transactions due to uncertain or
unfavorable market conditions may adversely affect our
investment banking business.
pricing and other competitive pressures have continued, even as
the volume and number of investment banking transactions have
increased. in addition, the trend in the underwriting business
toward multiple book runners and co-managers handling
transactions, where previously there would have been a single
book runner, has adversely affected our business and reduced our
revenues.
reductions in the level of the equity markets or increases in
interest rates tend to reduce the value of our clients
portfolios, which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for
managing assets. increases in interest rates or attractive
conditions in other investments could cause our clients to
transfer their assets out of our funds or other products. even
in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable economic or market
conditions, investment performance by our asset management
business below the performance of benchmarks or competitors
could result in a decline in assets under management and in the
incentive and management fees we receive as well as reputational
damage that might make it more difficult to attract new
investors.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant
losses in our market-making, proprietary trading and investing,
block trading, merchant banking, underwriting and lending
businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand our
proprietary trading and investing businesses or commit capital
to facilitate customer-driven business. for example, in recent
years large blocks of securities have increasingly been sold in
block trades rather than on a marketed basis, which increases
the risk that goldman sachs may be unable to resell the
purchased securities at favorable prices and may incur
significant losses as a result. moreover, because of
concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic
and market conditions are generally favorable for others in the
industry. we also regularly enter into large transactions as
part of our trading businesses. the number and size of such
transactions may affect our results of operations in a given
period.
the volume of transactions that we execute for our clients and
as a specialist or market maker may decline, which would reduce
the revenues we receive from commissions and spreads. in
addition, competitive pressures and other industry factors,
including the increasing use by our clients of low-cost
electronic trading, could cause a reduction in commissions and
spreads. in our specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock
exchange rules to maintain an orderly market, including by
purchasing shares in a declining market. this may result in
trading losses and an increased need for liquidity. weakness in
global equity markets and the trading of securities in multiple
markets and on multiple exchanges could adversely impact our
trading businesses and impair the value of our goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets. in addition, competitive
pressures have been particularly intense in the context of block
trades. for a further discussion of our goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, see  critical
accounting policies goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets below.
table of contents
while we employ a broad and diversified set of risk monitoring
and risk mitigation techniques, those techniques and the
judgments that accompany their application cannot anticipate
every economic and financial outcome or the specifics and timing
of such outcomes. thus, we may, in the course of our activities,
incur losses.
market volatility has been relatively low in recent years. an
increase in volatility would increase our measured risk, which
might cause us to reduce our proprietary positions or to reduce
certain of our business activities. in such circumstances, we
may not be able to reduce our positions or our exposure in a
timely, cost-effective way or in a manner sufficient to offset
the increase in measured risk.
liquidity risk. liquidity is essential to our businesses.
our liquidity could be impaired by an inability to access
secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an inability to access
funds from our subsidiaries, an inability to sell assets or
unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this situation may
arise due to circumstances that we are unable to control, such
as a general market disruption or an operational problem that
affects third parties or us. the financial instruments that we
hold and the contracts to which we are a party are increasingly
complex, as we employ structured products to benefit our clients
and ourselves, and these complex structured products often do
not have readily available markets to access in times of
liquidity stress. growth of our proprietary investing activities
may lead to situations where the holdings from these activities
represent a significant portion of specific markets, which could
restrict liquidity for our positions. further, our ability to
sell assets may be impaired if other market participants are
seeking to sell similar assets at the same time.
our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a reduction
in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and
competitive position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our
access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under
certain bilateral provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions,
counterparties could be permitted to terminate contracts with
goldman sachs or require us to post additional collateral.
termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our
liquidity by requiring us to find other sources of financing or
to make significant cash payments or securities movements. for a
discussion of the potential impact on goldman sachs of a
reduction in our credit ratings, see liquidity
and funding risk credit ratings below.
credit risk. we are exposed to the risk that third
parties that owe us money, securities or other assets will not
perform their obligations. these parties may default on their
obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity,
operational failure or other reasons. we are also subject to the
risk that our rights against third parties may not be
enforceable in all circumstances. in addition, a deterioration
in the credit quality of third parties whose securities or
obligations we hold could result in losses and/or adversely
affect our ability to rehypothecate or otherwise use those
securities or obligations for liquidity purposes. a significant
downgrade in the credit ratings of our counterparties could also
have a negative impact on our results. the amount and duration
of our credit exposures have been increasing over the past
several years, as has the breadth of the entities to which we
have credit exposures. as a clearing member firm, we finance our
client positions, and we could be held responsible for the
defaults or misconduct of our clients. in addition, we have
experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure to extend and
price credit at levels that may not always fully compensate us
for the risks we take. in particular, corporate clients
sometimes seek to require credit commitments from us in
connection with investment banking and other assignments.
although we regularly review credit exposures to specific
clients and counterparties and to specific industries, countries
and regions that we believe may present credit concerns, default
risk may arise from events or circumstances that are difficult
to detect or foresee, particularly as new business initiatives
lead us to transact with a broader array of clients, with new
asset classes and in new markets. in addition, concerns about,
or a default by, one institution could lead to significant
liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other institutions,
which in turn could adversely affect goldman sachs.
table of contents
operational risk. shortcomings or failures in our
internal processes, people or systems, or external events could
lead to impairment of our liquidity, financial loss, disruption
of our businesses, liability to clients, regulatory intervention
or reputational damage. for example, our businesses are highly
dependent on our ability to process, on a daily basis, a large
number of transactions across numerous and diverse markets in
many currencies. the transactions we process have become
increasingly complex and often must adhere to client-specific
guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory standards. despite
the contingency plans and facilities we have in place, our
ability to conduct business may be adversely impacted by a
disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses
and the communities in which we are located. this may include a
disruption involving electrical, communications, transportation
or other services used by goldman sachs or third parties with
which we conduct business.
legal and regulatory risk. we are subject to extensive
and evolving regulation in jurisdictions around the world.
substantial legal liability or a significant regulatory action
against goldman sachs could have material adverse financial
effects or cause significant reputational harm to goldman sachs,
which in turn could seriously harm our business prospects. firms
in the financial services industry have been operating in a
difficult regulatory environment. we face significant legal
risks in our businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of
damages and penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory
proceedings against financial institutions remain high. for a
discussion of how we account for our legal and regulatory
exposures, see use of estimates below.
table of contents
critical accounting policies
fair value
the use of fair value to measure our financial instruments, with
related unrealized gains or losses generally recognized
immediately in our results of operations, is fundamental to our
financial statements and is our most critical accounting policy.
the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which
the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction
between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation
sale.
in determining fair value, we separate our financial instruments
into three categories cash (i.e., nonderivative)
trading instruments, derivative contracts and principal
investments (included within the principal investments component
of our trading and principal investments segment), as set forth
in the following table:
financial instruments by category
(in millions)
as of november
financial
financial
financial
instruments sold,
financial
instruments sold,
instruments
but not yet
instruments
but not yet
owned, at
purchased, at
owned, at
purchased, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
cash trading instruments
$
247,031
(1)
$
87,244
$
210,042
$
89,735
derivative contracts
67,543
65,496
58,532
57,829
principal investments
13,962
(2)
3,065
(3)
6,526
(2)
1,507
(3)
total
$
328,536
$
155,805
$
275,100
$
149,071
(1)
includes securities held by our bank and insurance subsidiaries,
which are accounted for as available-for-sale
(afs)under sfasno.115, accounting for
certain investments in debt and equity securities. the
following table sets forth the types of afs securities and their
maturity profile:
as of november 2006
under
10years
one year
1-5years
5-10years
or greater
total
(in millions)
mortgage-backed and other federal
agency securities
$
2,374
$
1,031
$
$
$
3,662
investment-grade corporate bonds
1,403
1,519
collateralized debt obligations
4,199
4,512
other debt securities
total
$
2,704
$
6,664
$
$
$
9,945
(2)
excludes assets related to consolidated merchant banking funds
of $6.03billion and $1.93billion as of
november2006 and november 2005, respectively, for which
goldman sachs is not at risk.
(3)
represents an economic hedge on the unrestricted shares of
common stock underlying our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg. for a further discussion of our
investment in smfg, see principal
investments below.
table of contents
cash trading instruments. the following table sets forth
the valuation of our cash trading instruments by level of price
transparency:
cash trading instruments by price transparency
(in millions)
as of november
financial
financial
financial
instruments sold,
financial
instruments sold,
instruments
but not yet
instruments
but not yet
owned, at
purchased, at
owned, at
purchased, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
quoted prices or alternative
pricing sources with reasonable price transparency
$
231,012
$
87,110
$
198,233
$
89,565
little or no price transparency
16,019
11,809
total
$
247,031
$
87,244
$
210,042
$
89,735
fair values of our cash trading instruments are generally
obtained from quoted market prices in active markets, broker or
dealer price quotations, or alternative pricing sources with
reasonable levels of price transparency. the types of
instruments valued in this manner include u.s.government
and agency securities, other sovereign government obligations,
liquid mortgage products, investment-grade and high-yield
corporate bonds, listed equities, money market securities,
state, municipal and provincial obligations, and physical
commodities.
certain cash trading instruments trade infrequently and have
little or no price transparency. such instruments include
certain corporate bank loans, mortgage whole loans and
distressed debt. we value these instruments initially at cost
and generally do not adjust valuations unless there is
substantive evidence supporting a change in the value of the
underlying instrument or valuation assumptions (such as similar
market transactions, changes in financial ratios or changes in
the credit ratings of the underlying companies). where there is
evidence supporting a change in the value, we use valuation
methodologies such as the present value of known or estimated
cash flows.
cash trading instruments we own (long positions) are marked to
bid prices, and instruments we have sold but not yet purchased
(short positions) are marked to offer prices. in certain
circumstances, such as for positions that are illiquid or have
transfer restrictions, the fair value reflects liquidity
valuation adjustments based on market evidence or predetermined
policies. for certain highly illiquid positions,
managements estimates are used to determine these
liquidity valuation adjustments. see recent
accounting developments below for a discussion of the
impact of sfasno.157, fair value
measurements on the valuation of financial instruments.
table of contents
derivative contracts. derivative contracts consist of
exchange-traded and
over-the-counter
(otc)derivatives. the following table sets forth the fair
value of our exchange-traded and otc derivative assets and
liabilities:
derivative assets and liabilities
(in millions)
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
exchange-traded derivatives
$
14,407
$
13,851
$
10,869
$
9,083
otc derivatives
53,136
51,645
47,663
48,746
total
$
67,543
(1)
$
65,496
(2)
$
58,532
(1)
$
57,829
(2)
(1)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support agreements of
$24.06billion and $22.61billion as of
november2006 and november 2005, respectively.
(2)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit support agreements of
$16.00billion and $16.10billion as of november 2006
and november 2005, respectively.
fair values of our exchange-traded derivatives are generally
determined from quoted market prices. otc derivatives are valued
using valuation models. we use a variety of valuation models
including the present value of known or estimated cash flows and
option-pricing models. the valuation models that we use to
derive the fair values of our otc derivatives require inputs
including contractual terms, market prices, yield curves, credit
curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates and
correlations of such inputs. the selection of a model to value
an otc derivative depends upon the contractual terms of, and
specific risks inherent in, the instrument as well as the
availability of pricing information in the market. we generally
use similar models to value similar instruments. where possible,
we verify the values produced by our pricing models to market
transactions. for otc derivatives that trade in liquid markets,
such as generic forwards, swaps and options, model selection
does not involve significant judgment because market prices are
readily available. for otc derivatives that trade in less liquid
markets, model selection requires more judgment because such
instruments tend to be more complex and pricing information is
less available in these markets. price transparency is
inherently more limited for more complex structures because they
often combine one or more product types, requiring additional
inputs such as correlations and volatilities. as markets
continue to develop and more pricing information becomes
available, we continue to review and refine the models that we
use.
at the inception of an otc derivative contract (day one), we
value the contract at the model value if we can verify all of
the significant model inputs to observable market data and
verify the model to market transactions. when appropriate,
valuations are adjusted to reflect various factors such as
liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations. these
adjustments are generally based on market evidence or
predetermined policies. in certain circumstances, such as for
highly illiquid positions, managements estimates are used
to determine these adjustments.
where we cannot verify all of the significant model inputs to
observable market data and verify the model to market
transactions, we value the contract at the transaction price at
inception and, consequently, record no day one gain or loss in
accordance with emerging issues task force (eitf)issue
no.02-3,
issues involved in accounting for derivative contracts
held for trading purposes and contracts involved in energy
trading and risk management activities.
following day one, we adjust the inputs to our valuation models
only to the extent that changes in these inputs can be verified
by similar market transactions, third-party pricing services
and/or broker quotes, or can be derived from other substantive
evidence such as empirical market data. in circumstances where
we cannot verify the model to market transactions, it is
possible that a different valuation model could produce a
materially different estimate of fair value. see
recent accounting developments below for
a discussion of the impact of sfasno.157 on the
valuation of financial instruments.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the fair values of our otc
derivative assets and liabilities by product and by remaining
contractual maturity:
otc derivatives
(in millions)
as of november 2006
assets
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates(1)
$
2,432
$
1,706
$
5,617
$
5,217
$
6,201
$
21,173
currencies
5,578
3,103
1,669
12,259
commodities
3,892
1,215
5,836
1,258
12,432
equities
1,430
1,134
1,329
2,144
1,235
7,272
total
$
13,332
$
4,998
$
15,885
$
10,288
$
8,633
$
53,136
liabilities
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates(1)
$
2,807
$
1,242
$
6,064
$
3,582
$
5,138
$
18,833
currencies
6,859
1,290
2,582
11,859
commodities
3,078
4,253
1,643
9,905
equities
3,235
1,682
2,615
3,239
11,048
total
$
15,979
$
4,872
$
15,514
$
8,958
$
6,322
$
51,645
as of november 2005
assets
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates(1)
$
1,898
$
$
4,634
$
5,310
$
5,221
$
17,530
currencies
5,825
1,031
1,843
1,046
10,664
commodities
3,772
1,369
8,130
1,374
14,765
equities
1,168
1,171
1,403
4,704
total
$
12,663
$
4,038
$
15,439
$
9,006
$
6,517
$
47,663
liabilities
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates(1)
$
1,956
$
$
5,327
$
3,142
$
4,970
$
15,985
currencies
6,295
3,978
12,208
commodities
3,852
2,080
5,904
1,865
13,863
equities
1,308
1,068
2,079
1,993
6,690
total
$
13,411
$
4,313
$
17,288
$
7,436
$
6,298
$
48,746
(1)
includes credit-related derivatives.
we enter into certain otc option transactions that provide us or
our counterparties with the right to extend the maturity of the
underlying contract. the fair value of these option contracts is
not material to the aggregate fair value of our otc derivative
portfolio. in the tables above, for option contracts that
require settlement by delivery of an underlying derivative
instrument, the remaining contractual maturity is generally
classified based upon the maturity date of the underlying
derivative instrument. in those instances where the underlying
instrument does not have a maturity date or either counterparty
has the right to settle in cash, the remaining contractual
maturity is generally based upon the option expiration date.
table of contents
principal investments. the following table sets forth the
carrying value of the investments included within the principal
investments component of our trading and principal investments
segment. these investments consist of private investments,
investments in the convertible preferred stock of smfg and the
ordinary shares of icbc, and other public investments:
principal investments
(in millions)
as of november
corporate
real estate
total
corporate
real estate
total
private
$
2,741
$
$
3,296
$
1,538
$
$
2,254
public
subtotal(1)
3,675
4,263
1,723
2,468
smfg convertible
preferred
stock(2)
(3)
4,505
4,505
4,058
4,058
icbc ordinary
shares(4)
5,194
5,194
total
$
13,374
$
$
13,962
$
5,781
$
$
6,526
(1)
excludes assets related to consolidated merchant banking funds
of $6.03billion and $1.93billion as of
november2006 and november 2005, respectively, for which
goldman sachs is not at risk.
(2)
the fair value of our japanese yen-denominated investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg includes the effect of
foreign exchange revaluation. we mitigate our economic exposure
to exchange rate movements on our investment in smfg by
borrowing japanese yen. foreign exchange revaluation on the
investment and the related borrowing are generally equal and
offsetting. for example, if the japanese yen appreciates against
the u.s.dollar, the u.s.dollar carrying value of our
smfg investment will increase and the u.s.dollar carrying
value of the related borrowing will also increase by an amount
that is generally equal and offsetting.
(3)
excludes an economic hedge on the unrestricted shares of common
stock underlying our investment in the convertible preferred
stock of smfg. the fair value of this hedge was
$3.07billion and $1.51billion as of
november2006 and november 2005, respectively, and is
reflected in financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value in the consolidated statements of
financial condition. for a further discussion of the
restrictions on our ability to hedge or sell the common stock
underlying our investment in smfg, see below.
(4)
includes interests of $3.28billion as of november 2006
held by investment funds managed by goldman sachs. the fair
value of our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, which
trade on the stock exchange of hong kong, includes the effect of
foreign exchange revaluation.
our private principal investments, by their nature, have little
or no price transparency. such investments are initially carried
at cost as an approximation of fair value. adjustments to
carrying value are made if there are third-party transactions
evidencing a change in value. downward adjustments are also
made, in the absence of third-party transactions, if we
determine that the expected realizable value of the investment
is less than the carrying value. in reaching that determination,
we consider many factors including, but not limited to, the
operating cash flows and financial performance of the companies
or properties relative to budgets or projections, trends within
sectors and/or regions, underlying business models, expected
exit timing and strategy, and any specific rights or terms
associated with the investment, such as conversion features and
liquidation preferences. see recent accounting
developments below for a discussion of the impact of
sfasno.157 on the valuation of financial instruments.
our public principal investments, which tend to be large,
concentrated holdings that result from initial public offerings
or other corporate transactions, are valued using quoted market
prices less a liquidity valuation adjustment based on
predetermined written policies.
table of contents
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg is
carried at fair value, which is derived from a model that
incorporates smfgs common stock price and credit spreads,
the impact of nontransferability and illiquidity, and downside
protection on the conversion strike price. the fair value of our
investment is particularly sensitive to movements in the smfg
common stock price. as a result of downside protection on the
conversion strike price, the relationship between changes in the
fair value of our investment and changes in smfgs common
stock price would be nonlinear for a significant decline in the
smfg common stock price. during the year, the fair value of our
investment (excluding the economic hedge on the unrestricted
shares of common stock) increased 8% (expressed in japanese
yen), reflecting the impact of passage of time in respect of the
transfer restrictions on the underlying common stock.
our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg is
generally nontransferable without the consent of smfg, but is
freely convertible into smfg common stock. as of november 2006,
we had hedged two-thirds of the common stock underlying our
investment in smfg. restrictions on our ability to hedge or sell
the remaining shares will lapse on february7, 2007. as of
november 2006, the conversion price was 318,800, subject
to downward adjustment if the price of smfg common stock at the
time of conversion is less than the conversion price (subject to
a floor of 105,100).
our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc is carried at fair
value using quoted market prices less a liquidity valuation
adjustment. the ordinary shares acquired from icbc are subject
to transfer restrictions that, among other things, prohibit any
sale, disposition or other transfer until april28, 2009.
from april28, 2009 to october20, 2009, we may
transfer up to 50% of the aggregate ordinary shares of icbc that
we owned as of october20, 2006. we may transfer the
remaining shares after october20, 2009. a portion of our
interest is held by investment funds managed by goldman sachs.
controls over valuation of financial instruments. a
control infrastructure, independent of the trading and investing
functions, is fundamental to ensuring that our financial
instruments are appropriately valued and that fair value
measurements are reliable. this is particularly important in
valuing instruments with lower levels of price transparency.
we employ an oversight structure that includes appropriate
segregation of duties. senior management, independent of the
trading functions, is responsible for the oversight of control
and valuation policies and for reporting the results of these
policies to our audit committee. we seek to maintain the
necessary resources to ensure that control functions are
performed to the highest standards. we employ procedures for the
approval of new transaction types and markets, price
verification, review of daily profit and loss, and review of
valuation models by personnel with appropriate technical
knowledge of relevant products and markets. these procedures are
performed by personnel independent of the revenue-producing
units. for trading and principal investments with little or no
price transparency, we employ, where possible, procedures that
include comparisons with similar observable positions, analysis
of actual to projected cash flows, comparisons with subsequent
sales and discussions with senior business leaders. for a
further discussion of how we manage the risks inherent in our
trading and principal investing businesses, see
risk management below.
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
as a result of our acquisitions, principally slk llc
(slk)in 2000, the ayco company, l.p. (ayco) in 2003,
cogentrix energy, inc. (cogentrix) in 2004, national
energy& gas transmission, inc. (negt)in 2005 and
the acquisition of the variable annuity and variable life
insurance business of the hanover insurance group, inc.
(formerly allmerica financial corporation) in 2006, we have
acquired goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. goodwill
is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of
net assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the
acquisition date.
table of contents
goodwill. we test the goodwill in each of our operating
segments for impairment at least annually in accordance with
sfasno.142, goodwill and other intangible
assets, by comparing the estimated fair value of each
operating segment with its estimated net book value. we derive
the fair value of each of our operating segments primarily based
on price-earnings multiples. we derive the net book value of our
operating segments by estimating the amount of
shareholders equity required to support the activities of
each operating segment. our last annual impairment test was
performed during our 2006 fourth quarter and no impairment was
identified.
the following table sets forth the carrying value of our
goodwill by operating segment:
goodwill by operating segment
(in millions)
as of november
investment banking
financial advisory
$
$
underwriting
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities(1)
2,381
2,390
principal investments
asset management and securities
services
asset
management(2)
securities services
total
$
3,184
$
3,148
(1)
primarily related to slk.
(2)
primarily related to ayco.
identifiable intangible assets. we amortize our
identifiable intangible assets over their estimated useful lives
in accordance with sfasno.142, and test for
potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying
value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144, accounting for the impairment or
disposal of long-lived assets. an impairment loss,
calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value
and the carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized
if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to
the asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying
value.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the carrying value and range of
remaining useful lives of our identifiable intangible assets by
major asset class:
identifiable intangible assets by asset class
($ in millions)
as of november
range of remaining
carrying
useful lives
carrying
value
(in years)
value
customer
lists(1)
$
$
power
contracts(2)
new york stock exchange
(nyse)specialist rights
15(5)
insurance-related
assets(3)
exchange-traded fund
(etf)specialist rights
other(4)
total
$
2,502
$
2,055
(1)
primarily includes our clearance and execution and nasdaq
customer lists related to slk and financial counseling customer
lists related to ayco.
(2)
primarily relates to above-market power contracts of
consolidated power generation facilities related to cogentrix
and negt. substantially all of these power contracts have been
pledged to counterparties in connection with our secured
financings. the increase in the carrying value of power
contracts in 2006 was due to a restructuring of certain
contracts, which resulted in the consolidation of the associated
power generation facilities that had been previously accounted
for under the equity method.
(3)
consists of the value of business acquired (voba)and
deferred acquisition costs (dac). voba represents the present
value of estimated future gross profits of the variable annuity
and variable life insurance business acquired in 2006. dac
results from commissions paid by goldman sachs to the primary
insurer (ceding company) on life and annuity reinsurance
agreements as compensation to place the business with us and to
cover the ceding companys acquisition expenses. voba and
dac are amortized over the estimated life of the underlying
contracts based on estimated gross profits, and amortization is
adjusted based on actual experience. the seven year useful life
represents the weighted average remaining amortization period of
the underlying contracts (certain of which extend for
approximately 30years).
(4)
primarily includes technology-related and other assets related
to slk.
(5)
during the first quarter of 2006, we reduced the estimated
useful lives of our nyse specialist rights from
22-24years to
16years. this change was due to higher than expected
attrition in acquired nyse specialist rights, primarily from
mergers and delistings.
a prolonged period of weakness in global equity markets and the
trading of securities in multiple markets and on multiple
exchanges could adversely impact our businesses and impair the
value of our goodwill and/or identifiable intangible assets. in
addition, certain events could indicate a potential impairment
of our identifiable intangible assets, including
(i)changes in market structure that could adversely affect
our specialist businesses, (ii)an adverse action or
assessment by a regulator, (iii)a default event under a
power contract or physical damage or other adverse events
impacting the underlying power generation facilities, or
(iv)adverse actual experience on the contracts in our
variable annuity and variable life insurance business.
table of contents
use of estimates
the use of generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make certain estimates. in addition to the
estimates we make in connection with fair value measurements and
the accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets,
the use of estimates is also important in determining provisions
for potential losses that may arise from litigation and
regulatory proceedings and tax audits.
we estimate and provide for potential losses that may arise out
of litigation and regulatory proceedings and tax audits to the
extent that such losses are probable and can be estimated, in
accordance with sfasno.5, accounting for
contingencies. significant judgment is required in making
these estimates and our final liabilities may ultimately be
materially different. our total liability in respect of
litigation and regulatory proceedings is determined on a
case-by-case basis and represents an estimate of probable losses
after considering, among other factors, the progress of each
case or proceeding, our experience and the experience of others
in similar cases or proceedings, and the opinions and views of
legal counsel. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the
outcome of our litigation and regulatory matters, particularly
in cases or proceedings in which substantial or indeterminate
damages or fines are sought, we cannot estimate losses or ranges
of losses for cases or proceedings where there is only a
reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred. see
legal proceedings in parti,
item3 of the annual report on
form10-k, for
information on our judicial, regulatory and arbitration
proceedings.
results of operations
the composition of our net revenues has varied over time as
financial markets and the scope of our operations have changed.
the composition of net revenues can also vary over the shorter
term due to fluctuations in u.s. and global economic and market
conditions. for a further discussion of the impact of economic
and market conditions on our results of operations, see
certain risk factors that may affect our
business above, and risk factors in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
financial overview
the following table sets forth an overview of our financial
results:
financial overview
($ in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended november
net
revenues(1)
$
37,665
$
25,238
$
20,951
pre-tax earnings
14,560
8,273
6,676
net earnings
9,537
5,626
4,553
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders
9,398
5,609
4,553
diluted earnings per common share
19.69
11.21
8.92
return on average common
shareholders
equity(2)
32.8
%
21.8
%
19.8
%
return on average tangible common
shareholders
equity(3)
39.8
%
26.7
%
25.2
%
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to our reported net
earnings.
(2)
return on average common shareholders equity is computed
by dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by
average monthly common shareholders equity.
(3)
tangible common shareholders equity equals total
shareholders equity less preferred stock, goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, excluding power contracts. in
2006, we amended our calculation of tangible common
shareholders equity. we no longer deduct identifiable
intangible assets associated with power contracts from total
shareholders equity because, unlike other intangible
assets, less than 50% of these assets are supported by common
shareholders equity. prior periods have been adjusted to
conform to the current presentation.
we believe that return on average tangible common
shareholders equity is meaningful because it measures the
performance of businesses consistently, whether they were
acquired or developed internally. return on average tangible
common shareholders equity is computed by dividing net
earnings applicable to common shareholders by average monthly
tangible common shareholders equity.
the following table sets forth a reconciliation of average total
shareholders equity to average tangible common
shareholders equity:
average for the
year ended november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
31,048
$
26,264
$
22,975
preferred stock
(2,400
)
(538
)
common shareholders equity
$
28,648
$
25,726
$
22,975
goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts
(5,013
)
(4,737
)
(4,918
)
tangible common shareholders
equity
$
23,635
$
20,989
$
18,057
table of contents
net revenues
2006 versus 2005. our net revenues were
$37.67billion in 2006, an increase of 49% compared with
2005, reflecting significantly higher net revenues in trading
and principal investments, investment banking, and asset
management and securities services. the increase in trading and
principal investments reflected significantly higher net
revenues in ficc, equities and principal investments. the
increase in ficc reflected particularly strong performances
across all major businesses. during 2006, ficc operated in an
environment characterized by strong customer-driven activity and
favorable market opportunities. in addition, corporate credit
spreads tightened, the yield curve flattened and volatility
levels were generally low in interest rate and currency markets.
the increase in equities primarily reflected significantly
higher net revenues in our customer franchise business. during
2006, equities operated in a favorable environment characterized
by strong customer-driven activity, generally higher equity
prices and favorable market opportunities, although volatility
levels were generally low. the increase in principal investments
reflected a significant gain related to our investment in the
ordinary shares of icbc and higher gains and overrides from
other principal investments, partially offset by a smaller, but
still significant, gain related to our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg. the increase in investment
banking was due to significantly higher net revenues in
underwriting and financial advisory, as we benefited from strong
client activity levels, reflecting favorable equity and
financing markets, strong ceo confidence and growth in financial
sponsor activity. the increase in asset management and
securities services was primarily due to higher assets under
management and significantly higher incentive fees, as well as
significantly higher global customer balances in securities
services. assets under management increased $144billion or
27% to a record $676billion, including net asset inflows
of $94billion during 2006.
2005 versus 2004. our net revenues were
$25.24billion in 2005, an increase of 20% compared with
2004, reflecting strong growth in trading and principal
investments and asset management and securities services as well
as higher net revenues in investment banking. the increase in
trading and principal investments reflected significantly higher
net revenues in ficc, as all major businesses performed well.
during 2005, ficc operated in an environment generally
characterized by strong customer-driven activity, tight, but
volatile, credit spreads, higher energy prices and a flatter
yield curve. net revenues in equities also improved
significantly compared with the prior year, reflecting strong
performance across the business. equities operated in an
environment characterized by generally higher equity prices,
improved customer-driven activity and continued low levels of
market volatility. net revenues in our principal investments
business also increased significantly, primarily reflecting a
gain on our investment in the convertible preferred stock of
smfg as well as gains from real estate principal investments.
the strong net revenue growth in asset management and securities
services primarily reflected higher assets under management and
higher customer balances in securities services. the increase in
investment banking net revenues was due to significantly higher
net revenues in debt underwriting and improved results in
financial advisory, primarily reflecting an increase in
industry-wide corporate activity, partially offset by lower net
revenues in equity underwriting.
table of contents
operating expenses
our operating expenses are primarily influenced by compensation,
headcount and levels of business activity. a substantial portion
of our compensation expense represents discretionary bonuses
which are significantly impacted by, among other factors, the
level of net revenues, prevailing labor markets, business mix
and the structure of our share-based compensation programs. for
2006, our ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues was
43.7%. excluding non-cash expenses of $637million related
to the continued amortization of prior year share-based awards
held by employees that were retirement-eligible on the date of
adoption of
sfasno.123-r,
our ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues was
42.0%(1).
(1)
our ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues,
excluding the impact of the continued amortization of these
share-based awards, is computed by dividing compensation and
benefits, excluding the impact of the continued amortization of
these prior year share-based awards held by employees that were
retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r,
by net revenues. we believe that presenting the ratio of
compensation and benefits to net revenues excluding the impact
of the continued amortization of these awards enhances the
comparability of
period-to-period
compensation and benefits and allows for a more meaningful
representation of the relationship of current period
compensation to net revenues. the following table sets forth the
reconciliation of the ratio of compensation and benefits to net
revenues, as reported, to the ratio of compensation and benefits
to net revenues excluding the impact of the continued
amortization of these prior year share-based awards:
year ended
november2006
($inmillions)
compensation and benefits
$
16,457
impact of the continued
amortization of prior year share-based awards
(637
)
compensation and benefits,
excluding the impact of the continued amortization of prior year
share-basedawards
$
15,820
net revenues
$
37,665
ratio of compensation and benefits
to net revenues, excluding the impact of the continued
amortization of prior year share-based awards
42.0%
table of contents
the following table sets forth our operating expenses and number
of employees:
operating expenses and employees
($ in millions)
year ended november
compensation and
benefits(1)
(2)
$
16,457
$
11,758
$
9,681
brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution
fees(3)
1,985
1,416
1,172
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable
intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
cost of power
generation(2)
other
expenses(3)
1,132
total non-compensation expenses
6,648
5,207
4,594
total operating expenses
$
23,105
$
16,965
$
14,275
employees at year
end(4)
(5)
26,467
23,623
21,736
(1)
compensation and benefits includes $259million,
$137million and $19million for the years ended
november 2006, november 2005 and november 2004, respectively,
attributable to consolidated entities held for investment
purposes. consolidated entities held for investment purposes are
entities that are held strictly for capital appreciation, have a
defined exit strategy and are engaged in activities that are not
closely related to our principal businesses.
(2)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. compensation and benefits includes direct employee
costs associated with our consolidated power generation
facilities and cost of power generation includes the other
direct costs associated with these power generation facilities
and related contractual assets. prior periods have been
reclassified to conform to the current presentation, with no
impact to our reported net earnings. this reclassification
increased operating expenses as follows:
year ended
november
(in millions)
compensation and benefits
$
$
$
cost of power generation
total
$
$
$
(3)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, third party research
and brokerage fees and asset management sales and distribution
fees were reclassified from other expenses to
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
in the consolidated statements of earnings. prior periods have
been reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
(4)
excludes 3,868, 7,382 and 485 employees as of november 2006,
november 2005 and november 2004, respectively, of consolidated
entities held for investment purposes (see footnote1
above).
(5)
includes 1,326 employees as of november 2006 of goldman
sachs consolidated property management and loan servicing
subsidiaries. november 2005 and november 2004 have been adjusted
to conform to the current presentation and include 1,198 and
1,014 employees, respectively.
table of contents
the following table sets forth non-compensation expenses of
consolidated entities held for investment purposes and our
remaining non-compensation expenses by line item:
non-compensation expenses
(in millions)
year ended november
non-compensation expenses of
consolidated
investments(1)
$
$
$
non-compensation expenses excluding
consolidated investments
brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution
fees(2)
1,985
1,416
1,172
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable
intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
cost of power
generation(3)
other
expenses(2)
subtotal
6,147
4,942
4,573
total non-compensation expenses, as
reported
$
6,648
$
5,207
$
4,594
(1)
consolidated entities held for investment purposes are entities
that are held strictly for capital appreciation, have a defined
exit strategy and are engaged in activities that are not closely
related to our principal businesses. for example, these
investments include consolidated entities that hold real estate
assets, such as golf courses and hotels in asia, but exclude
investments in entities that primarily hold financial assets. we
believe that it is meaningful to review non-compensation
expenses excluding expenses related to these consolidated
entities in order to evaluate trends in non-compensation
expenses related to our principal business activities. revenues
related to such entities are included in trading and
principal investments in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
(2)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, third party research
and brokerage fees and asset management sales and distribution
fees were reclassified from other expenses to
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
in the consolidated statements of earnings. prior periods have
been reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
(3)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to our reported net
earnings.
table of contents
2006 versus 2005. operating expenses were
$23.11billion for 2006, 36% higher than 2005. compensation
and benefits expenses of $16.46billion increased 40%
compared with 2005, primarily reflecting increased discretionary
compensation due to higher net revenues, and increased levels of
employment. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net
revenues for 2006 was
43.7%(1)
compared with
46.6%(1)
for 2005. this lower ratio primarily reflected our strong net
revenues in 2006. employment levels increased 12% compared with
november 2005.
in the first quarter of 2006, we adopted
sfasno.123-r,
which requires that share-based awards granted to
retirement-eligible employees be expensed in the year of grant.
in addition to expensing current year awards, prior year awards
must continue to be amortized over the relevant service period.
therefore, our compensation and benefits in 2006 included (and,
to a lesser extent, 2007 and 2008 will include) both
amortization of prior year share-based awards held by employees
that were retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
and new awards granted to those employees.
compensation and benefits expenses in 2006 included
$637million in continued amortization of prior year awards
held by employees that were retirement-eligible on the date of
adoption of
sfasno.123-r.
this amount represents the majority of the expense to be
recognized with respect to these awards.
non-compensation expenses of $6.65billion for 2006
increased 28% compared with 2005. excluding non-compensation
expenses related to consolidated entities held for investment
purposes, non-compensation expenses were 24% higher than 2005,
primarily due to higher brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees in equities and ficc, and increased other
expenses, primarily due to costs related to our insurance
business, which was acquired in 2006. in addition, market
development costs and professional fees were higher, reflecting
increased levels of business activity, and occupancy expenses
increased, primarily reflecting new office space and higher
facility expenses.
2005 versus 2004. operating expenses were
$16.97billion for 2005, 19% above 2004. compensation and
benefits expenses of $11.76billion increased 21% compared
with 2004, resulting from higher discretionary compensation,
reflecting higher net revenues, and increased levels of
employment. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net
revenues for 2005 was
46.6%(1)
compared with
46.2%(1)
for 2004. employment levels increased 9% compared with november
2004.
non-compensation expenses of $5.21billion for 2005
increased 13% compared with 2004. excluding non-compensation
expenses related to consolidated entities held for investment
purposes, non-compensation expenses were 8% higher than 2004,
primarily due to higher brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees, reflecting higher transaction volumes in ficc
and equities, and increased professional fees, reflecting higher
legal and consulting fees.
non-compensation expenses in 2005 included $37million of
net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings
(included in other expenses) and $36million of real estate
costs associated with the relocation of office space (included
in occupancy). non-compensation expenses in 2004 included
$103million of net provisions for litigation and
regulatory proceedings, $62million in connection with the
establishment of our joint venture in china (included in market
development) and $41million of real estate exit costs
associated with reductions in our office space (included in
occupancy and depreciation and amortization).
(1)
the effect of the cost of power generation reclassification on
the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues was to
decrease the ratio by approximately 30basis points,
60basis points and 50basis points for 2006, 2005 and
2004, respectively.
table of contents
provision for taxes
the effective income tax rate was 34.5% for 2006, up from 32.0%
for 2005. the increase in the effective income tax rate for 2006
compared with 2005 was primarily related to a reduction in the
impact of permanent benefits due to higher levels of earnings in
2006 and audit settlements in 2005. the effective income tax
rate for 2005 was 32.0% compared with 31.8% for 2004. excluding
the impact of audit settlements in 2005, the effective income
tax rate for 2005 would have been
33.3%(1).
excluding the impact of audit settlements, the increase in the
effective income tax rate for 2005 compared with 2004 was
primarily due to a lower benefit from tax credits in 2005.
our effective income tax rate can vary from period to period
depending on, among other factors, the geographic and business
mix of our earnings, the level of our tax credits and the effect
of tax audits. certain of these and other factors, including our
history of pre-tax earnings, are taken into account in assessing
our ability to realize our net deferred tax assets. see
note14 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our provision for taxes.
(1)
the effective income tax rate excluding the impact of audit
settlements is calculated by dividing the provision for taxes,
adjusted to exclude the impact of audit settlements, by pre-tax
earnings. the impact of audit settlements decreased the
effective income tax rate by 1.3% for 2005. we believe that the
effective income tax rate excluding the impact of audit
settlements provides a meaningful basis for
period-to-period
comparisons of our effective income tax rates.
table of contents
segment operating results
the following table sets forth the net revenues, operating
expenses and pre-tax earnings of our segments:
segment operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
investment banking
net revenues
$
5,629
$
3,671
$
3,374
operating expenses
4,062
3,258
2,973
pre-tax earnings
$
1,567
$
$
trading and principal
net
revenues(1)
$
25,562
$
16,818
$
13,728
investments
operating
expenses(1)
14,962
10,600
8,688
pre-tax earnings
$
10,600
$
6,218
$
5,040
asset management and
net revenues
$
6,474
$
4,749
$
3,849
securities services
operating expenses
4,036
3,070
2,430
pre-tax earnings
$
2,438
$
1,679
$
1,419
total
net
revenues(1)
$
37,665
$
25,238
$
20,951
operating
expenses(1)(2)
23,105
16,965
14,275
pre-tax earnings
$
14,560
$
8,273
$
6,676
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to our reported pre-tax
earnings.
(2)
includes the following expenses that have not been allocated to
our segments: (i)net provisions for a number of litigation
and regulatory proceedings of $45million, $37million
and $103million for the years ended november2006,
november 2005 and november 2004, respectively;
(ii)$62million in connection with the establishment
of our joint venture in china for the year ended november 2004;
and (iii)the amortization of employee initial public
offering awards, net of forfeitures, of $19million for the
year ended november 2004.
net revenues in our segments include allocations of interest
income and interest expense to specific securities, commodities
and other positions in relation to the cash generated by, or
funding requirements of, such underlying positions. see
note16 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our segments.
the cost drivers of goldman sachs taken as a whole
compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of our business
segments. compensation and benefits expenses within our segments
reflect, among other factors, the overall performance of goldman
sachs as well as the performance of individual business units.
consequently, pre-tax margins in one segment of our business may
be significantly affected by the performance of our other
business segments. a discussion of segment operating results
follows.
table of contents
investment banking
our investment banking segment is divided into two components:
financial advisory. financial advisory includes advisory
assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions,
divestitures, corporate defense activities, restructurings and
spin-offs.
underwriting. underwriting includes public offerings and
private placements of a wide range of securities and other
financial instruments.
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
investment banking segment:
investment banking operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
financial advisory
$
2,580
$
1,905
$
1,737
equity underwriting
1,365
debt underwriting
1,684
1,062
total underwriting
3,049
1,766
1,637
total net revenues
5,629
3,671
3,374
operating expenses
4,062
3,258
2,973
pre-tax earnings
$
1,567
$
$
the following table sets forth our financial advisory and
underwriting transaction volumes:
goldman sachs global investment banking
volumes(1)
(in billions)
year ended november
announced mergers and acquisitions
$
1,112
$
$
completed mergers and acquisitions
equity and equity-related
offerings(2)
debt
offerings(3)
(1)
source: thomson financial. announced and completed mergers and
acquisitions volumes are based on full credit to each of the
advisors in a transaction. equity and equity-related offerings
and debt offerings are based on full credit for single book
managers and equal credit for joint book managers. transaction
volumes may not be indicative of net revenues in a given period.
(2)
includes public common stock offerings, convertible offerings,
rights offerings and rule144a issues.
(3)
includes non-convertible preferred stock, mortgage-backed
securities, asset-backed securities and taxable municipal debt.
includes publicly registered and rule144a issues.
2006 versus 2005. net revenues in investment banking of
$5.63billion for 2006 increased 53% compared with 2005.
net revenues in financial advisory of $2.58billion
increased 35% compared with 2005, primarily reflecting strong
growth in industry-wide completed mergers and acquisitions. net
revenues in our underwriting business of $3.05billion
increased 73% compared with 2005. net revenues were
significantly higher in equity underwriting, reflecting
increased client
table of contents
activity. net revenues were also significantly higher in debt
underwriting, primarily due to a significant increase in
leveraged finance activity and, to a lesser extent, an increase
in investment-grade activity. our investment banking backlog at
the end of 2006 was at its highest level since
2000.(1)
operating expenses of $4.06billion for 2006 increased 25%
compared with 2005, substantially all of which was due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses resulting from
higher levels of discretionary compensation. pre-tax earnings
were $1.57billion in 2006 compared with $413million
in 2005.
2005 versus 2004. net revenues in investment banking of
$3.67billion for 2005 increased 9% compared with 2004. net
revenues in financial advisory of $1.91billion increased
10% compared with 2004, primarily reflecting an increase in
industry-wide completed mergers and acquisitions. net revenues
in our underwriting business of $1.77billion increased 8%
compared with 2004, reflecting higher net revenues in debt
underwriting, primarily due to an increase in leveraged finance
and mortgage activity, partially offset by lower net revenues in
equity underwriting. our investment banking backlog at the end
of 2005 was significantly higher than at the end of
2004.(1)
operating expenses of $3.26billion for 2005 increased 10%
compared with 2004, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses resulting from higher levels of discretionary
compensation and increased amortization expense related to prior
year equity awards. in addition, professional fees were higher,
principally due to increased legal and consulting fees. pre-tax
earnings of $413million in 2005 increased 3% compared with
2004.
trading and principal investments
our trading and principal investments segment is divided into
three components:
ficc. we make markets in and trade interest rate and
credit products, mortgage-related securities and loan products,
currencies and commodities, structure and enter into a wide
variety of derivative transactions and engage in proprietary
trading and investing.
equities. we make markets in, trade and act as a
specialist for equities and equity-related products, structure
and enter into equity derivative transactions and engage in
proprietary trading and insurance activities. we also execute
and clear client transactions on major stock, options and
futures exchanges worldwide.
principal investments. we make real estate and corporate
principal investments, including our investments in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg and the ordinary shares of
icbc. we generate net revenues from returns on these investments
and from the increased share of the income and gains derived
from our merchant banking funds when the return on a funds
investments, over the life of the fund, exceeds certain
threshold returns (overrides).
substantially all of our inventory is
marked-to-market daily
and, therefore, its value and our net revenues are subject to
fluctuations based on market movements. in addition, net
revenues derived from our principal investments in privately
held concerns and in real estate may fluctuate significantly
depending on the revaluation or sale of these investments in any
given period. we also regularly enter into large transactions as
part of our trading businesses. the number and size of such
transactions may affect our results of operations in a given
period.
net revenues from principal investments do not include
management fees generated from our merchant banking funds. these
management fees are included in the net revenues of the asset
management and securities services segment.
(1)
our investment banking backlog represents an estimate of our
future net revenues from investment banking transactions where
we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than
not.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
trading and principal investments segment:
trading and principal investments operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
ficc(1)
$
14,262
$
8,940
$
7,723
equities trading
4,965
2,675
1,969
equities commissions
3,518
2,975
2,704
total equities
8,483
5,650
4,673
smfg
1,475
icbc
gross gains
1,534
gross
losses(2)
(585
)
(198
)
(399
)
net other corporate and real estate
investments
overrides
total principal investments
2,817
2,228
1,332
total net
revenues(1)
25,562
16,818
13,728
operating
expenses(1)
14,962
10,600
8,688
pre-tax earnings
$
10,600
$
6,218
$
5,040
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to our reported pre-tax
earnings.
(2)
a substantial portion relates to interest expense on our
principal investments.
2006 versus 2005. net revenues in trading and principal
investments of $25.56billion for 2006 increased 52%
compared with 2005. net revenues in ficc of $14.26billion
increased 60% compared with 2005, primarily due to significantly
higher net revenues in credit products (which includes
distressed investing) and commodities. in addition, net revenues
were higher in interest rate products, currencies and mortgages.
during 2006, the business operated in an environment
characterized by strong customer-driven activity and favorable
market opportunities. in addition, corporate credit spreads
tightened, the yield curve flattened and volatility levels were
generally low in interest rate and currency markets. net
revenues in equities of $8.48billion increased 50%
compared with 2005, primarily reflecting significantly higher
net revenues in derivatives, across all regions, as well as
higher net revenues in shares. the increase also reflected the
contribution from our insurance business, which was acquired in
2006. in addition, principal strategies performed well, although
net revenues were lower than a particularly strong 2005. during
2006, equities operated in a favorable environment characterized
by strong customer-driven activity, generally higher equity
prices and favorable market opportunities, although volatility
levels were generally low. principal investments recorded net
revenues of $2.82billion, reflecting a $937million
gain related to our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, a
$527million gain related to our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg and $1.35billion in
gains and overrides from other principal investments.
table of contents
operating expenses of $14.96billion for 2006 increased 41%
compared with 2005, due to increased compensation and benefits
expenses, primarily resulting from higher levels of
discretionary compensation due to higher net revenues and
increased levels of employment, as well as higher
non-compensation expenses. excluding non-compensation expenses
related to consolidated entities held for investment purposes,
the increase in non-compensation expenses was primarily due to
higher brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees, in
equities and ficc, and increased other expenses, primarily due
to costs related to our insurance business, which was acquired
in 2006, and higher levels of business activity. in addition,
professional fees were higher, due to increased legal and
consulting fees. pre-tax earnings of $10.60billion in 2006
increased 70% compared with 2005.
2005 versus 2004. net revenues in trading and principal
investments of $16.82billion for 2005 increased 23%
compared with 2004. net revenues in ficc of $8.94billion
increased 16% compared with 2004, primarily reflecting
significantly higher net revenues in credit products (which
includes distressed investing) and, to a lesser extent, interest
rate products and currencies. net revenues in commodities and
mortgages were strong, but essentially unchanged compared with
2004. during 2005, ficc operated in an environment generally
characterized by strong customer-driven activity, tight, but
volatile, credit spreads, higher energy prices and a flatter
yield curve. net revenues in equities of $5.65billion
increased 21% compared with 2004, reflecting significantly
higher net revenues in our customer franchise and principal
strategies businesses. the increase in our customer franchise
business reflected improved results in derivatives and shares,
particularly in europe and asia, as well as in convertibles. in
addition, results in principal strategies reflected strength
across all regions. during 2005, equities operated in an
environment characterized by generally higher equity prices,
improved customer-driven activity and continued low levels of
market volatility. principal investments recorded net revenues
of $2.23billion, due to a $1.48billion gain related
to our investment in the convertible preferred stock of smfg and
$753million in gains and overrides from other corporate
and, to a lesser extent, real estate principal investments.
operating expenses of $10.60billion for 2005 increased 22%
compared with 2004, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses, reflecting higher discretionary compensation
and increased levels of employment and, to a lesser extent,
higher non-compensation expenses related to consolidated
entities held for investment purposes. excluding
non-compensation expenses related to consolidated entities held
for investment purposes, the increase in non-compensation
expenses was primarily attributable to higher brokerage,
clearing, exchange and distribution fees, principally due to
increased transaction volumes in ficc and equities, and higher
professional fees, due to increased legal and consulting fees.
pre-tax earnings of $6.22billion in 2005 increased 23%
compared with 2004.
asset management and securities services
our asset management and securities services segment is divided
into two components:
asset management. asset management provides investment
advisory and financial planning services and offers investment
products (primarily through separate accounts and funds) across
all major asset classes to a diverse group of institutions and
individuals worldwide and primarily generates revenues in the
form of management and incentive fees.
securities services. securities services provides prime
brokerage services, financing services and securities lending
services to institutional clients, including hedge funds, mutual
funds, pension funds and foundations, and to high-net-worth
individuals worldwide, and generates revenues primarily in the
form of interest rate spreads or fees.
table of contents
assets under management typically generate fees as a percentage
of asset value. in certain circumstances, we are also entitled
to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of a funds
return or when the return on assets under management exceeds
specified benchmark returns or other performance targets.
incentive fees are recognized when the performance period ends
and they are no longer subject to adjustment. we have numerous
incentive fee arrangements, many of which have annual
performance periods that end on december31. for that
reason, incentive fees have been seasonally weighted to our
first quarter. based on investment performance in calendar 2006,
our incentive fees will be significantly lower in fiscal 2007
than they were in fiscal 2006.
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
asset management and securities services segment:
asset management and securities services operating results
(in millions)
year ended november
management and other fees
$
3,332
$
2,629
$
2,219
incentive fees
total asset management
4,294
2,956
2,553
securities services
2,180
1,793
1,296
total net revenues
6,474
4,749
3,849
operating expenses
4,036
3,070
2,430
pre-tax earnings
$
2,438
$
1,679
$
1,419
assets under management include our mutual funds, alternative
investment funds and separately managed accounts for
institutional and individual investors. substantially all assets
under management are valued as of calendar month end.
the following table sets forth our assets under management by
asset class:
assets under management by asset
class(1)
(in billions)
as of november30
alternative
investments(2)
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
(1)
in the first quarter of 2006, we changed the methodology for
classifying certain non-money market assets. the changes were
made primarily to reclassify certain assets allocated to
external investment managers out of alternative investment
assets and to reclassify currency funds into alternative
investment assets. the changes did not impact total assets under
management and prior periods have been reclassified to conform
to the current presentation.
(2)
primarily includes hedge funds, private equity, real estate,
currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
table of contents
the following table sets forth a summary of the changes in our
assets under management:
changes in assets under management
(in billions)
year ended november30
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
net asset inflows/ (outflows)
alternative investments
equity
fixed income
total non-money market net asset
inflows/ (outflows)
money markets
(1)
total net asset inflows/ (outflows)
(2)
net market appreciation/
(depreciation)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
(1)
net of $8billion transferred from assets under management
to interest-bearing deposits at goldman sachs bank usa, a wholly
owned subsidiary of group inc. these deposits are not included
in assets under management.
(2)
includes $3billion of net asset inflows in connection with
our december30, 2005 acquisition of the variable annuity
and variable life insurance business of the hanover insurance
group, inc.
2006 versus 2005. net revenues in asset management and
securities services of $6.47billion for 2006 increased 36%
compared with 2005. asset management net revenues of
$4.29billion increased 45% compared with 2005, reflecting
significantly higher management and other fees, principally due
to strong growth in assets under management, and significantly
higher incentive fees. during the year, assets under management
increased $144billion or 27% to $676billion,
reflecting non-money market net asset inflows of
$77billion, spread across all asset classes, money market
net asset inflows of
$17billion(1),
and market appreciation of $50billion, primarily in equity
and fixed income assets. securities services net revenues of
$2.18billion increased 22% compared with 2005, as our
prime brokerage business continued to generate strong results,
primarily reflecting significantly higher global customer
balances in securities lending and margin lending.
operating expenses of $4.04billion for 2006 increased 31%
compared with 2005, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses, resulting from higher levels of discretionary
compensation due to higher net revenues, and increased levels of
employment. non-compensation expenses also increased, primarily
due to higher distribution fees (included in brokerage,
clearing, exchange and distribution fees). in addition, market
development costs were higher, reflecting increased levels of
business activity. pre-tax earnings of $2.44billion
increased 45% compared with 2005.
(1)
net of $8billion transferred from assets under management
to interest-bearing deposits at goldman sachs bank usa, a wholly
owned subsidiary of group inc. these deposits are not included
in assets under management.
table of contents
2005 versus 2004. net revenues in asset management and
securities services of $4.75billion for 2005 increased 23%
compared with 2004. asset management net revenues of
$2.96billion increased 16% compared with 2004, primarily
due to higher management fees, driven by growth in assets under
management. during 2005, assets under management increased 18%
to $532billion, reflecting net asset inflows of
$63billion across all asset classes as well as market
appreciation of $17billion, primarily in equity assets.
securities services net revenues of $1.79billion for 2005
increased 38% compared with 2004, primarily reflecting
significantly higher global customer balances in securities
lending and margin lending.
operating expenses of $3.07billion for 2005 increased 26%
compared with 2004, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses resulting from higher discretionary
compensation and increased levels of employment. other expenses
also increased and professional fees were higher, principally
due to increased consulting and legal fees. pre-tax earnings of
$1.68billion increased 18% compared with 2004.
geographic data
for a summary of the net revenues and pre-tax earnings of
goldman sachs by geographic region, see note16 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on
form10-k.
off-balance-sheet arrangements
we have various types of off-balance-sheet arrangements that we
enter into in the ordinary course of business. our involvement
in these arrangements can take many different forms, including
purchasing or retaining residual and other interests in
mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securitization vehicles;
holding senior and subordinated debt, interests in limited and
general partnerships, and preferred and common stock in other
nonconsolidated vehicles; entering into interest rate, foreign
currency, equity, commodity and credit derivatives, including
total return swaps; entering into operating leases; and
providing guarantees, indemnifications, loan commitments,
letters of credit, representations and warranties.
we enter into these arrangements for a variety of business
purposes, primarily related to the securitization of commercial
and residential mortgages, home equity and auto loans,
government and corporate bonds, and other types of financial
assets. other reasons for entering into these arrangements
include underwriting client securitization transactions;
providing secondary market liquidity; making investments in
performing and nonperforming debt, equity, real estate and other
assets; providing investors with credit-linked and
asset-repackaged notes; and receiving or providing letters of
credit to satisfy margin requirements and to facilitate the
clearance and settlement process.
we engage in transactions with variable interest entities (vies)
and qualifying special-purpose entities (qspes). such vehicles
are critical to the functioning of several significant investor
markets, including the mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed securities
markets, since they provide market liquidity to financial assets
by offering investors access to specific cash flows and risks
created through the securitization process. our financial
interests in, and derivative transactions with, such
nonconsolidated entities are accounted for at fair value, in the
same manner as our other financial instruments, except in cases
where we apply the equity method of accounting.
table of contents
the following table sets forth where a discussion of these and
other off-balance-sheet arrangements may be found in
partii, items7 and 8 of the annual report on
form10-k:
type of off-balance-sheet arrangement
disclosure in annual report on form10-k
retained interests or contingent
interests in assets transferred by us to nonconsolidated entities
see note3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k.
leases, letters of credit, and
loans and other commitments
see contractual
obligations and commitments below and note6 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on form10-k.
guarantees
see note6 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k.
other obligations, including
contingent obligations, arising out of variable interests we
have in nonconsolidated entities
see note3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k.
derivative contracts
see critical
accounting policies above and risk
management below and note3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on form10-k.
in addition, see note2 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for a
discussion of our consolidation policies.
equity capital
the level and composition of our equity capital are principally
determined by our consolidated regulatory capital requirements,
subsidiary capital requirements and rating agency guidelines.
the equity capital we hold may also be influenced by the
business environment, conditions in the financial markets and an
assessment of potential future losses during an extremely
adverse business and market environment. as of november 2006,
our total shareholders equity was $35.79billion
(consisting of common shareholders equity of
$32.69billion and preferred stock of $3.10billion)
compared with total shareholders equity of
$28.00billion as of november 2005 (consisting of common
shareholders equity of $26.25billion and preferred
stock of $1.75billion). in addition to total
shareholders equity, we consider the $2.75billion of
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust (see below) part of
our equity capital, as it qualifies as capital for regulatory
and certain rating agency purposes.
consolidated regulatory capital requirements
during 2005, goldman sachs became regulated by the
u.s.securities and exchange commission (sec)as a
consolidated supervised entity (cse). as such, goldman sachs is
subject to group-wide supervision and examination by the sec and
to minimum capital adequacy standards on a consolidated basis.
minimum capital adequacy standards are principally driven by the
amount of our market risk, credit risk and operational risk as
calculated by methodologies approved by the sec. eligible
sources of regulatory capital include common equity and certain
types of preferred stock, debt and hybrid instruments, including
our junior subordinated debt issued to a trust. the recognition
of preferred stock, debt and hybrid instruments as regulatory
capital is subject to limitations. goldman sachs was in
compliance with the cse capital adequacy standards as of
november 2006 and november
2005.
table of contents
subsidiary capital requirements
many of our principal subsidiaries are subject to separate
regulation and capital requirements in the united states and/or
elsewhere. goldman, sachs& co. and goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. are registered
u.s.broker-dealers and futures commissions merchants, and
their primary regulators include the sec, the commodity futures
trading commission, the chicago board of trade, the nyse, the
national association of securities dealers, inc. and the
national futures association. goldman sachs international, our
regulated u.k. broker-dealer, is subject to regulation primarily
by the u.k.s financial services authority. goldman sachs
japan co., ltd. (gsjcl), our regulated japanese broker-dealer,
is subject to regulation by japans financial services
agency. prior to october1, 2006, goldman sachs (japan)
ltd. (gsjl), the predecessor to gsjcl, was our primary regulated
subsidiary based in japan. several other subsidiaries of goldman
sachs are regulated by securities, investment advisory, banking,
and other regulators and authorities around the world, such as
the federal financial supervisory authority (bafin) and the
bundesbank in germany, banque de france and the autorit
des marchs financiers in france, banca ditalia and
the commissione nazionale per le societ e la borsa
(consob)in italy, the swiss federal banking commission,
the securities and futures commission in hong kong, the monetary
authority of singapore and the china securities regulatory
commission. goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank), a wholly owned
industrial bank, is regulated by the federal deposit insurance
corporation and the state of utah department of financial
institutions and is subject to minimum capital requirements. as
of november 2006 and november 2005, these subsidiaries were in
compliance with their local capital requirements.
as discussed above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to
regulatory capital requirements in jurisdictions throughout the
world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold
capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency
requirements or internal policies, including policies concerning
the minimum amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based
upon its underlying risk. for a discussion of our potential
inability to access funds from our subsidiaries, see
liquidity and funding risk
conservative liability structure below.
equity investments in subsidiaries are generally funded with
parent company equity capital. as of november 2006, group
inc.s equity investment in subsidiaries was
$32.58billion compared with its total shareholders
equity of $35.79billion.
our capital invested in
non-u.s.subsidiaries
is generally exposed to foreign exchange risk, substantially all
of which is managed primarily through the use of derivative
contracts. in addition, we generally manage the non-trading
exposure to foreign exchange risk that arises from transactions
denominated in currencies other than the transacting
entitys functional currency.
see note15 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our regulated subsidiaries.
table of contents
rating agency guidelines
the credit rating agencies assign credit ratings to the
obligations of the goldman sachs group, inc., which directly
issues or guarantees substantially all of goldman sachs
senior unsecured obligations. the level and composition of our
equity capital are among the many factors considered in
determining our credit ratings. each agency has its own
definition of eligible capital and methodology for evaluating
capital adequacy, and assessments are generally based on a
combination of factors rather than a single calculation. see
liquidity and funding risk credit
ratings below for further information regarding our credit
ratings.
equity capital management
our objective is to maintain a sufficient level and optimize the
composition of our equity capital. we manage our capital through
repurchases of our common stock and issuances of preferred
stock, junior subordinated debt issued to a trust and
subordinated debt.
share repurchase program. we use our share repurchase
program to help maintain the appropriate level of common equity
and to substantially offset increases in share count over time
resulting from employee share-based compensation. the repurchase
program is effected primarily through regular open-market
purchases and is influenced by our overall capital position (the
comparison of our capital requirements to our available
capital), general market conditions and the prevailing price and
trading volumes of our common stock.
the following table sets forth the level of share repurchases
for the years ended november2006 and november 2005:
as of november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
number of shares repurchased
50.23
63.73
total cost
$
7,817
$
7,108
average cost per share
$
155.64
$
111.57
as of november 2006, we were authorized to repurchase up to
52.6million additional shares of common stock pursuant to
our repurchase program. for additional information on our
repurchase program, see market for
registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities in part ii,
item5 of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
preferred stock. during 2006, goldman sachs issued
54,000shares of perpetual floating rate non-cumulative
preferred stock, seriesd. as of november 2006, goldman
sachs had 124,000shares of perpetual non-cumulative
preferred stock outstanding in four series as set forth in the
following table:
preferred stock by series
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
issued
authorized
dividend rate
redemption date
(in millions)
a
30,000
50,000
3month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 3.75%per annum
april25, 2010
$
b
32,000
50,000
6.20%per annum
october31, 2010
c
8,000
25,000
3month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 4%per annum
october31, 2010
d
54,000
60,000
3month libor + 0.67%,
with floor of 4%per annum
may24, 2011
1,350
124,000
185,000
$
3,100
each share of preferred stock has a par value of $0.01, has a
liquidation preference of $25,000, is represented by 1,000
depositary shares and is redeemable at our option at a
redemption price equal to $25,000 plus declared and unpaid
dividends. dividends on each series of preferred stock, if
declared, are payable quarterly in arrears. our ability to
declare or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise
acquire, our common stock is subject to certain restrictions in
the event that we fail to pay or set aside full dividends on our
preferred stock for the latest completed dividend period. all
preferred stock also has a preference over our common stock upon
liquidation.
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust. as of
november 2006, we had outstanding junior subordinated debt
issued to a trust of $2.75billion, included in
unsecured long-term borrowings on the consolidated
statements of financial condition. the inherent characteristics
of these securities, including the long-term nature of the
securities, our ability to defer coupon interest for up to ten
consecutive semiannual periods and the subordinated nature of
the obligations in our capital structure, are such that they
qualify as regulatory capital for cse purposes, and thus, are
part of our equity capital.
subordinated debt. although not part of our
shareholders equity, subordinated debt may be used to meet
a portion of our consolidated minimum capital requirements as a
cse. as of november 2006, we had outstanding subordinated debt
of $4.67billion.
table of contents
capital ratios and metrics
the following table sets forth information on our assets,
shareholders equity, leverage ratios and book value per
common share:
as of november
($ in millions, except per
share amounts)
total assets
$
838,201
$
706,804
adjusted
assets(1)
541,033
466,500
total shareholders equity
35,786
28,002
tangible equity
capital(2)
33,517
26,030
leverage
ratio(3)
23.4
x
25.2
x
adjusted leverage
ratio(4)
16.1
x
17.9
x
debt to equity
ratio(5)
3.4
x
3.0
x
common shareholders equity
32,686
26,252
tangible common shareholders
equity(6)
27,667
21,530
book value per common
share(7)
$
72.62
$
57.02
tangible book value per common
share(8)
61.47
46.76
(1)
adjusted assets excludes (i)low-risk collateralized assets
generally associated with our matched book and securities
lending businesses (which we calculate by adding our securities
borrowed and financial instruments purchased under agreements to
resell, and then subtracting our nonderivative short positions),
(ii)cash and securities we segregate for regulatory and
other purposes and (iii)goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts. in 2006, we
amended our calculation of adjusted assets. we no longer deduct
identifiable intangible assets associated with power contracts
from total assets. we amended our calculation in order to be
consistent with the calculation of tangible equity capital and
the adjusted leverage ratio (see footnote2 below). prior
periods have been adjusted to conform to the current
presentation.
the following table sets forth a reconciliation of total assets
to adjusted assets:
as of november
(in millions)
total assets
$
838,201
$
706,804
deduct:
securities borrowed
(219,342
)
(191,800
)
financial instruments purchased
under agreements to resell
(82,126
)
(83,619
)
add:
financial instruments sold, but not
yet purchased, at fair value
155,805
149,071
less derivative liabilities
(65,496
)
(57,829
)
subtotal
90,309
91,242
deduct:
cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes
(80,990
)
(51,405
)
goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts
(5,019
)
(4,722
)
adjusted assets
$
541,033
$
466,500
(2)
tangible equity capital equals total shareholders equity
and junior subordinated debt issued to a trust less goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, excluding power contracts. in
2006, we amended our calculation of tangible equity capital. we
no longer deduct identifiable intangible assets associated with
power contracts from total shareholders equity because,
unlike other intangible assets, less than 50% of these assets
are supported by common shareholders equity. prior periods
have been adjusted to conform to the current presentation. we
consider junior subordinated debt issued to a trust to be a
component of our tangible equity capital base due to the
inherent characteristics of these securities, including the
long-term nature of the securities, our ability to defer coupon
interest for up to ten consecutive semiannual periods and the
subordinated nature of the obligations in our capital structure.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the reconciliation of total
shareholders equity to tangible equity capital:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
35,786
$
28,002
add:
junior subordinated debt issued to
a trust
2,750
2,750
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts
(5,019
)
(4,722
)
tangible equity capital
$
33,517
$
26,030
(3)
leverage ratio equals total assets divided by total
shareholders equity.
(4)
adjusted leverage ratio equals adjusted assets divided by
tangible equity capital. we believe that the adjusted leverage
ratio is a more meaningful measure of our capital adequacy than
the leverage ratio because it excludes certain low-risk
collateralized assets that are generally supported with little
or no capital and reflects the tangible equity capital deployed
in our businesses.
(5)
debt to equity ratio equals unsecured long-term borrowings
divided by total shareholders equity.
(6)
tangible common shareholders equity equals total
shareholders equity less preferred stock, goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, excluding power contracts. in
2006, we amended our calculation of tangible common
shareholders equity. we no longer deduct identifiable
intangible assets associated with power contracts from total
shareholders equity because, unlike other intangible
assets, less than 50% of these assets are supported by common
shareholders equity. prior periods have been adjusted to
conform to the current presentation.
the following table sets forth a reconciliation of total
shareholders equity to tangible common shareholders
equity:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
35,786
$
28,002
deduct:
preferred stock
(3,100
)
(1,750
)
common shareholders equity
32,686
26,252
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts
(5,019
)
(4,722
)
tangible common shareholders
equity
$
27,667
$
21,530
(7)
book value per common share is based on common shares
outstanding, including restricted stock units granted to
employees with no future service requirements, of
450.1million and 460.4million as of november 2006
and november 2005, respectively.
(8)
tangible book value per common share is computed by dividing
tangible common shareholders equity by the number of
common shares outstanding, including restricted stock units
granted to employees with no future service requirements.
table of contents
contractual obligations and commitments
goldman sachs has contractual obligations to make future
payments related to our unsecured long-term borrowings, secured
long-term financings, long-term noncancelable lease agreements
and purchase obligations and has commitments under a variety of
commercial arrangements.
the following table sets forth our contractual obligations by
fiscal maturity date as of november2006:
contractual obligations
(in millions)
2008-
2010-
2012-
thereafter
total
unsecured long-term
borrowings(1)(2)(3)
$
$
33,262
$
20,043
$
69,537
$122,842
secured long-term
financings(1)(2)(4)
6,412
6,999
12,723
26,134
minimum rental payments
2,195
4,052
purchase
obligations(5)
1,448
2,019
(1)
obligations maturing within one year of our financial statement
date or redeemable within one year of our financial statement
date at the option of the holder are excluded from this table
and are treated as short-term obligations. see note3 to
the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our secured financings.
(2)
obligations that are repayable prior to maturity at the option
of goldman sachs are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. obligations that are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the holder are reflected at the dates such options
become exercisable.
(3)
includes $7.25billion of hybrid financial instruments
accounted for at fair value under sfasno.155 as of
november2006.
(4)
included in other secured financings in the
consolidated statements of financial condition.
(5)
primarily includes construction-related obligations.
as of november 2006, our unsecured long-term borrowings were
$122.84billion and consisted principally of senior
borrowings with maturities extending to 2036. see note5 to
the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our unsecured long-term borrowings.
as of november 2006, our future minimum rental payments, net of
minimum sublease rentals, under noncancelable leases were
$4.05billion. these lease commitments, principally for
office space, expire on various dates through 2069. certain
agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for
increases in real estate taxes and other charges. see
note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our leases.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office
space held in excess of our current requirements. this excess
space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is
being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied
space that we may exit in the future. we regularly evaluate our
current and future space capacity in relation to current and
projected staffing levels. we may incur exit costs in 2007 and
thereafter to the extent we (i)reduce our space capacity
or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties in the
locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of
existing space that had been held for potential growth. these
exit costs may be material to our results of operations in a
given period.
as of november 2006 and november 2005, we had
construction-related obligations of $1.63billion and
$579million, respectively, including purchase obligations
of $1.07billion and
table of contents
$481million, respectively, related to the development of
wind energy projects. construction-related obligations also
include outstanding purchase obligations of $500million
and $47million as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively, related to our new world headquarters in new york
city, which is expected to cost between $2.3billion and
$2.5billion.
the following table sets forth our commitments as of november
2006:
commitments
(in millions)
commitment amount by fiscal period of expiration
2008-
2010-
2012-
thereafter
total
commitments to extend credit
william street program
$
1,540
$
2,664
$
13,442
$
1,185
$
18,831
other commercial lending:
investment-grade
4,606
1,463
1,535
7,604
non-investment-grade
2,437
11,999
30,415
12,166
57,017
warehouse financing
15,488
1,538
17,026
total commitments to extend credit
24,071
17,664
45,392
13,351
100,478
forward starting resale and
securities borrowing agreements
18,285
18,285
forward starting repurchase and
securities lending agreements
17,148
17,148
commitments under letters of credit
issued by banks to counterparties
5,714
5,734
merchant banking commitments
4,058
1,353
6,355
underwriting commitments
2,620
2,620
other investment commitments
1,201
1,882
total
$
72,252
$
19,326
$
46,023
$
14,901
$
152,502
our commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to
counterparties that have fixed termination dates and are
contingent on the satisfaction of all conditions to borrowing
set forth in the contract. in connection with our lending
activities, we had outstanding commitments to extend credit of
$100.48billion as of november 2006 compared with
$61.12billion as of november 2005. since these commitments
may expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the
counterpartys request, the total commitment amount does
not necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow
requirements. our commercial lending commitments outside the
william street credit extension program are generally extended
in connection with contingent acquisition financing and other
types of corporate lending. we may seek to reduce our credit
risk on these commitments by syndicating all or substantial
portions of commitments to other investors. in addition,
commitments that are extended for contingent acquisition
financing are often short-term in nature, as borrowers often
replace them with other funding sources.
substantially all of the commitments provided under the william
street credit extension program are to investment-grade
corporate borrowers. commitments under the program are primarily
extended by william street commitment corporation (commitment
corp.), a consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of group inc.
whose assets and liabilities are legally separated from other
assets
table of contents
and liabilities of goldman sachs, and, to a lesser extent, by
william street credit corporation, another consolidated wholly
owned subsidiary of group inc. a majority of the commitments
extended by commitment corp. are supported by funding raised by
william street funding corporation (funding corp.), another
consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of group inc. whose assets
and liabilities are also legally separated from other assets and
liabilities of goldman sachs. with respect to substantially all
of the william street commitments, smfg provides us with credit
loss protection that is generally limited to 95% of the first
loss we realize on approved loan commitments, up to a maximum of
$1.00billion. in addition, subject to the satisfaction of
certain conditions, upon our request, smfg will provide
protection for 70% of the second loss on such commitments, up to
a maximum of $1.13billion. we also use other financial
instruments to mitigate credit risks related to certain william
street commitments not covered by smfg.
our commitments to extend credit also include financing for the
warehousing of financial assets to be securitized, primarily in
connection with collateralized debt obligations (cdos) and
mortgage securitizations, which are expected to be repaid from
the proceeds of the related securitizations for which we may or
may not act as underwriter. these arrangements are secured by
the warehoused assets, primarily consisting of mortgage-backed
and other asset-backed securities, residential and commercial
mortgages and corporate debt instruments.
see note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our commitments, contingencies and
guarantees.
risk management
management believes that effective risk management is of primary
importance to the success of goldman sachs. accordingly, we have
a comprehensive risk management process to monitor, evaluate and
manage the principal risks we assume in conducting our
activities. these risks include market, credit, liquidity,
operational, legal and reputational exposures.
risk management structure
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a
variety of separate but complementary financial, credit,
operational, compliance and legal reporting systems. in
addition, a number of committees are responsible for monitoring
risk exposures and for general oversight of our risk management
process, as described further below. these committees (including
their subcommittees), meet regularly and consist of senior
members of both our revenue-producing units and departments that
are independent of our revenue-producing units.
segregation of duties and management oversight are fundamental
elements of our risk management process. in addition to the
committees described below, functions that are independent of
the revenue-producing units, such as compliance, finance, legal,
management controls (internal audit) and operations, perform
risk management functions, which include monitoring, analyzing
and evaluating risk.
management committee. all risk control functions
ultimately report to our management committee. through both
direct and delegated authority, the management committee
approves all of our operating activities, trading risk
parameters and customer review guidelines.
risk committees. the firmwide risk committee reviews the
activities of existing businesses, approves new businesses and
products, approves firmwide and divisional market risk limits,
reviews business unit market risk limits, approves market risk
limits for selected sovereign markets and business units,
approves sovereign credit risk limits and credit risk limits by
ratings group, and reviews scenario analyses based on abnormal
or catastrophic market movements.
table of contents
the divisional risk committee sets market risk limits for our
trading activities subject to overall firmwide risk limits,
based on a number of measures, including value-at-risk (var),
stress tests and scenario analyses. several other committees
oversee various risk, valuation, operational, credit and
business practice issues related to our asset management
business.
business unit risk limits are established by the various risk
committees and may be further allocated by the business unit
managers to individual trading desks. trading desk managers have
the first line of responsibility for managing risk within
prescribed limits. these managers have in-depth knowledge of the
primary sources of risk in their respective markets and the
instruments available to hedge their exposures.
market risk limits are monitored by the finance division and are
reviewed regularly by the appropriate risk committee. limit
violations are reported to the appropriate risk committee and
business unit managers and addressed, as necessary. credit risk
limits are also monitored by the finance division and reviewed
by the appropriate risk committee.
business practices committee. the business practices
committee assists senior management in its oversight of
compliance, legal and operational risks and related reputational
concerns, such as potential conflicts of interest. the business
practices committee also reviews goldman sachs business
practices, policies, and procedures for consistency with our
business principles. the business practices committee reviews
these areas and makes recommendations for improvements as
necessary to mitigate potential risks and assist in achieving
adherence to our business principles.
firmwide capital committee. the firmwide capital
committee reviews and approves transactions involving
commitments of our capital. such capital commitments include,
but are not limited to, extensions of credit, alternative
liquidity commitments, certain bond underwritings and certain
distressed debt and principal finance activities. the firmwide
capital committee is also responsible for establishing business
and reputational standards for capital commitments and ensuring
that they are maintained on a global basis.
commitments committee. the commitments committee reviews
and approves underwriting and distribution activities, primarily
with respect to offerings of equity and equity-related
securities, and sets and maintains policies and procedures
designed to ensure that legal, reputational, regulatory and
business standards are maintained in conjunction with these
activities. in addition to reviewing specific transactions, the
commitments committee periodically conducts strategic reviews of
industry sectors and products and establishes policies in
connection with transaction practices.
credit policy committee. the credit policy committee
establishes and reviews broad credit policies and parameters
that are implemented by the credit department.
finance committee. the finance committee establishes and
oversees our liquidity policies, sets certain inventory position
limits and has oversight responsibility for liquidity risk, the
size and composition of our balance sheet and capital base, and
our credit ratings. the finance committee regularly reviews our
funding position and capitalization and makes adjustments in
light of current events, risks and exposures.
new products committee. the new products committee, under
the oversight of the firmwide risk committee, is responsible for
reviewing and approving new products and businesses globally.
operational risk committee. the operational risk
committee provides oversight of the ongoing development and
implementation of our operational risk policies, framework and
methodologies, and monitors the effectiveness of operational
risk management.
structured products committee. the structured products
committee reviews and approves structured product transactions
entered into with our clients that raise legal, regulatory, tax
or accounting issues or present reputational risk to goldman
sachs.
table of contents
market risk
the potential for changes in the market value of our trading and
investing positions is referred to as market risk. such
positions result from market-making, specialist, proprietary
trading and investing, and underwriting activities.
categories of market risk include exposures to interest rates,
equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. a
description of each market risk category is set forth below:
interest rate risks primarily result from exposures to changes
in the level, slope and curvature of the yield curve, the
volatility of interest rates, mortgage prepayment speeds and
credit spreads.
equity price risks result from exposures to changes in prices
and volatilities of individual equities, equity baskets and
equity indices.
currency rate risks result from exposures to changes in spot
prices, forward prices and volatilities of currency rates.
commodity price risks result from exposures to changes in spot
prices, forward prices and volatilities of commodities, such as
electricity, natural gas, crude oil, petroleum products, and
precious and base metals.
we seek to manage these risks by diversifying exposures,
controlling position sizes and establishing economic hedges in
related securities or derivatives. for example, we may hedge a
portfolio of common stocks by taking an offsetting position in a
related equity-index futures contract. the ability to manage an
exposure may, however, be limited by adverse changes in the
liquidity of the security or the related hedge instrument and in
the correlation of price movements between the security and
related hedge instrument.
in addition to applying business judgment, senior management
uses a number of quantitative tools to manage our exposure to
market risk for our long and short financial instruments. these
tools include:
risk limits based on a summary measure of market risk exposure
referred to as var;
scenario analyses, stress tests and other analytical tools that
measure the potential effects on our trading net revenues of
various market events, including, but not limited to, a large
widening of credit spreads, a substantial decline in equity
markets and significant moves in selected emerging
markets;and
inventory position limits for selected business units.
var
var is the potential loss in value of goldman sachs
trading positions due to adverse market movements over a defined
time horizon with a specified confidence level.
for the var numbers reported below, a one-day time horizon and a
95% confidence level were used. this means that there is a 1 in
20 chance that daily trading net revenues will fall below the
expected daily trading net revenues by an amount at least as
large as the reported var. thus, shortfalls from expected
trading net revenues on a single trading day greater than the
reported var would be anticipated to occur, on average, about
once a month. shortfalls on a single day can exceed reported var
by significant amounts. shortfalls can also accumulate over a
longer time horizon such as a number of consecutive trading days.
the modeling of the risk characteristics of our trading
positions involves a number of assumptions and approximations.
while management believes that these assumptions and
approximations are reasonable, there is no standard methodology
for estimating var, and different assumptions and/or
approximations could produce materially different var estimates.
table of contents
we use historical data to estimate our var and, to better
reflect current asset volatilities, we generally weight
historical data to give greater importance to more recent
observations. given its reliance on historical data, var is most
effective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which there
are no sudden fundamental changes or shifts in market
conditions. an inherent limitation of var is that the
distribution of past changes in market risk factors may not
produce accurate predictions of future market risk. different
var methodologies and distributional assumptions could produce a
materially different var. moreover, var calculated for a one-day
time horizon does not fully capture the market risk of positions
that cannot be liquidated or offset with hedges within one day.
changes in var between reporting periods are generally due to
changes in levels of exposure, volatilities and/or correlations
among asset classes.
the following tables set forth the daily var:
average daily
var(1)
(in millions)
year ended november
risk categories
interest rates
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification
effect(2)
(71
)
(44
)
(41
)
total
$
$
$
(1)
beginning in the first quarter of 2006, we excluded from our
calculation of var certain equity positions generally due to
their transfer restrictions or illiquidity. the effect of
excluding these positions was not material to prior periods and,
accordingly, such periods have not been adjusted. for a further
discussion of the market risk associated with these positions,
see other market risk measures below.
(2)
equals the difference between total var and the sum of the vars
for the four risk categories. this effect arises because the
four market risk categories are not perfectly correlated.
our average daily var increased to $101million in 2006
from $70million in 2005. we increased our level of
exposure across all risk categories, particularly equity prices
and interest rates.
our average daily var increased to $70million in 2005 from
$67million in 2004. the increase was primarily due to
higher levels of exposure to commodity prices, equity prices and
interest rates, partially offset by reduced exposures to
currency rates, as well as reduced volatilities, particularly in
interest rate and equity assets.
table of contents
daily
var(1)
(in millions)
year ended
as of november
november 2006
risk categories
high
low
interest rates
$
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification
effect(2)
(52
)
(44
)
total
$
$
$
$
(1)
beginning in the first quarter of 2006, we excluded from our
calculation of var certain equity positions generally due to
their transfer restrictions or illiquidity. the effect of
excluding these positions was not material to prior periods and,
accordingly, such periods have not been adjusted. for a further
discussion of the market risk associated with these positions,
see other market risk measures below.
(2)
equals the difference between total var and the sum of the vars
for the four risk categories. this effect arises because the
four market risk categories are not perfectly correlated.
our daily var increased to $119million as of
november2006 from $83million as of
november2005. we increased our level of exposure across
all risk categories, particularly equity prices.
the following chart presents our daily var during 2006:
table of contents
trading net revenues distribution
substantially all of our inventory positions are
marked-to-market on a
daily basis and changes are recorded in net revenues. the
following chart sets forth the frequency distribution of our
daily trading net revenues for substantially all inventory
positions included in var for the year ended november 2006:
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, we excluded daily net
revenues from our insurance business and our power generation
facilities from this chart. amounts for the full year have been
adjusted accordingly.
as part of our overall risk control process, daily trading net
revenues are compared with var calculated as of the end of the
prior business day. trading losses incurred on a single day
exceeded our 95%
one-day var on three
occasions during 2006.
other market risk measures
certain portfolios and individual positions are not included in
var, where var is not the most appropriate measure of risk
(e.g., due to transfer restrictions and/or illiquidity). the
market risk related to our investments in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg and the ordinary shares of icbc is
measured by estimating the potential reduction in net revenues
associated with a 10% decline in the smfg common stock price and
a 10% decline in the icbc ordinary share price, respectively.
the market risk related to the remaining positions is measured
by estimating the potential reduction in net revenues associated
with a 10% decline in asset values.
the sensitivity analyses for equity and debt positions in our
trading portfolio and equity, debt (primarily mezzanine
instruments) and real estate positions in our
non-trading portfolio
are measured by the impact of a decline in the asset values
(including the impact of leverage in the underlying investments
for real estate positions in our
non-trading portfolio)
of such positions. the fair values of the underlying positions
may be sensitive to changes in a number of factors, including,
but not limited to, the financial performance of the companies
or properties relative to budgets or projections, the projected
timing and amount of future cash flows, discount rates, trends
within sectors and/or regions, underlying business models and
equity prices.
table of contents
the sensitivity analysis of our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg, net of the economic hedge on the
unrestricted shares of common stock underlying a portion of our
investment, is measured by the impact of a decline in the smfg
common stock price. this sensitivity should not be extrapolated
to a significant decline in the smfg common stock price, as the
relationship between the fair value of our investment and the
smfg common stock price would be nonlinear due to downside
protection on the conversion stock price.
the sensitivity analysis of our investment in the ordinary
shares of icbc excludes interests held by investment funds
managed by goldman sachs.
the following table sets forth market risk for positions not
included in var. these measures do not reflect diversification
benefits across asset categories and, given the differing
likelihood of such events occurring, these measures have not
been aggregated:
10% sensitivity measure
amount as of
amount as of
asset categories
10% sensitivity measure
november 2006
november 2005(1)
(in millions)
trading
risk(2)
equity
underlying asset value
$
$
debt
underlying asset value
non-trading risk
smfg
smfg
common stock price
icbc
icbc
ordinary share price
n/a
other equity
underlying asset value
debt
underlying asset value
real
estate(3)
underlying asset value
(1)
beginning in the first quarter of 2006, we excluded from our
calculation of var certain equity positions generally due to
their transfer restrictions or illiquidity. the effect of
excluding these positions from var was not material to prior
periods and, accordingly, var for such periods has not been
adjusted. we have calculated the 10% sensitivity measure for
these equity positions (i.e., trading risk equity) as of
november 2005 to provide a
period-to-period
comparison. to the extent that other market risk measures in the
above table were affected, such measures have been adjusted to
conform to the current presentation.
(2)
in addition to the positions in these portfolios, which are
accounted for at fair value, we make investments accounted for
under the equity method and we also make direct investments in
real estate, both of which are included in other
assets in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. direct investments in real estate are accounted for
at cost less accumulated depreciation. see note 10 to the
consolidated financial statements in part ii, item 8 of the
annual report on form10-k for information on other
assets.
(3)
relates to interests in our real estate investment funds.
during 2006, the market risk for equity positions in our trading
portfolio increased due to new investments as well as an
increase in the fair value of the portfolio. the increase in
market risk in 2006 for debt positions in our trading portfolio
and debt, real estate and other equity positions in our
non-trading portfolio
was primarily due to new investments.
the decrease in market risk in 2006 for smfg was primarily due
to the impact of additional hedging with respect to the second
one-third installment
of unrestricted shares underlying our investment, partially
offset by the increase in the fair value of our investment due
to the passage of time in respect of the transfer restrictions
on the underlying common stock.
credit risk
credit risk represents the loss that we would incur if a
counterparty or an issuer of securities or other instruments we
hold fails to perform under its contractual obligations to us,
or upon a deterioration in the credit quality of third parties
whose securities or other instruments, including otc
table of contents
derivatives, we hold. our exposure to credit risk principally
arises through our trading, investing and financing activities.
to reduce our credit exposures, we seek to enter into netting
agreements with counterparties that permit us to offset
receivables and payables with such counterparties. in addition,
we attempt to further reduce credit risk with certain
counterparties by (i)entering into agreements that enable
us to obtain collateral from a counterparty on an upfront or
contingent basis, (ii)seeking
third-party guarantees
of the counterpartys obligations, and/or
(iii)transferring our credit risk to third parties using
credit derivatives and/or other structures and techniques.
to measure and manage our credit exposures, we use a variety of
tools, including credit limits referenced to both current
exposure and potential exposure. potential exposure is generally
based on projected
worst-case market
movements over the life of a transaction. in addition, as part
of our market risk management process, for positions measured by
changes in credit spreads, we use var and other sensitivity
measures. to supplement our primary credit exposure measures, we
also use scenario analyses, such as credit spread widening
scenarios, stress tests and other quantitative tools.
our global credit management systems monitor credit exposure to
individual counterparties and on an aggregate basis to
counterparties and their affiliates. these systems also provide
management, including the firmwide risk and credit policy
committees, with information regarding credit risk by product,
industry sector, country and region.
while our activities expose us to many different industries and
counterparties, we routinely execute a high volume of
transactions with counterparties in the financial services
industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial banks,
investment funds and other institutional clients, resulting in
significant credit concentration with respect to this industry.
in the ordinary course of business, we may also be subject to a
concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty,
borrower or issuer.
as of both november 2006 and november 2005, we held
u.s.government and federal agency obligations that
represented 6% and 7% of our total assets, respectively. in
addition, most of our financial instruments purchased under
agreements to resell as well as some derivatives are
collateralized by u.s.government, federal agency and other
sovereign obligations. as of november2006 and november
2005, we did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty
that exceeded 5% of our total assets. however, over the past
several years, the amount and duration of our credit exposures
have been increasing, due to, among other factors, the growth of
our lending and otc derivative activities and market evolution
towards longer dated transactions. a further discussion of our
derivative activities follows below.
credit risk on derivatives
derivative contracts are instruments, such as futures, forwards,
swaps or option contracts, that derive their value from
underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a combination of
these factors. derivative instruments may be privately
negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
substantially all of our derivative transactions are entered
into to facilitate client transactions, to take proprietary
positions or as a means of risk management. in addition to
derivative transactions entered into for trading purposes, we
enter into derivative contracts to manage currency exposure on
our net investment in
non-u.s.operations
and to manage the interest rate and currency exposure on our
long-term borrowings
and certain short-term
borrowings.
derivatives are used in many of our businesses, and we believe
that the associated market risk can only be understood relative
to all of the underlying assets or risks being hedged, or as
part of a broader trading strategy. accordingly, the market risk
of derivative positions is managed together with our
nonderivative positions.
fair values of our derivative contracts are reflected net of
cash paid or received pursuant to credit support agreements and
are reported on a
net-by-counterparty
basis in our consolidated
table of contents
statements of financial condition when management believes a
legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable netting
agreement. for an otc derivative, our credit exposure is
directly with our counterparty and continues until the maturity
or termination of such contract.
the following table sets forth the distribution, by credit
rating, of substantially all of our exposure with respect to otc
derivatives as of november2006 and november2005,
after taking into consideration the effect of netting
agreements. the categories shown reflect our internally
determined public rating agency equivalents:
over-the-counter
derivative credit exposure
($ in millions)
as of
as of november 2006
november 2005
exposure
percentage of
percentage of
collateral
net of
total exposure
total exposure
credit rating equivalent
exposure(1)
held
collateral
net of collateral
net of collateral
aaa/aaa
$
5,185
$
$
4,671
%
%
aa/aa2
12,499
1,447
11,052
a/a2
16,039
4,810
11,229
bbb/baa2
8,616
2,964
5,652
bb/ba2 or lower
8,906
3,760
5,146
unrated
1,891
total
$
53,136
$
14,449
$
38,687
%
%
(1)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support agreements of
$24.06billion.
the following tables set forth our otc derivative credit
exposure, net of collateral, by remaining contractual maturity:
exposure net of collateral
(in millions)
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
credit rating equivalent
months
months
years
years
or greater
total(1)
aaa/aaa
$
1,011
$
$
1,263
$
1,002
$
1,279
$
4,671
aa/aa2
2,204
1,496
2,521
2,834
1,997
11,052
a/a2
3,850
1,304
3,094
1,867
1,114
11,229
bbb/baa2
1,480
2,478
5,652
bb/ba2 or lower
1,729
1,550
5,146
unrated
total
$
10,751
$
4,375
$
10,911
$
6,583
$
6,067
$
38,687
0-6
6-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total(1)
interest
rates(2)
$
2,300
$
1,524
$
3,720
$
3,802
$
3,753
$
15,099
currencies
4,418
2,521
1,186
9,953
commodities
3,469
3,898
9,175
equities
1,010
1,137
4,460
total
$
10,751
$
4,375
$
10,911
$
6,583
$
6,067
$
38,687
(1)
where we have obtained collateral from a counterparty under a
master trading agreement that covers multiple products and
transactions, we have allocated the collateral ratably based on
exposure before giving effect to such collateral.
(2)
includes credit-related
derivatives.
table of contents
derivative transactions may also involve legal risks including
the risk that they are not authorized or appropriate for a
counterparty, that documentation has not been properly executed
or that executed agreements may not be enforceable against the
counterparty. we attempt to minimize these risks by obtaining
advice of counsel on the enforceability of agreements as well as
on the authority of a counterparty to effect the derivative
transaction. in addition, certain derivative transactions (e.g.,
credit derivative contracts) involve the risk that we may have
difficulty obtaining, or be unable to obtain, the underlying
security or obligation in order to satisfy any physical
settlement requirement.
liquidity and funding risk
liquidity is of critical importance to companies in the
financial services sector. most failures of financial
institutions have occurred in large part due to insufficient
liquidity resulting from adverse circumstances. accordingly,
goldman sachs has in place a comprehensive set of liquidity and
funding policies that are intended to maintain significant
flexibility to address both goldman
sachs-specific and
broader industry or market liquidity events. our principal
objective is to be able to fund goldman sachs and to enable our
core businesses to continue to generate revenue even under
adverse circumstances.
management has implemented a number of policies according to the
following liquidity risk management framework:
excess liquidity we maintain substantial excess
liquidity to meet a broad range of potential cash outflows in a
stressed environment including financing obligations.
asset-liability
management we ensure our funding sources are
sufficiently long-term
in order to withstand a prolonged or severe
liquidity-stressed
environment without having to rely on asset sales.
conservative liability structure we access funding
across a diverse range of markets, products and counterparties,
emphasize less
credit-sensitive
sources of funding and conservatively manage the distribution of
funding across our entity structure.
crisis planning we base our liquidity and funding
management on
stress-scenario
planning and maintain a crisis plan detailing our response to a
liquidity threatening event.
excess liquidity
our most important liquidity policy is to
pre-fund what we
estimate will be our likely cash needs during a liquidity crisis
and hold such excess liquidity in the form of unencumbered,
highly liquid securities that may be sold or pledged to provide
same-day liquidity.
this global core excess liquidity is intended to
allow us to meet immediate obligations without needing to sell
other assets or depend on additional funding from
credit-sensitive
markets. we believe that this pool of excess liquidity provides
us with a resilient source of funds and gives us significant
flexibility in managing through a difficult funding environment.
our global core excess reflects the following principles:
the first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most
critical to a companys survival.
focus must be maintained on all potential cash and collateral
outflows, not just disruptions to financing flows. goldman
sachs businesses are diverse, and its cash needs are
driven by many factors, including market movements, collateral
requirements and client commitments, all of which can change
dramatically in a difficult funding environment.
during a liquidity crisis,
credit-sensitive
funding, including unsecured debt and some types of secured
financing agreements, may be unavailable and the terms or
availability of other types of secured financing may change.
table of contents
as a result of our policy to
pre-fund liquidity that
we estimate may be needed in a crisis, we hold more unencumbered
securities and have larger unsecured debt balances than our
businesses would otherwise require. we believe that our
liquidity is stronger with greater balances of highly liquid
unencumbered securities, even though it increases our unsecured
liabilities.
the size of our global core excess is based on an internal
liquidity model together with a qualitative assessment of the
condition of the financial markets and of goldman sachs. our
liquidity model identifies and estimates cash and collateral
outflows over a
short-term horizon in a
liquidity crisis, including, but not limited to:
upcoming maturities of unsecured debt and letters of credit;
potential buybacks of a portion of our outstanding negotiable
unsecured debt;
adverse changes in the terms or availability of secured funding;
derivatives and other margin and collateral outflows, including
those due to market moves;
potential cash outflows associated with our prime brokerage
business;
additional collateral that could be called in the event of a
two-notch downgrade in
our credit ratings;
draws on our unfunded commitments not supported by william
street funding
corporation(1);and
upcoming cash outflows, such as tax and other large payments.
the following table sets forth the average loan value (the
estimated amount of cash that would be advanced by
counterparties against these securities) of our global core
excess:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.dollar-denominated
$
40,862
$
35,310
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
10,202
11,029
total global core excess
$
51,064
$
46,339
the
u.s.dollar-denominated
excess is comprised of only unencumbered u.s.government
and agency securities and highly liquid mortgage securities, all
of which are federal reserve
repo-eligible, as well
as overnight cash deposits. our
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
excess is comprised of only unencumbered french, german, united
kingdom and japanese government bonds and euro, british pound
and japanese yen overnight cash deposits. we strictly limit our
global core excess to this narrowly defined list of securities
and cash that we believe are highly liquid, even in a difficult
funding environment.
the majority of our global core excess is structured such that
it is available to meet the liquidity requirements of our parent
company, group inc., and all of its subsidiaries. the remainder
is primarily held to better match the currency and timing
requirements for potential liquidity obligations of our
principal
non-u.s.operating
entities.
(1)
the global core excess excludes liquid assets of
$6.93billion held separately by william street funding
corporation. see contractual obligations and
commitments above for a further discussion of the william
street credit extension program.
table of contents
in addition to our global core excess, we have a significant
amount of other unencumbered securities as a result of our
business activities. these assets, which are located in the
united states, europe and asia, include other government bonds,
high-grade money market
securities, corporate bonds and marginable equities. we do not
include these securities in our global core excess.
we maintain global core excess and other unencumbered assets in
an amount that, if pledged or sold, would provide the funds
necessary to replace at least 110% of our unsecured obligations
that are scheduled to mature (or where holders have the option
to redeem) within the next 12months. we assume
conservative loan values that are based on
stress-scenario
borrowing capacity and we regularly review these assumptions
asset class by asset class.
asset-liability
management
we seek to maintain a highly liquid balance sheet and
substantially all of our inventory is
marked-to-market daily.
we utilize aged inventory limits for certain financial
instruments as a disincentive to our businesses to hold
inventory over longer periods of time. we believe that these
limits provide a complementary mechanism for ensuring
appropriate balance sheet liquidity in addition to our standard
position limits. although our balance sheet fluctuates due to
seasonal activity, market conventions and periodic market
opportunities in certain of our businesses, our total assets and
adjusted assets at financial statement dates are not materially
different than those occurring within our reporting periods.
we seek to manage the maturity profile of our funding base such
that we should be able to liquidate our assets prior to our
liabilities coming due, even in times of prolonged or severe
liquidity stress. we do not rely on immediate sales of assets
(other than our global core excess) to maintain liquidity in a
distressed environment, although we recognize orderly asset
sales may be prudent and necessary in a persistent liquidity
crisis.
in order to avoid reliance on asset sales, our goal is to ensure
that we have sufficient total capital (unsecured
long-term borrowings
plus total shareholders equity) to fund our balance sheet
for at least one year. the amount of our total capital is based
on an internal liquidity model, which incorporates, among other
things, the following
long-term financing
requirements:
the portion of financial instruments owned that we believe could
not be funded on a secured basis in periods of market stress,
assuming conservative loan values;
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, property, leasehold
improvements and equipment, and other illiquid assets;
derivative and other margin and collateral requirements;
anticipated draws on our unfunded loan commitments;and
capital or other forms of financing in our regulated
subsidiaries that is in excess of their
long-term financing
requirements. see conservative liability
structure below for a further discussion of how we fund
our subsidiaries.
table of contents
certain financial instruments may be more difficult to fund on a
secured basis during times of market stress. accordingly, we
generally hold higher levels of total capital for these assets
than more liquid types of financial instruments. the table below
sets forth our aggregate holdings in these categories of
financial instruments:
as of november
(in millions)
mortgage whole loans and
collateralized debt
obligations(1)
$
41,017
$
31,459
bank
loans(2)
28,196
13,843
high-yield securities
11,054
8,822
emerging market debt securities
2,291
1,789
smfg convertible preferred stock
4,505
4,058
icbc ordinary
shares(3)
5,194
other corporate principal
investments(4)
3,675
1,723
other private equity and restricted
public equity securities
3,736
1,297
real estate principal
investments(4)
(1)
includes certain
mortgage-backed
interests held in qspes. see note3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our securitization activities.
(2)
includes funded commitments and inventory held in connection
with our origination and secondary trading activities.
(3)
includes interests of $3.28billion as of
november2006 held by investment funds managed by goldman
sachs.
(4)
excludes assets related to consolidated merchant banking funds
of $6.03billion and $1.93billion as of
november2006 and november2005, respectively, for
which goldman sachs is not at risk.
a large portion of these assets are funded through secured
funding markets or nonrecourse financing. we focus on
demonstrating a consistent ability to fund these assets on a
secured basis for extended periods of time to reduce refinancing
risk and to help ensure that they have an established amount of
loan value in order that they can be funded in periods of market
stress.
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding the financial instruments we hold.
conservative liability
structure
we seek to structure our liabilities conservatively to reduce
refinancing risk and the risk that we may redeem or repurchase
certain of our borrowings prior to their contractual maturity.
our conservative liability structure reflects the following
policies:
we fund a substantial portion of our inventory on a secured
basis. we believe secured financing provides goldman sachs with
a more stable source of liquidity than unsecured financing, as
it is less sensitive to changes in our credit due to underlying
collateral.
our liquidity depends to an important degree on the stability of
our short-term
unsecured financing base. accordingly, we prefer the use of
promissory notes (in which goldman sachs does not make a market)
over commercial paper, which we may repurchase prior to maturity
through the ordinary course of business as a market maker. as of
november 2006 and november 2005, our unsecured
short-term borrowings,
including the current portion of unsecured
long-term borrowings
was $47.9billion and $47.2billion, respectively. see
note4 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our unsecured
short-term borrowings.
table of contents
we recognize that secured funding transactions have greater
refinancing risk when the underlying collateral is more
difficult to fund. consequently, we seek longer maturities for
secured funding transactions collateralized by these assets. in
some cases, we use extendible maturity features to obtain a
rolling minimum term to the funding.
we issue substantially all of our unsecured debt without
provisions that would, based solely upon an adverse change in
our credit ratings, financial ratios, earnings, cash flows or
stock price, trigger a requirement for an early payment,
collateral support, change in terms, acceleration of maturity or
the creation of an additional financial obligation.
we seek to maintain broad and diversified funding sources
globally for both secured and unsecured funding. we make
extensive use of the repurchase agreement and securities lending
markets, as well as other secured funding markets. in addition,
we issue debt through syndicated u.s.registered offerings,
u.s.registered and 144a medium-term note programs,
offshore medium-term note offerings and other bond offerings,
u.s. and
non-u.s.commercial
paper and promissory note issuances, and other methods. we also
arrange for letters of credit to be issued on our behalf.
we benefit from distributing our debt issuances through our own
sales force to a large, diverse global creditor base and we
believe that our relationships with our creditors are critical
to our liquidity. our creditors include banks, governments,
securities lenders, pension funds, insurance companies and
mutual funds. we access funding in a variety of markets in the
united states, europe and asia. we have imposed various internal
guidelines on investor concentration, including the amount of
our commercial paper that can be owned and letters of credit
that can be issued by any single investor or group of investors.
to mitigate refinancing risk, we have created internal
guidelines on the principal amount of debt maturing on any one
day or during any week or year. the following table sets forth
our quarterly unsecured long-term borrowings maturity profile
through 2012:
(1)
our unsecured long-term borrowings include extendible debt if
the earliest maturity is one year or greater from our financial
statement date. extendible debt is categorized in the maturity
profile at the earliest possible maturity even though the debt
can be, and in the past generally has been, extended.
table of contents
the weighted average maturity of our unsecured long-term
borrowings as of november 2006 was approximately eight years. we
swap a substantial portion of our long-term borrowings into
u.s.dollar obligations with short-term floating interest
rates in order to minimize our exposure to interest rates and
foreign exchange movements.
for a discussion of factors that could impair our ability to
access the capital markets, see certain risk
factors that may affect our business above as well as
risk factors in parti, item1a of the
annual report on
form10-k.
subsidiary funding policies. substantially all of our
unsecured funding is raised by our parent company, group inc.
the parent company then lends the necessary funds to its
subsidiaries, some of which are regulated, to meet their asset
financing and capital requirements. in addition, the parent
company provides its regulated subsidiaries with the necessary
capital to meet their regulatory requirements. the benefits of
this approach to subsidiary funding include enhanced control and
greater flexibility to meet the funding requirements of our
subsidiaries.
our intercompany funding policies are predicated on an
assumption that, unless legally provided for, funds or
securities are not freely available from a subsidiary to its
parent company or other subsidiaries. in particular, many of our
subsidiaries are subject to laws that authorize regulatory
bodies to block or limit the flow of funds from those
subsidiaries to group inc. regulatory action of that kind could
impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on
obligations, including debt obligations. as such, we assume that
capital or other financing provided to our regulated
subsidiaries is not available to our parent company or other
subsidiaries. in addition, we assume that the global core excess
held in our principal
non-u.s.operating
entities will not be available to our parent company or other
subsidiaries and therefore is available only to meet the
potential liquidity requirements of those entities.
we also manage our liquidity risk by requiring senior and
subordinated intercompany loans to have maturities equal to or
shorter than the maturities of the aggregate borrowings of the
parent company. this policy ensures that the subsidiaries
obligations to the parent company will generally mature in
advance of the parent companys third-party borrowings. in
addition, many of our subsidiaries and affiliates pledge
collateral to the parent company to cover their intercompany
borrowings (other than subordinated debt) in order to mitigate
parent company liquidity risk.
group inc. has provided substantial amounts of equity and
subordinated indebtedness, directly or indirectly, to its
regulated subsidiaries; for example, as of november 2006, group
inc. had $17.32billion of such equity and subordinated
indebtedness invested in goldman, sachs& co., its
principal u.s.registered broker-dealer;
$23.87billion invested in goldman sachs international, a
regulated u.k. broker-dealer; $2.50billion invested in
goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p., a
u.s.registered broker-dealer; and $2.79billion
invested in goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl)a
regulated japanese broker-dealer. group inc. also had
$46.25billion of unsubordinated loans to these entities as
of november 2006, as well as significant amounts of capital
invested in and loans to its other regulated subsidiaries.
crisis planning
in order to be prepared for a liquidity event, or a period of
market stress, we base our liquidity risk management framework
and our resulting funding and liquidity policies on conservative
stress-scenario assumptions. our planning incorporates several
market-based and operational stress scenarios. we also
periodically conduct liquidity crisis drills to test our lines
of communication and backup funding procedures.
in addition, we maintain a liquidity crisis plan that specifies
an approach for analyzing and responding to a
liquidity-threatening
event. the plan provides the framework to estimate the likely
impact of a liquidity event on goldman sachs based on some of
the risks identified above and outlines which and to what extent
liquidity maintenance activities should be implemented based on
table of contents
the severity of the event. it also lists the crisis management
team and internal and external parties to be contacted to ensure
effective distribution of information.
credit ratings
we rely upon the short-term and
long-term debt capital
markets to fund a significant portion of our
day-to-day operations.
the cost and availability of debt financing is influenced by our
credit ratings. credit ratings are important when we are
competing in certain markets and when we seek to engage in
longer term transactions, including otc derivatives. we believe
our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit rating
agencies assessment of our liquidity, market, credit and
operational risk management practices, the level and variability
of our earnings, our capital base, our franchise, reputation and
management, our corporate governance and the external operating
environment. see certain risk factors that may
affect our business above for a discussion of the risks
associated with a reduction in our credit ratings.
the following table sets forth our unsecured credit ratings as
of november 2006:
short-term debt
long-term debt
subordinated debt(1)
preferred stock
dominion bond rating service limited
r-1 (middle)
aa (low)
not applicable
not applicable
fitch, inc.
f1+
aa-
a+
a+
moodys investors service
p1
aa3
a1
a2
standard&
poors(2)
a-1+
aa-
a+
a
(1)
during 2006, we issued $4.46billion of subordinated debt.
see note5 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding our subordinated debt.
(2)
during the fourth quarter of 2006, standard&
poors raised our
short-term debt rating
from a-1 to
a-1+, our
long-term debt rating
from a+ to aa-, our subordinated debt from a to a+ and our
preferred stock from a- to a.
as of november 2006, collateral or termination payments pursuant
to bilateral agreements with certain counterparties of
approximately $595million would have been required in the
event of a one-notch
reduction in our
long-term credit
ratings. in evaluating our liquidity requirements, we consider
additional collateral or termination payments that would be
required in the event of a
two-notch downgrade in
our long-term credit ratings, as well as collateral that has not
been called by counterparties, but is available to them.
cash flows
as a global financial institution, our cash flows are complex
and interrelated and bear little relation to our net earnings
and net assets and, consequently, we believe that traditional
cash flow analysis is less meaningful in evaluating our
liquidity position than the excess liquidity and
asset-liability
management policies described above. cash flow analysis may,
however, be helpful in highlighting certain macro trends and
strategic initiatives in our business.
year ended november 2006. our cash and cash equivalents
decreased by $3.97billion to $6.29billion at the end
of 2006. we raised $53.40billion in net cash from
financing activities, primarily in
long-term borrowings as
well as through secured financings, partially offset by common
stock repurchases. we used net cash of $57.37billion in
our operating and investing activities, primarily to capitalize
on trading and investing opportunities for our clients and
ourselves.
year ended november 2005. our cash and cash equivalents
increased by $5.90billion to $10.26billion at the
end of 2005. we raised $19.37billion in net cash from
financing activities, primarily in long-term borrowings, in
light of the favorable debt financing environment, as well as
through secured financings, partially offset by common stock
repurchases. we used net cash of $13.48billion in our
operating and investing activities, primarily to capitalize on
trading and investing opportunities for our clients and
ourselves.
table of contents
year ended november 2004. our cash and cash equivalents
decreased by $2.72billion to $4.37billion at the end
of 2004. we raised $31.75billion in net cash from
financing activities, primarily in
long-term borrowings,
in light of the favorable debt financing environment, as well as
through secured financings. we used net cash of
$34.48billion in our operating and investing activities,
primarily to capitalize on trading and investing opportunities
for our clients and ourselves, to meet additional collateral
requirements at securities exchanges and clearing organizations
and to provide additional funding support for our william street
loan commitments program.
operational risk
operational risk relates to the risk of loss arising from
shortcomings or failures in internal processes, people or
systems, and from external events. operational risk can arise
from many factors ranging from routine processing errors to
potentially costly incidents arising, for example, from major
systems failures. operational risk may also cause reputational
harm. thus, efforts to identify, manage and mitigate operational
risk must be equally sensitive to the risk of reputational
damage as well as the risk of financial loss.
we manage operational risk through the application of
long-standing, but
continuously evolving, firmwide control standards: the training,
supervision and development of our people; the active
participation and commitment of senior management in a
continuous process of identifying and mitigating key operational
risks across goldman sachs; and a framework of strong and
independent control departments that monitor operational risk on
a daily basis. together, these elements form a strong firmwide
control culture that serves as the foundation of our efforts to
minimize events that create operational risk and the damage they
can cause.
the operational risk department, an independent risk management
function, is responsible for developing and implementing a
standardized framework to identify, measure, monitor and manage
operational risk across goldman sachs. this framework, which
evolves with the changing needs of our businesses and regulatory
guidance, takes into account internal and external operational
risk events, business environment and internal control factors,
the ongoing analysis of
business-specific risk
metrics and the use of scenario analysis. while individual
business units have direct responsibility for the control and
mitigation of operational risk, this framework provides a
consistent methodology for identifying and monitoring
operational risk factors at the business unit and firmwide
level. for a further discussion of operational risk see
risk factors in parti,
item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
recent accounting developments
sfasno.123-r.
in december 2004, the financial accounting standards board
(fasb)issued
sfasno.123-r,
share-based payment, which is a revision to
sfasno.123, accounting for stock-based
compensation.
sfasno.123-r
focuses primarily on accounting for transactions in which an
entity obtains employee services in exchange for share-based
payments. under
sfasno.123-r,
the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award
of equity instruments is generally measured based on the
grant-date fair value of the award. under
sfasno.123-r,
share-based awards that do not require future service (i.e.,
vested awards) are expensed immediately. share-based employee
awards that require future service are amortized over the
relevant service period. we adopted
sfasno.123-r
under the modified prospective adoption method. under that
method of adoption, the provisions of
sfasno.123-r
are generally applied only to share-based awards granted
subsequent to adoption. the accounting treatment of share-based
awards granted to retirement-eligible employees prior to our
adoption of
sfasno.123-r
has not changed and financial statements for periods prior to
adoption are not restated for the effects of adopting
sfasno.123-r.
sfasno.123-r
requires the immediate expensing of share-based awards granted
to retirement-eligible employees, including awards subject to
non-compete agreements. share-based awards held by employees
that were retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
must continue to be amortized over the stated service period of
the award (and accelerated if the
table of contents
employee actually retires). consequently, our compensation and
benefits expenses in 2006 included (and, to a lesser extent,
2007 and 2008 will include) both the amortization of awards held
by employees that were retirement-eligible on the date of
adoption of
sfasno.123-r
as well as the full grant-date fair value of new awards granted
to such employees under
sfasno.123-r.
if we had amortized share-based compensation prior to the
adoption of
sfasno.123-r
over a period beginning on the date of grant and ending on the
earlier of the vesting date or the date of retirement
eligibility, compensation and benefits expenses would have been
$637million lower in 2006, approximately $350million
higher in 2005 and approximately $375million higher in
2004.
sfasno.123-r
requires expected forfeitures to be included in determining
share-based employee compensation expense. prior to the adoption
of
sfasno.123-r,
forfeiture benefits were recorded as a reduction to compensation
and benefits expense when an employee left goldman sachs and
forfeited the award. in the first quarter of 2006, we recorded a
benefit for expected forfeitures on all outstanding share-based
awards. the transition impact of adopting
sfasno.123-r
as of the first day of our 2006 fiscal year, including the
effect of accruing for expected forfeitures on outstanding
share-based awards, was not material to our results of
operations.
eitf issue
no.04-5. in
june 2005, the eitf reached consensus on issue
no.04-5,
determining whether a general partner, or the general
partners as a group, controls a limited partnership or similar
entity when the limited partners have certain rights,
which requires general partners to consolidate their
partnerships or to provide limited partners with rights to
remove the general partner or to terminate the partnership.
goldman sachs, as the general partner of numerous merchant
banking and asset management partnerships, was required to adopt
the provisions of eitf issue
no.04-5
(i)immediately for partnerships formed or modified after
june29,2005 and (ii)in the first quarter of
2007 for partnerships formed on or before june29, 2005
that have not been modified. we have generally provided limited
partners in these funds with rights to remove goldman sachs as
the general partner or to terminate the partnerships. therefore,
the adoption of eitf issue
no.04-5 did not
have a material effect on our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows in 2006 for partnerships formed or
modified after june29, 2005 and is not expected to have a
material effect in 2007.
sfasno.155. in february 2006, the fasb issued
sfasno.155, accounting for certain hybrid
financial instrumentsan amendment of fasb
statements no.133 and 140. sfasno.155
permits an entity to measure at fair value any hybrid financial
instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise
would require bifurcation. as permitted, we early adopted
sfasno.155 in the first quarter of 2006. adoption
did not have a material effect on our financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
sfasno.156. effective for the first quarter
of 2006, we adopted sfasno.156, accounting for
servicing of financial assets an amendment of fasb
statement no.140, which permits entities to elect to
measure servicing assets and servicing liabilities at fair value
and report changes in fair value in earnings. goldman sachs
acquires residential mortgage servicing rights in connection
with its mortgage securitization activities and has elected
under sfasno.156 to account for these servicing
rights at fair value. adoption did not have a material effect on
our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
finno.46-r-6.
in april 2006, the fasb issued fasb staff position
(fsp)finno.46-r-6,
determining the variability to be considered in applying
fasb interpretation
no.46-r.
this fsp addresses how a reporting enterprise should determine
the variability to be considered in applying
finno.46-r
by requiring an analysis of the purpose for which an entity was
created and the variability that the entity was designed to
create. this fsp must be applied prospectively to all entities
with which a reporting enterprise first becomes involved and to
all entities previously required to be analyzed under
finno. 46-r when
a reconsideration event has occurred. as permitted, we early
adopted fsp
finno.46-r-6
in the third quarter of 2006. adoption did not have a material
effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash
flows.
table of contents
finno.48. in june 2006, the fasb issued
finno.48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxes an interpretation of fasb statement
no.109. finno.48 requires that
management determine whether a tax position is more likely than
not to be sustained upon examination, including resolution of
any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the
technical merits of the position. once it is determined that a
position meets this recognition threshold, the position is
measured to determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in
the financial statements. we expect to adopt the provisions of
finno.48 beginning in the first quarter of 2008. we
are currently evaluating the impact of adopting
finno.48 on our financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows.
sfasno.157. in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.157, fair value
measurements. sfasno.157 clarifies that fair
value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be
exchanged to sell an asset or transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants. sfasno.157
nullifies the consensus reached in eitf issue
no.02-3
prohibiting the recognition of day one gain or loss on
derivative contracts (and hybrid instruments measured at fair
value under sfasno.133, accounting for
derivative instruments and hedging activities, as modified
by sfasno.155) where we cannot verify all of the
significant model inputs to observable market data and verify
the model to market transactions. however,
sfasno.157 requires that a fair value measurement
technique include an adjustment for risks inherent in a
particular valuation technique (such as a pricing model) and/or
the risks inherent in the inputs to the model, if market
participants would also include such an adjustment. in addition,
sfasno.157 prohibits the recognition of block
discounts for large holdings of unrestricted financial
instruments where quoted prices are readily and regularly
available in an active market. the provisions of
sfasno.157 are to be applied prospectively, except
for changes in fair value measurements that result from the
initial application of sfasno.157 to existing
derivative financial instruments measured under eitf issue
no.02-3, existing
hybrid instruments measured at fair value and block discounts,
which are to be recorded as an adjustment to opening retained
earnings in the year of adoption.
we intend to adopt sfasno.157 in the first quarter
of 2007. to determine the transition adjustment to opening
retained earnings, we have performed an analysis of existing
derivative instruments measured under eitf
issue02-3, hybrid
financial instruments and block discounts. to determine the
prospective transition adjustment that will be recorded in net
revenues in the first quarter of 2007, we will perform an
analysis of all other positions. with respect to principal
investments, the prospective transition adjustment may include
positive changes to investment valuations based on available
market evidence even if there have been no third-party
transactions in the capital structure of the underlying
investee. the transition adjustment to opening retained earnings
will not have a material effect on our financial condition. we
are currently evaluating the impact of sfasno.157 on
our results of operations for the first quarter of 2007.
sfasno.158. in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.158, employers accounting
for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and
132-r. sfasno.158 requires an entity to
recognize in its statement of financial condition the funded
status of its defined benefit pension and postretirement plans,
measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan
assets and the benefit obligation. sfasno.158 also
requires an entity to recognize changes in the funded status of
a defined benefit pension and postretirement plan within
accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, to the
extent such changes are not recognized in earnings as components
of periodic net benefit cost. sfasno.158 is
effective as of the end of the fiscal year ending after
december15, 2006. we will adopt sfasno.158 as
of the end of 2007. we do not expect that the adoption of
sfasno.158 will have a material effect on our
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk is set
forth under managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations risk
management in partii, item7 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
table of contents
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
index
page
no.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated
statements of earnings
consolidated
statements of financial condition
consolidated
statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated
statements of cash flows
consolidated
statements of comprehensive income
notes to
consolidated financial statements
note1
description of business
note2
significant accounting policies
note3
financial instruments
note4
unsecured short-term borrowings
note5
unsecured long-term borrowings
note6
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
note7
shareholders equity
note8
earnings per common share
note9
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
note10
other assets and other liabilities
note11
employee benefit plans
note12
employee incentive plans
note13
transactions with affiliated funds
note14
income taxes
note15
regulation
note16
business segments
supplemental
financial information
quarterly
results
common stock
price range
selected
financial data
financial statement schedule
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
schedulei
condensed nonconsolidated financial information of registrant
(parent company only)
f-2
condensed
nonconsolidated statements of earnings
f-2
condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
f-3
condensed
nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
f-4
notes to
condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
f-5
table of contents
managements report on internal control over
financial reporting
management of the goldman sachs group, inc., together with its
consolidated subsidiaries (the firm), is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting. the firms internal control over
financial reporting is a process designed under the supervision
of the firms principal executive and principal financial
officers to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the
firms financial statements for external reporting purposes
in accordance with u.s.generally accepted accounting
principles.
as of the end of the firms 2006 fiscal year, management
conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of the firms
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework
established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this
assessment, management has determined that the firms
internal control over financial reporting as of
november24, 2006 was effective.
our internal control over financial reporting includes policies
and procedures that pertain to the maintenance of records that,
in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect transactions
and dispositions of assets; provide reasonable assurances that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with u.s.generally
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and the directors of the firm; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the
firms assets that could have a material effect on our
financial statements.
managements assessment of the effectiveness of the
firms internal control over financial reporting as of
november24, 2006 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing on
pages109 and 110, which expresses unqualified opinions on
managements assessment and on the effectiveness of the
firms internal control over financial reporting as of
november24, 2006.
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and the shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
we have completed integrated audits of the goldman sachs group,
inc.s consolidated financial statements and of its
internal control over financial reporting as of
november24, 2006, in accordance with the standards of the
public company accounting oversight board (united states). our
opinions, based on our audits, are presented below.
consolidated financial statements and financial statement
schedule
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in
the accompanying index present fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of the goldman sachs group, inc. and its
subsidiaries (the company) at november24, 2006 and
november25, 2005, and the results of its operations and
its cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the period
ended november24, 2006 in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united states of america.
in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement schedule
listed in the accompanying index presents fairly, in all
material respects, the information set forth therein when read
in conjunction with the related consolidated financial
statements. these financial statements and financial statement
schedule are the responsibility of the companys
management. our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements and financial statement schedule based on
our audits. we conducted our audits of these statements in
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting
oversight board (united states). those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. an audit of financial statements includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
internal control over financial reporting
also, in our opinion, managements assessment, included in
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting appearing on page108, that the company
maintained effective internal control over financial reporting
as of november24, 2006 based on criteria established in
internal control integrated framework issued
by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway
commission (coso), is fairly stated, in all material respects,
based on those criteria. furthermore, in our opinion, the
company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal
control over financial reporting as of november24, 2006,
based on criteria established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the coso. the companys
management is responsible for maintaining effective internal
control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. our
responsibility is to express opinions on managements
assessment and on the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. we
conducted our audit of internal control over financial reporting
in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether effective internal control over
financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. an
audit of internal control over financial reporting includes
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, evaluating managements assessment, testing and
evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
control, and performing such other procedures as we consider
necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audit
provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.
table of contents
acompanys internal control over financial reporting
includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions
of the assets of the company; (ii)provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance
with authorizations of management and directors of the company;
and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention
or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a
material effect on the financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers
llp
new york, new york
january31, 2007
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
revenues
investment banking
$
5,613
$
3,599
$
3,286
trading and principal investments
24,027
15,452
11,984
asset management and securities
services
4,527
3,090
2,655
interest income
35,186
21,250
11,914
total revenues
69,353
43,391
29,839
interest expense
31,688
18,153
8,888
revenues, net of interest expense
37,665
25,238
20,951
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
16,457
11,758
9,681
brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees
1,985
1,416
1,172
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable
intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
cost of power generation
other expenses
1,132
total non-compensation expenses
6,648
5,207
4,594
total operating expenses
23,105
16,965
14,275
pre-tax earnings
14,560
8,273
6,676
provision for taxes
5,023
2,647
2,123
net earnings
9,537
5,626
4,553
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders
$
9,398
$
5,609
$
4,553
earnings per common
share
basic
$
20.93
$
11.73
$
9.30
diluted
19.69
11.21
8.92
average common shares
outstanding
basic
449.0
478.1
489.5
diluted
477.4
500.2
510.5
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of financial condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
6,293
$
10,261
cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes
80,990
51,405
receivables from brokers, dealers
and clearing organizations
13,223
15,150
receivables from customers and
counterparties
79,790
60,231
collateralized agreements:
securities borrowed
219,342
191,800
financial instruments purchased
under agreements to resell
82,126
83,619
financial instruments owned, at
fair value
298,563
238,043
financial instruments owned and
pledged as collateral, at fair value
35,998
38,983
total financial instruments owned,
at fair value
334,561
277,026
other assets
21,876
17,312
total assets
$
838,201
$
706,804
liabilities and
shareholders equity
unsecured short-term borrowings,
including the current portion of
unsecured long-term borrowings
$
47,904
$
47,247
payables to brokers, dealers and
clearing organizations
6,293
10,014
payables to customers and
counterparties
217,581
178,304
collateralized financings:
securities loaned
22,208
23,331
financial instruments sold under
agreements to repurchase
147,492
149,026
other secured financings
50,424
23,641
financial instruments sold, but not
yet purchased, at fair value
155,805
149,071
other liabilities and accrued
expenses
31,866
13,830
unsecured long-term borrowings
122,842
84,338
total liabilities
802,415
678,802
commitments, contingencies and
guarantees
shareholders
equity
preferred stock, par value
$0.01per share; 150,000,000shares authorized,
124,000 and 70,000shares issued and outstanding as of
november2006 and november2005, respectively, with
liquidation preference of $25,000per share
3,100
1,750
common stock, par value
$0.01per share; 4,000,000,000shares authorized,
599,697,200 and 573,970,935shares issued as of november
2006 and november2005, respectively, and 412,666,084 and
437,170,695shares outstanding as of november 2006 and
november 2005, respectively
restricted stock units and employee
stock options
6,290
3,415
nonvoting common stock, par value
$0.01per share; 200,000,000shares authorized, no
shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
19,731
17,159
retained earnings
27,868
19,085
accumulated other comprehensive
income
common stock held in treasury, at
cost, par value $0.01per share; 187,031,116 and
136,800,240shares as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively
(21,230
)
(13,413
)
total shareholders equity
35,786
28,002
total liabilities and
shareholders equity
$
838,201
$
706,804
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders
equity
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
preferred stock
balance, beginning of year
$
1,750
$
$
issued
1,350
1,750
balance, end of year
3,100
1,750
common stock, par value
$0.01per share
balance, beginning of year
issued
balance, end of year
restricted stock units and
employee stock options
balance, beginning of year
3,415
2,013
2,984
issuance and amortization of
restricted stock units and employee
stock options
3,787
1,871
1,050
delivery of common stock underlying
restricted stock units
(781
)
(423
)
(1,948
)
forfeiture of restricted stock
units and employee stock options
(129
)
(37
)
(62
)
exercise of employee stock options
(2
)
(9
)
(11
)
balance, end of year
6,290
3,415
2,013
additional paid-in
capital
balance, beginning of year
17,159
15,501
13,562
issuance of common stock, including
proceeds from exercise of employee stock options
2,432
1,580
2,479
cancellation of restricted stock
units in satisfaction of withholding tax requirements
(375
)
(163
)
(870
)
preferred stock issuance costs
(1
)
(31
)
excess net tax benefit related to
share-based compensation
cash settlement of share-based
compensation
(137
)
balance, end of year
19,731
17,159
15,501
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year
19,085
13,970
9,914
net earnings
9,537
5,626
4,553
dividends and dividend equivalents
declared on common stock and restricted stock units
(615
)
(494
)
(497
)
dividends declared on preferred
stock
(139
)
(17
)
balance, end of year
27,868
19,085
13,970
unearned compensation
balance, beginning of year
(117
)
(339
)
restricted stock units forfeited
amortization of restricted stock
units
balance, end of year
(117
)
accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss)
balance, beginning of year
currency translation adjustment,
net of tax
(27
)
minimum pension liability
adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
(11
)
net gains/(losses) on cash flow
hedges, net of tax
(7
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on
available-for-sale securities, net of tax
balance, end of year
common stock held in treasury,
at cost
balance, beginning of year
(13,413
)
(6,305
)
(4,500
)
repurchased
(7,817
)
(7,108
)
(1,805
)
balance, end of year
(21,230
)
(13,413
)
(6,305
)
total shareholders
equity
$
35,786
$
28,002
$
25,079
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating
activities
net earnings
$
9,537
$
5,626
$
4,553
non-cash items included in net
earnings
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable
intangible assets
deferred income taxes
(1,505
)
(450
)
1,040
share-based compensation
3,654
1,756
1,224
changes in operating assets and
liabilities
cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes
(21,044
)
(3,226
)
(18,437
)
net receivables from brokers,
dealers and clearing organizations
(1,794
)
1,322
(776
)
net payables to customers and
counterparties
20,520
2,953
36,669
securities borrowed, net of
securities loaned
(28,666
)
(32,777
)
(24,102
)
financial instruments sold under
agreements to repurchase, net of financial instruments purchased
under agreements to resell
(42
)
62,269
(12,912
)
financial instruments owned, at
fair value
(48,479
)
(66,899
)
(52,366
)
financial instruments sold, but not
yet purchased, at fair value
6,384
16,974
29,429
other, net
12,823
(815
)
1,442
net cash used for operating
activities
(47,617
)
(12,413
)
(33,391
)
cash flows from investing
activities
purchase of property, leasehold
improvements and equipment
(1,744
)
(1,421
)
(829
)
proceeds from sales of property,
leasehold improvements and equipment
business acquisitions, net of cash
acquired
(1,661
)
(556
)
(255
)
proceeds from sales of investments
2,114
purchase of available-for-sale
securities
(12,922
)
proceeds from sales of
available-for-sale securities
4,396
net cash used for investing
activities
(9,748
)
(1,064
)
(1,084
)
cash flows from financing
activities
other secured financings
(short-term), net
16,856
2,238
4,600
proceeds from issuance of other
secured financings (long-term)
14,451
7,279
7,584
repayment of other secured
financings (long-term), including the current portion
(7,420
)
(5,941
)
(754
)
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
(4,031
)
(5
)
(699
)
proceeds from issuance of unsecured
long-term borrowings
48,839
35,898
31,699
repayment of unsecured long-term
borrowings, including the current portion
(13,510
)
(16,399
)
(9,444
)
derivative contracts with a
financing element, net
3,494
1,060
common stock repurchased
(7,817
)
(7,108
)
(1,805
)
dividends and dividend equivalents
paid on common stock, preferred stock and restricted stock units
(754
)
(511
)
(497
)
proceeds from issuance of common
stock
1,613
1,143
proceeds from issuance of preferred
stock, net of issuance costs
1,349
1,719
excess tax benefit related to
share-based compensation
cash settlement of share-based
compensation
(137
)
net cash provided by financing
activities
53,397
19,373
31,753
net increase/(decrease) in cash and
cash equivalents
(3,968
)
5,896
(2,722
)
cash and cash equivalents,
beginning of year
10,261
4,365
7,087
cash and cash equivalents, end of
year
$
6,293
$
10,261
$
4,365
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were
$30.98billion, $17.49billion and $8.55billion
for the years ended november2006, november 2005 and
november 2004, respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were
$4.56billion, $2.47billion and $1.02billion
for the years ended november2006, november 2005 and
november 2004, respectively.
non-cash activities:
the firm assumed $498million, $1.15billion and $1.63
billion of debt in connection with business acquisitions for the
years ended november2006, november 2005 and november 2004,
respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
year ended november
(in millions)
net earnings
$
9,537
$
5,626
$
4,553
currency translation adjustment,
net of tax
(27
)
minimum pension liability
adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
(11
)
net gains/(losses) on cash flow
hedges, net of tax
(7
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on
available-for-sale securities, net of tax
comprehensive income
$
9,558
$
5,615
$
4,558
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1.
description of business
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc.), a delaware
corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries
(collectively, the firm), is a leading global investment
banking, securities and investment management firm that provides
a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals.
the firms activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking. the firm provides a broad range of
investment banking services to a diverse group of corporations,
financial institutions, investment funds, governments and
individuals.
trading and principal investments. the firm facilitates
client transactions with a diverse group of corporations,
financial institutions, investment funds, governments and
individuals and takes proprietary positions through market
making in, trading of and investing in fixed income and equity
products, currencies, commodities and derivatives on these
products. in addition, the firm engages in specialist and
market-making activities on equities and options exchanges and
clears client transactions on major stock, options and futures
exchanges worldwide. in connection with the firms merchant
banking and other investing activities, the firm makes principal
investments directly and through funds that the firm raises and
manages.
asset management and securities services. the firm
provides investment advisory and financial planning services and
offers investment products (primarily through separate accounts
and funds) across all major asset classes to a diverse group of
institutions and individuals worldwide and provides prime
brokerage services, financing services and securities lending
services to institutional clients, including hedge funds, mutual
funds, pension funds and foundations, and to high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
note2.
significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
these consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
group inc. and all other entities in which the firm has a
controlling financial interest. all material intercompany
transactions and balances have been eliminated.
the firm determines whether it has a controlling financial
interest in an entity by first evaluating whether the entity is
a voting interest entity, a variable interest entity
(vie)or a qualifying special-purpose entity
(qspe)under generally accepted accounting principles.
voting interest entities. voting interest entities are
entities in which (i)the total equity investment at risk
is sufficient to enable the entity to finance its activities
independently and (ii)the equity holders have the
obligation to absorb losses, the right to receive residual
returns and the right to make decisions about the entitys
activities. voting interest entities are consolidated in
accordance with accounting research bulletin
(arb)no.51, consolidated financial
statements, as amended. arb no.51states that
the usual condition for a controlling financial interest in an
entity is ownership of a majority voting interest. accordingly,
the firm consolidates voting interest entities in which it has a
majority voting interest.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
variable interest entities. vies are entities that lack
one or more of the characteristics of a voting interest entity.
a controlling financial interest in a vie is present when an
enterprise has a variable interest, or a combination of variable
interests, that will absorb a majority of the vies
expected losses, receive a majority of the vies expected
residual returns, or both. the enterprise with a controlling
financial interest, known as the primary beneficiary,
consolidates the vie. in accordance with financial accounting
standards board (fasb)interpretation
(fin)no.46-r,
consolidation of variable interest entities, the
firm consolidates vies of which it is the primary beneficiary.
the firm determines whether it is the primary beneficiary of a
vie by first performing a qualitative analysis of the vie that
includes a review of, among other factors, its capital
structure, contractual terms, which interests create or absorb
variability, related party relationships and the design of the
vie. where qualitative analysis is not conclusive, the firm
performs a quantitative analysis. for purposes of allocating a
vies expected losses and expected residual returns to its
variable interest holders, the firm utilizes the top
down method. under that method, the firm calculates its
share of the vies expected losses and expected residual
returns using the specific cash flows that would be allocated to
it, based on contractual arrangements and/or the firms
position in the capital structure of the vie, under various
probability-weighted scenarios.
qspes. qspes are passive entities that are commonly used
in mortgage and other securitization transactions. statement of
financial accounting standards (sfas)no.140,
accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets
and extinguishments of liabilities, sets forth the
criteria an entity must satisfy to be a qspe. these criteria
include the types of assets a qspe may hold, limits on asset
sales, the use of derivatives and financial guarantees, and the
level of discretion a servicer may exercise in attempting to
collect receivables. these criteria may require management to
make judgments about complex matters, including whether a
derivative is considered passive and the degree of discretion a
servicer may exercise. in accordance with sfasno.140
and
finno.46-r,
the firm does not consolidate qspes.
equity-method investments. when the firm does not have a
controlling financial interest in an entity but exerts
significant influence over the entitys operating and
financial policies (generally defined as owning a voting
interest of 20% to 50%) and has an investment in common stock or
in-substance common stock, the firm accounts for its investment
in accordance with the equity method of accounting prescribed by
accounting principles board (apb)opinion no.18,
the equity method of accounting for investments in common
stock.
other. if the firm does not consolidate an entity or
apply the equity method of accounting, the firm accounts for its
investment at fair value. the firm also has formed numerous
nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party investors that
are typically organized as limited partnerships. the firm acts
as general partner for these funds and does not hold a majority
of the economic interests in any fund. for funds established on
or before june29,2005 in which the firm holds more
than a minor interest and for funds established or modified
after june29, 2005, the firm has generally provided the
third-party investors with rights to remove the firm as the
general partner or to terminate the funds (see
recent accounting developments below for
a discussion of the impact of emerging issues task force
(eitf)issue
no.04-5,
determining whether a general partner, or the general
partners as a group, controls a limited partnership or similar
entity when the limited partners have certain rights).
these fund investments are included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
unless otherwise stated herein, all references to november 2006,
november 2005 and november 2004 refer to the firms fiscal
years ended, or the dates, as the context requires,
november24, 2006, november25, 2005 and
november26, 2004, respectively. certain reclassifications
have been made to previously reported amounts to conform to the
current presentation.
use of estimates
these consolidated financial statements have been prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that
require management to make certain estimates and assumptions.
the most important of these estimates and assumptions relate to
fair value measurements, the accounting for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets and the provision for potential
losses that may arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings
and tax audits. although these and other estimates and
assumptions are based on the best available information, actual
results could be materially different from these estimates.
revenue recognition
investment banking. underwriting revenues and fees from
mergers and acquisitions and other financial advisory
assignments are recognized in the consolidated statements of
earnings when the services related to the underlying transaction
are completed under the terms of the engagement. expenses
associated with such transactions are deferred until the related
revenue is recognized or the engagement is otherwise concluded.
underwriting revenues are presented net of related expenses.
expenses associated with financial advisory transactions are
recorded as non-compensation expenses, net of client
reimbursements.
financial instruments. total financial instruments
owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold,
but not yet purchased, at fair value are reflected in the
consolidated statements of financial condition on a trade-date
basis and consist of financial instruments carried at fair value
or amounts that approximate fair value, with related unrealized
gains or losses generally recognized in trading and
principal investments in the consolidated statements of
earnings. the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount
at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current
transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or
liquidation sale.
in determining fair value, the firm separates its financial
instruments into three categories cash (i.e.,
nonderivative) trading instruments, derivative contracts and
principal investments.
cash trading instruments. fair values of the firms
cash trading instruments are generally obtained from quoted
market prices in active markets, broker or dealer price
quotations, or alternative pricing sources with reasonable
levels of price transparency. the types of instruments valued in
this manner include u.s.government and agency securities,
other sovereign government obligations, liquid mortgage
products, investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds,
listed equities, money market securities, state, municipal and
provincial obligations, and physical commodities.
certain cash trading instruments trade infrequently and have
little or no price transparency. such instruments include
certain corporate bank loans, mortgage whole loans and
distressed debt. the firm values these instruments initially at
cost and generally does not adjust valuations unless there is
substantive evidence supporting a change in the value of the
underlying instrument or valuation assumptions (such as similar
market transactions, changes in financial ratios or changes in
the credit ratings of the underlying companies). where there is
evidence supporting a change in the value, the firm uses
valuation methodologies such as the present value of known or
estimated cash flows.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
cash trading instruments owned by the firm (long positions) are
marked to bid prices, and instruments sold but not yet purchased
(short positions) are marked to offer prices. in certain
circumstances, such as for positions that are illiquid or have
transfer restrictions, the fair value reflects liquidity
valuation adjustments based on market evidence or predetermined
policies. for certain highly illiquid positions,
managements estimates are used to determine these
liquidity valuation adjustments. see recent
accounting developments below for a discussion of the
impact of sfasno.157, fair value
measurements on the valuation of financial instruments.
derivative contracts. fair values of the firms
derivative contracts consist of exchange-traded and
over-the-counter (otc)
derivatives and are reflected net of cash that the firm has paid
and received (for example, option premiums or cash paid or
received pursuant to credit support agreements). fair values of
the firms exchange-traded derivatives are generally
determined from quoted market prices. otc derivatives are valued
using valuation models. the firm uses a variety of valuation
models including the present value of known or estimated cash
flows and option-pricing models. the valuation models used to
derive the fair values of the firms otc derivatives
require inputs including contractual terms, market prices, yield
curves, credit curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates
and correlations of such inputs. the selection of a model to
value an otc derivative depends upon the contractual terms of,
and specific risks inherent in, the instrument as well as the
availability of pricing information in the market. the firm
generally uses similar models to value similar instruments.
where possible, the firm verifies the values produced by its
pricing models to market transactions. for otc derivatives that
trade in liquid markets, such as generic forwards, swaps and
options, model selection does not involve significant judgment
because market prices are readily available. for otc derivatives
that trade in less liquid markets, model selection requires more
judgment because such instruments tend to be more complex and
pricing information is less available in these markets. price
transparency is inherently more limited for more complex
structures because they often combine one or more product types,
requiring additional inputs such as correlations and
volatilities. as markets continue to develop and more pricing
information becomes available, the firm continues to review and
refine the models it uses.
at the inception of an otc derivative contract (day one), the
firm values the contract at the model value if the firm can
verify all of the significant model inputs to observable market
data and verify the model to market transactions. when
appropriate, valuations are adjusted to reflect various factors
such as liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations.
these adjustments are generally based on market evidence or
predetermined policies. in certain circumstances, such as for
highly illiquid positions, managements estimates are used
to determine these adjustments.
where the firm cannot verify all of the significant model inputs
to observable market data and verify the model to market
transactions, the firm values the contract at the transaction
price at inception and, consequently, records no day one gain or
loss in accordance with eitf issue
no.02-3,
issues involved in accounting for derivative contracts
held for trading purposes and contracts involved in energy
trading and risk management activities.
following day one, the firm adjusts the inputs to its valuation
models only to the extent that changes in these inputs can be
verified by similar market transactions, third-party pricing
services and/or broker quotes, or can be derived from other
substantive evidence such as empirical market data. in
circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model to market
transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model
could produce a materially different
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
estimate of fair value. see recent accounting
developments below for a discussion of the impact of
sfasno.157 on the valuation of financial instruments.
principal investments. in valuing corporate and real
estate principal investments included within the principal
investments component of our trading and principal investments
segment, the firms portfolio is separated into private
investments, investments in the convertible preferred stock of
sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)and the
ordinary shares of industrial and commercial bank of china
limited (icbc), and other public investments.
the firms private principal investments, by their nature,
have little or no price transparency. such investments are
initially carried at cost as an approximation of fair value.
adjustments to carrying value are made if there are third-party
transactions evidencing a change in value. downward adjustments
are also made, in the absence of third-party transactions, if it
is determined that the expected realizable value of the
investment is less than the carrying value. in reaching that
determination, many factors are considered including, but not
limited to, the operating cash flows and financial performance
of the companies or properties relative to budgets or
projections, trends within sectors and/or regions, underlying
business models, expected exit timing and strategy, and any
specific rights or terms associated with the investment, such as
conversion features and liquidation preferences. see
recent accounting developments below for
a discussion of the impact of sfasno.157 on the
valuation of financial instruments.
the firms public principal investments, which tend to be
large, concentrated holdings that result from initial public
offerings or other corporate transactions, are valued using
quoted market prices less a liquidity valuation adjustment based
on predetermined written policies.
the firms investment in the convertible preferred stock of
smfg is carried at fair value, which is derived from a model
that incorporates smfgs common stock price and credit
spreads, the impact of nontransferability and illiquidity, and
downside protection on the conversion strike price. the
firms investment in the convertible preferred stock of
smfg is generally nontransferable without the consent of smfg,
but is freely convertible into smfg common stock. as of november
2006, the firm had hedged two-thirds of the common stock
underlying its investment in smfg. restrictions on the
firms ability to hedge or sell the remaining shares will
lapse on february7, 2007. as of november 2006, the
conversion price was 318,800, subject to downward
adjustment if the price of smfg common stock at the time of
conversion is less than the conversion price (subject to a floor
of 105,100).
the firms investment in the ordinary shares of icbc is
carried at fair value using quoted market prices less a
liquidity valuation adjustment. the ordinary shares acquired
from icbc are subject to transfer restrictions that, among other
things, prohibit any sale, disposition or other transfer until
april28, 2009. from april28, 2009 to
october20, 2009, the firm may transfer up to 50% of the
aggregate ordinary shares of icbc that the firm owned as of
october20, 2006. the firm may transfer the remaining
shares after october20, 2009. a portion of the firms
interest is held by investment funds managed by the firm.
transfers of financial assets. in general, transfers of
financial assets are accounted for as sales under
sfasno.140 when the firm has relinquished control
over the transferred assets. for transfers accounted for as
sales, any related gains or losses are recognized in net
revenues. transfers that are not accounted for as sales are
accounted for as collateralized financings, with the related
interest expense recognized in net revenues over the lives of
the transactions.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
collateralized agreements and financings. collateralized
agreements consist of resale agreements and securities borrowed.
collateralized financings consist of repurchase agreements,
securities loaned and other secured financings. interest income
or expense on collateralized agreements and collateralized
financings is recognized in net revenues over the life of the
transaction.
resale and repurchase agreements. financial instruments
purchased under agreements to resell and financial instruments
sold under agreements to repurchase, principally
u.s.government, federal agency and investment-grade
sovereign obligations, represent short-term collateralized
financing transactions and are carried in the consolidated
statements of financial condition at their contractual amounts
plus accrued interest. these amounts are presented on a
net-by-counterparty basis when the requirements of
finno.41, offsetting of amounts related to
certain repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements, or
finno.39, offsetting of amounts related to
certain contracts, are satisfied. the firm receives
financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell,
makes delivery of financial instruments sold under agreements to
repurchase, monitors the market value of these financial
instruments on a daily basis and delivers or obtains additional
collateral as appropriate.
securities borrowed and loaned. securities borrowed and
loaned are recorded based on the amount of cash collateral
advanced or received. these transactions are generally
collateralized by cash, securities or letters of credit. the
firm receives securities borrowed, makes delivery of securities
loaned, monitors the market value of securities borrowed and
loaned, and delivers or obtains additional collateral as
appropriate.
other secured financings. in addition to repurchase
agreements and securities loaned, the firm funds assets through
the use of other secured financing arrangements and pledges
financial instruments and other assets as collateral in these
transactions. the firm records these financings based on the
amount of cash received. see note3 for further information
regarding these arrangements.
power generation. power generation revenues associated
with the firms consolidated power generation facilities
are included in trading and principal investments in
the consolidated statements of earnings when power is delivered.
these revenues were $553million, $496million and
$488million for the years ended november 2006, november
2005 and november 2004, respectively.
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. compensation and benefits includes direct
employee costs associated with the firms consolidated
power generation facilities and cost of power
generation includes the other direct costs associated with
these power generation facilities and related contractual
assets. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to our reported net
earnings. this reclassification increased operating expenses as
follows:
year ended november
(in millions)
compensation and benefits
$
$
$
cost of power generation
total
$
$
$
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
commissions. commission revenues from executing and
clearing client transactions on stock, options and futures
markets worldwide are recognized in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings on
a trade-date basis.
insurance activities. revenues from variable annuity and
variable life insurance contracts, and from providing
reinsurance of such contracts, generally consist of fees
assessed on contract holder account balances for mortality
charges, policy administration and surrender charges. these fees
are recognized within trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings in
the period that services are provided.
interest credited to variable annuity and life insurance account
balances and changes in reserves are recognized in other
expenses in the consolidated statements of earnings.
premiums earned for providing property catastrophe reinsurance
are recognized within trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings
over the coverage period, net of premiums ceded for the cost of
reinsurance. expenses for liabilities related to property
catastrophe reinsurance claims, including estimates of claims
that have been incurred but not reported, are recognized within
other expenses in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
merchant banking overrides. the firm is entitled to
receive merchant banking overrides (i.e., an increased share of
a funds income and gains) when the return on the
funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns.
overrides are based on investment performance over the life of
each merchant banking fund, and future investment
underperformance may require amounts of override previously
distributed to the firm to be returned to the funds.
accordingly, overrides are recognized in the consolidated
statements of earnings only when all material contingencies have
been resolved. overrides are included in trading and
principal investments in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
asset management. management fees are recognized over the
period that the related service is provided based upon average
net asset values. in certain circumstances, the firm is also
entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of a
funds return or when the return on assets under management
exceeds specified benchmark returns or other performance
targets. incentive fees are generally based on investment
performance over a
12-month period and are
subject to adjustment prior to the end of the measurement
period. accordingly, incentive fees are recognized in the
consolidated statements of earnings when the measurement period
ends. asset management fees and incentive fees are included in
asset management and securities services in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
share-based compensation
in the first quarter of 2006, the firm adopted
sfasno.123-r,
share-based payment, which is a revision to
sfasno.123, accounting for stock-based
compensation.
sfasno.123-r
focuses primarily on accounting for transactions in which an
entity obtains employee services in exchange for share-based
payments. under
sfasno.123-r,
the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award
of equity instruments is generally measured based on the
grant-date fair value of the award. under
sfasno.123-r,
share-based awards that do not require future service (i.e.,
vested awards) are expensed immediately. share-based employee
awards that require future service are amortized over the
relevant service period. the firm adopted
sfasno.123-r
under the modified prospective adoption method. under that
method of adoption, the provisions of
sfasno.123-r
are generally applied only to share-based awards granted
subsequent to adoption. the accounting treatment of share-based
awards granted to retirement-eligible employees prior to the
firms adoption of
sfasno.123-r
has not changed and financial statements for periods prior to
adoption are not restated for the effects of adopting
sfasno.123-r.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
sfasno.123-r
requires the immediate expensing of share-based awards granted
to retirement-eligible employees, including awards subject to
non-compete agreements. share-based awards held by employees
that were retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
must continue to be amortized over the stated service period of
the award (and accelerated if the employee actually retires).
consequently, the firms compensation and benefits expenses
in 2006 included (and, to a lesser extent, 2007 and 2008 will
include) both the amortization of awards held by employees that
were retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
as well as the full grant-date fair value of new awards granted
to such employees under
sfasno.123-r.
if the firm had amortized share-based compensation prior to the
adoption of
sfasno.123-r
over a period beginning on the date of grant and ending on the
earlier of the vesting date or the date of retirement
eligibility, compensation and benefits expenses would have been
$637million lower in 2006, approximately $350million
higher in 2005 and approximately $375million higher in
2004.
sfasno.123-r
requires expected forfeitures to be included in determining
share-based employee compensation expense. prior to the adoption
of
sfasno.123-r,
forfeiture benefits were recorded as a reduction to compensation
and benefits expense when an employee left the firm and
forfeited the award. in the first quarter of 2006, the firm
recorded a benefit for expected forfeitures on all outstanding
share-based awards. the transition impact of adopting
sfasno.123-r
as of the first day of the firms 2006 fiscal year,
including the effect of accruing for expected forfeitures on
outstanding share-based awards, was not material to the
firms results of operations.
the firm began to account for share-based awards in accordance
with the fair value method prescribed by sfasno.123,
accounting for stock-based compensation, as amended
by sfasno.148, accounting for stock-based
compensation
transition and disclosure, in 2003. share-based
employee awards granted for the year ended november29,
2002 and prior years were accounted for under the
intrinsic-value-based method prescribed by apb opinion
no.25, accounting for stock issued to
employees, as permitted by sfasno.123.
therefore, no compensation expense was recognized for unmodified
stock options issued for years prior to fiscal2003 that
had no intrinsic value on the date of grant.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
if the firm were to recognize compensation expense over the
relevant service period, generally three years, under the fair
value method per sfasno.123 with respect to stock
options granted for the year ended november29, 2002 and
prior years, net earnings would have decreased, resulting in pro
forma net earnings and earnings per common share (eps)as
set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders, as reported
$
5,609
$
4,553
add:
share-based compensation expense,
net of related tax effects, included in reported net earnings
1,133
deduct:
share-based compensation expense,
net of related tax effects, determined under the fair value
method for all awards
(1,178
)
(947
)
pro forma net earnings applicable
to common shareholders
$
5,564
$
4,396
earnings per common share, as
reported
basic
$
11.73
$
9.30
diluted
11.21
8.92
pro forma earnings per common share
basic
$
11.64
$
8.98
diluted
11.12
8.61
the firm pays cash dividend equivalents on outstanding
restricted stock units. dividend equivalents paid on restricted
stock units accounted for under sfasno.123 and
sfasno.123-r
are charged to retained earnings when paid.
sfasno.123-r
requires dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units
expected to be forfeited to be included in compensation expense.
prior to the adoption of
sfasno.123-r,
dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units that were
later forfeited by employees were reclassified to compensation
expense from retained earnings. dividend equivalents paid on
restricted stock units granted prior to 2003 were accounted for
under apb opinion no.25 and charged to compensation
expense. the tax benefit related to dividend equivalents paid on
restricted stock units is accounted for as a reduction of income
tax expense.
prior to the adoption of
sfasno.123-r,
the firm presented all tax benefits resulting from share-based
compensation as cash flows from operating activities in the
consolidated statements of cash flows.
sfasno.123-r
requires cash flows resulting from tax deductions in excess of
the grant-date fair value of share-based awards to be included
in cash flows from financing activities.
in certain cases, primarily related to the death of an employee
or conflicted employment (as outlined in the applicable award
agreements), the firm may cash settle share-based compensation
awards. additional paid-in capital is adjusted to
the extent of the difference between the current value of the
award and the grant-date value of the award.
goodwill
goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair
value of identifiable net assets at acquisition date. in
accordance with sfasno.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, goodwill is tested at least annually
for impairment. an impairment loss is triggered if the estimated
fair value of an operating segment is less than its estimated
net book value. such loss is calculated as the difference
between the estimated fair value of goodwill and its carrying
value.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
identifiable intangible assets
identifiable intangible assets, which consist primarily of
customer lists, above-market power contracts, specialist rights
and the value of business acquired (voba)and deferred
acquisition costs (dac)in the firms insurance
subsidiaries, are amortized over their estimated useful lives.
identifiable intangible assets are tested for potential
impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest
that an assets or asset groups carrying value may
not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144, accounting for the impairment or
disposal of long-lived assets. an impairment loss,
calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value
and the carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized
if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to
the asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying
value.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and equipment, net of
accumulated depreciation and amortization, are included in
other assets in the consolidated statements of
financial condition.
property and equipment placed in service prior to
december1, 2001 are depreciated under the accelerated cost
recovery method. property and equipment placed in service on or
after december1, 2001 are depreciated on a straight-line
basis over the useful life of the asset. leasehold improvements
for which the useful life of the improvement is shorter than the
term of the lease are amortized under the accelerated cost
recovery method if placed in service prior to december1,
2001. all other leasehold improvements are amortized on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the improvement or
the term of the lease, whichever is shorter. certain costs of
software developed or obtained for internal use are capitalized
and amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of
the software.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment are tested for
potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying
value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144. an impairment loss, calculated as the
difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying
value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the sum of
the expected undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or
asset group is less than the corresponding carrying value.
the firms operating leases include space held in excess of
current requirements. rent expense relating to space held for
growth is included in occupancy in the consolidated
statements of earnings. in accordance with
sfasno.146, accounting for costs associated
with exit or disposal activities, the firm records a
liability, based on the remaining lease rentals reduced by any
potential or existing sublease rentals, for leases where the
firm has ceased using the space and management has concluded
that the firm will not derive any future economic benefits.
costs to terminate a lease before the end of its term are
recognized and measured at fair value upon termination.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
non-u.s.currencies
are translated at rates of exchange prevailing on the date of
the consolidated statement of financial condition, and revenues
and expenses are translated at average rates of exchange for the
year. gains or losses on translation of the financial statements
of a
non-u.s.operation,
when the functional currency is other than the u.s.dollar,
are included, net of hedges and taxes, on the consolidated
statements of comprehensive income. the firm seeks to reduce its
net investment exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange
rates through the use of foreign currency forward contracts and
foreign currency-denominated debt. for foreign currency forward
contracts, hedge effectiveness is assessed based on changes in
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
forward exchange rates; accordingly, forward points are
reflected as a component of the currency translation adjustment
in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income. for
foreign currency-denominated debt, hedge effectiveness is
assessed based on changes in spot rates. foreign currency
remeasurement gains or losses on transactions in nonfunctional
currencies are included in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
income taxes
deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of the
firms assets and liabilities. valuation allowances are
established to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that
more likely than not will be realized. the firms tax
assets and liabilities are presented as a component of
other assets and other liabilities and accrued
expenses, respectively, in the consolidated statements of
financial condition. tax provisions are computed in accordance
with sfasno.109, accounting for income
taxes. contingent liabilities related to income taxes are
recorded when the criteria for loss recognition under
sfasno.5, accounting for contingencies,
as amended, have been met (see recent
accounting developments below for a discussion of the
impact of finno.48, accounting for uncertainty
in income taxes an interpretation of fasb statement
no.109, on sfasno.109).
earnings per common share
basic eps is calculated by dividing net earnings applicable to
common shareholders by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding. common shares outstanding includes common
stock and restricted stock units for which no future service is
required as a condition to the delivery of the underlying common
stock. diluted eps includes the determinants of basic eps and,
in addition, reflects the dilutive effect of the common stock
deliverable pursuant to stock options and to restricted stock
units for which future service is required as a condition to the
delivery of the underlying common stock.
cash and cash equivalents
the firm defines cash equivalents as highly liquid overnight
deposits held in the ordinary course of business.
recent accounting developments
eitf issue
no.04-5. in
june 2005, the eitf reached consensus on issue
no.04-5,
determining whether a general partner, or the general
partners as a group, controls a limited partnership or similar
entity when the limited partners have certain rights,
which requires general partners to consolidate their
partnerships or to provide limited partners with rights to
remove the general partner or to terminate the partnership. the
firm, as the general partner of numerous merchant banking and
asset management partnerships, was required to adopt the
provisions of eitf issue
no.04-5
(i)immediately for partnerships formed or modified after
june29, 2005 and (ii)in the first quarter of 2007
for partnerships formed on or before june29, 2005 that
have not been modified. the firm has generally provided limited
partners in these funds with rights to remove the firm as the
general partner or to terminate the partnerships. therefore, the
adoption of eitf issue
no.04-5 did not
have a material effect on the firms financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows in 2006 for partnerships
formed or modified after june29, 2005 and is not expected
to have a material effect in 2007.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
sfasno.155. in february 2006, the fasb issued
sfasno.155, accounting for certain hybrid
financial
instruments
an amendment of fasb statements no.133 and
140. sfasno.155 permits an entity to measure
at fair value any hybrid financial instrument that contains an
embedded derivative that otherwise would require bifurcation. as
permitted, the firm early adopted sfasno.155 in the
first quarter of 2006. adoption did not have a material effect
on the firms financial condition, results of operations or
cash flows.
sfasno.156. effective for the first quarter
of 2006, the firm adopted sfasno.156,
accounting for servicing of financial assets
an amendment of fasb statement no.140, which permits
entities to elect to measure servicing assets and servicing
liabilities at fair value and report changes in fair value in
earnings. the firm acquires residential mortgage servicing
rights in connection with its mortgage securitization activities
and has elected under sfasno.156 to account for
these servicing rights at fair value. adoption did not have a
material effect on the firms financial condition, results
of operations or cash flows.
finno.46-r-6.
in april 2006, the fasb issued fasb staff position
(fsp)finno.46-r-6,
determining the variability to be considered in applying
fasb interpretation
no.46-r.
this fsp addresses how a reporting enterprise should determine
the variability to be considered in applying
finno.46-r
by requiring an analysis of the purpose for which an entity was
created and the variability that the entity was designed to
create. this fsp must be applied prospectively to all entities
with which a reporting enterprise first becomes involved and to
all entities previously required to be analyzed under
finno.46-r
when a reconsideration event has occurred. as permitted, the
firm early adopted fsp
finno.46-r-6
in the third quarter of 2006. adoption did not have a material
effect on the firms financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
finno.48. in june 2006, the fasb issued
finno.48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxes an interpretation of fasb statement
no.109. finno.48 requires that the firm
determine whether a tax position is more likely than not to be
sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related
appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits
of the position. once it is determined that a position meets
this recognition threshold, the position is measured to
determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in the
financial statements. the firm expects to adopt the provisions
of finno.48 beginning in the first quarter of 2008.
the firm is currently evaluating the impact of adopting
finno.48 on its financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows.
sfasno.157. in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.157, fair value
measurements. sfasno.157 clarifies that fair
value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be
exchanged to sell an asset or transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants. sfasno.157
nullifies the consensus reached in eitf issue
no.02-3
prohibiting the recognition of day one gain or loss on
derivative contracts (and hybrid instruments measured at fair
value under sfasno.133, accounting for
derivative instruments and hedging activities, as modified
by sfasno.155) where the firm cannot verify all of
the significant model inputs to observable market data and
verify the model to market transactions. however,
sfasno.157 requires that a fair value measurement
technique include an adjustment for risks inherent in a
particular valuation technique (such as a pricing model) and/or
the risks inherent in the inputs to the model, if market
participants would also include such an adjustment. in addition,
sfasno.157 prohibits the recognition of block
discounts for large holdings of unrestricted financial
instruments where quoted prices are readily and regularly
available in an active market. the provisions of
sfasno.157 are to be applied prospectively, except
for changes in fair value measurements that result from the
initial application of sfasno.157 to existing
derivative financial instruments measured under eitf issue
no.02-3, existing
hybrid instruments measured at fair value and block discounts,
which are to be recorded as an adjustment to opening retained
earnings in the year of adoption.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the firm intends to adopt sfasno.157 in the first
quarter of 2007. to determine the transition adjustment to
opening retained earnings, the firm has performed an analysis of
existing derivative instruments measured under eitf
issue02-3, hybrid
financial instruments and block discounts. to determine the
prospective transition adjustment that will be recorded in net
revenues in the first quarter of 2007, the firm will perform an
analysis of all other positions. with respect to principal
investments, the prospective transition adjustment may include
positive changes to investment valuations based on available
market evidence even if there have been no third-party
transactions in the capital structure of the underlying
investee. the transition adjustment to opening retained earnings
will not have a material effect on the firms financial
condition. the firm is currently evaluating the impact of
sfasno.157 on its results of operations for the
first quarter of 2007.
sfasno.158. in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.158, employers accounting
for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and
132-r.
sfasno.158 requires an entity to recognize in its
statement of financial condition the funded status of its
defined benefit pension and postretirement plans, measured as
the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the
benefit obligation. sfasno.158 also requires an
entity to recognize changes in the funded status of a defined
benefit pension and postretirement plan within accumulated other
comprehensive income, net of tax, to the extent such changes are
not recognized in earnings as components of periodic net benefit
cost. sfasno.158 is effective as of the end of the
fiscal year ending after december15, 2006. the firm will
adopt sfasno.158 as of the end of 2007. the firm
does not expect that the adoption of sfasno.158 will
have a material effect on its financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
note3.
financial instruments
fair value of financial instruments
the following table sets forth the firms financial
instruments owned, at fair value, including those pledged as
collateral, and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of
deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$
14,723
(1)
$
$
14,609
(1)
$
u.s.government, federal
agency and sovereign obligations
64,383
51,200
68,688
51,458
corporate and other debt obligations
mortgage whole loans and
collateralized debt obligations
41,017
31,459
investment-grade corporate bonds
17,485
4,745
12,415
4,232
bank loans
28,196
1,154
13,843
high-yield securities
11,054
2,064
8,822
2,072
preferred stock
7,927
7,315
other
1,267
106,946
8,575
74,731
7,164
equities and convertible debentures
75,355
30,323
56,656
32,565
state, municipal and provincial
obligations
3,688
2,524
derivative contracts
67,543
(2)
65,496
(3)
58,532
(2)
57,829
(3)
physical commodities
1,923
1,286
total
$
334,561
(4)
$
155,805
$
277,026
$
149,071
(1)
includes $6.93billion and $6.12billion, as of
november 2006 and november 2005, respectively, of money market
instruments held by william street funding corporation to
support the william street credit extension program (see
note6 for further information regarding the william street
program).
(2)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support agreements of
$24.06billion and $22.61billion as of
november2006 and november 2005, respectively.
(3)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit support agreements of
$16.00billion and $16.10billion as of november 2006
and november 2005, respectively.
(4)
includes securities held by the firms bank and insurance
subsidiaries, which are accounted for as
available-for-sale (afs)under
sfasno.115, accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities. the following table sets
forth the types of afs securities and their maturity profile:
as of november 2006
under
10years
one year
1-5years
5-10years
or greater
total
(in millions)
mortgage-backed and other federal
agency securities
$
2,374
$
1,031
$
$
$
3,662
investment-grade corporate bonds
1,403
1,519
collateralized debt obligations
4,199
4,512
other debt securities
total
$
2,704
$
6,664
$
$
$
9,945
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
credit concentrations
credit concentrations may arise from trading, investing and
financing activities and may be impacted by changes in economic,
industry or political factors. the firm seeks to mitigate credit
risk by actively monitoring exposures and obtaining collateral
as deemed appropriate. while the firms activities expose
it to many different industries and counterparties, the firm
routinely executes a high volume of transactions with
counterparties in the financial services industry, including
brokers and dealers, commercial banks, investment funds and
other institutional clients, resulting in significant credit
concentration with respect to this industry. in the ordinary
course of business, the firm may also be subject to a
concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty,
borrower or issuer.
as of both november 2006 and november 2005, the firm held
u.s.government and federal agency obligations that
represented 6% and 7% of the firms total assets,
respectively. in addition, most of the firms financial
instruments purchased under agreements to resell are
collateralized by u.s.government, federal agency and other
sovereign obligations. as of november 2006 and november 2005,
the firm did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty
that exceeded 5% of the firms total assets.
derivative activities
derivative contracts are instruments, such as futures, forwards,
swaps or option contracts, that derive their value from
underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a combination of
these factors. derivative instruments may be privately
negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
derivatives may involve future commitments to purchase or sell
financial instruments or commodities, or to exchange currency or
interest payment streams. the amounts exchanged are based on the
specific terms of the contract with reference to specified
rates, securities, commodities, currencies or indices.
certain cash instruments, such as mortgage-backed securities,
interest-only and principal-only obligations, and indexed debt
instruments, are not considered derivatives even though their
values or contractually required cash flows are derived from the
price of some other security or index. however, certain
commodity-related contracts are included in the firms
derivatives disclosure, as these contracts may be settled in
cash or the assets to be delivered under the contract are
readily convertible into cash.
the firm enters into derivative transactions, to facilitate
client transactions, to take proprietary positions and as a
means of risk management. risk exposures are managed through
diversification, by controlling position sizes and by entering
into offsetting positions. for example, the firm may manage the
risk related to a portfolio of common stock by entering into an
offsetting position in a related equity-index futures contract.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the firm applies hedge accounting under sfasno.133
to certain derivative contracts. the firm uses these derivatives
to manage certain interest rate and currency exposures,
including the firms net investment in
non-u.s.operations.
the firm designates certain interest rate swap contracts as fair
value hedges. these interest rate swap contracts hedge changes
in the relevant benchmark interest rate (e.g., london interbank
offered rate (libor)), effectively converting a substantial
portion of the firms unsecured
long-term and certain
unsecured short-term borrowings into floating rate obligations.
in addition, the firm applies cash flow hedge accounting to a
limited number of foreign currency forward contracts that hedge
currency exposure on certain forecasted transactions in its
consolidated power generation facilities. see note2 for
information regarding the firms policy on foreign currency
forward contracts used to hedge its net investment in
non-u.s.operations.
the firm applies a long-haul method to substantially all of its
hedge accounting relationships to perform an ongoing assessment
of the effectiveness of these relationships in achieving
offsetting changes in fair value or offsetting cash flows
attributable to the risk being hedged. the firm utilizes a
dollar-offset method, which compares the change in the fair
value of the hedging instrument to the change in the fair value
of the hedged item, excluding the effect of the passage of time,
to prospectively and retrospectively assess hedge effectiveness.
the firms prospective dollar-offset assessment utilizes
scenario analyses to test hedge effectiveness via simulations of
numerous parallel and slope shifts of the relevant yield curve.
parallel shifts change the interest rate of all maturities by
identical amounts. slope shifts change the curvature of the
yield curve. for both the prospective assessment, in response to
each of the simulated yield curve shifts, and the retrospective
assessment, a hedging relationship is deemed to be effective if
the fair values of the hedging instrument and the hedged item
change inversely within a range of 80% to 125%.
for fair value hedges, gains or losses on derivative
transactions are recognized in interest expense in
the consolidated statements of earnings. the change in fair
value of the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged
is reported as an adjustment to its carrying value and is
subsequently amortized into interest expense over its remaining
life. for cash flow hedges, the effective portion of gains or
losses on derivative transactions is reported as a component of
other comprehensive income. gains or losses related
to hedge ineffectiveness for all hedges are generally included
in interest expense. these gains or losses and the
component of gains or losses on derivative transactions excluded
from the assessment of hedge effectiveness (e.g., the effect of
the passage of time on fair value hedges of the firms
borrowings) were not material to the firms results of
operations for the years ended november 2006, november 2005 and
november2004. gains and losses on derivatives used for
trading purposes are included in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
fair values of the firms derivative contracts are
reflected net of cash paid or received pursuant to credit
support agreements and are reported on a net-by-counterparty
basis in the firms consolidated statements of financial
condition when management believes a legal right of setoff
exists under an enforceable netting agreement. the fair value of
derivative financial instruments, computed in accordance with
the firms netting policy, is set forth below:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
forward settlement contracts
$
11,751
$
14,335
$
13,921
$
15,345
swap agreements
28,012
22,471
25,865
22,001
option contracts
27,780
28,690
18,746
20,483
total
$
67,543
$
65,496
$
58,532
$
57,829
the fair values of derivatives accounted for as qualifying
hedges under sfasno.133 consisted of
$2.66billion and $2.10billion in assets as of
november 2006 and november 2005, respectively, and
$551million and $443million in liabilities as of
november 2006 and november2005, respectively.
the firm also has embedded derivatives that have been bifurcated
from related borrowings under sfasno.133. such
derivatives, which are classified in unsecured
short-term and
unsecured long-term
borrowings, had a carrying value of $1.13billion and
$607million (excluding the debt host contract) as of
november 2006 and november 2005, respectively. see notes4
and 5 for further information regarding the firms
unsecured borrowings.
securitization activities
the firm securitizes commercial and residential mortgages, home
equity and auto loans, government and corporate bonds and other
types of financial assets. the firm acts as underwriter of the
beneficial interests that are sold to investors. the firm
derecognizes financial assets transferred in securitizations
provided it has relinquished control over such assets.
transferred assets are accounted for at fair value prior to
securitization. net revenues related to these underwriting
activities are recognized in connection with the sales of the
underlying beneficial interests to investors.
the firm may retain interests in securitized financial assets,
primarily in the form of senior or subordinated securities,
including residual interests. retained interests are accounted
for at fair value and are included in total financial
instruments owned, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
during the years ended november 2006 and november 2005, the firm
securitized $103.92billion and $92.00billion,
respectively, of financial assets, including $67.73billion
and $65.18billion, respectively, of residential mortgage
loans and securities. cash flows received on retained interests
were approximately $801million and $908million for
the years ended november2006 and november 2005,
respectively.
as of november 2006 and november 2005, the firm held
$7.08billion and $6.07billion of retained interests,
respectively, including $5.18billion and
$5.62billion, respectively, held in qspes.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the following table sets forth the weighted average key economic
assumptions used in measuring the fair values of the firms
retained interests and the sensitivity of those fair values to
immediate adverse changes of 10% and 20% in those
assumptions(1):
as of november 2006
as of november 2005
type of retained interests
type of retained interests
mortgage-
corporate
mortgage-
corporate
backed
cdos
debt(4)
backed
cdos
debt(4)
($ in millions)
fair value of retained
interests
$
4,013
$
1,973
$
1,097
$
4,190
$
$
1,283
weighted average life
(years)
6.0
7.0
2.2
6.0
5.3
2.2
constant prepayment rate
21.2
%
24.5
%
n/a
19.1
%
21.1
%
n/a
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(121
)
$
(2
)
$
$
(66
)
$
(1
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(221
)
(6
)
(121
)
(1
)
anticipated credit
losses(2)
2.0
%
2.0
%
n/a
2.5
%
2.5
%
n/a
impact of 10% adverse
change(3)
$
(81
)
$
(3
)
$
$
(36
)
$
(4
)
$
impact of 20% adverse
change(3)
(155
)
(4
)
(64
)
(8
)
discount rate
9.4
%
6.9
%
2.4
%
7.4
%
4.8
%
3.7
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(136
)
$
(35
)
$
(9
)
$
(114
)
$
(8
)
$
(10
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(266
)
(70
)
(17
)
(221
)
(14
)
(21
)
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, all retained interests
have been included in the sensitivity analysis. previously, the
analysis only included retained interests not valued using
quoted market prices in active markets. also, the firm changed
its methodology for quantifying the sensitivity to changes in
assumptions to consider negative impacts on a
bond-by-bond basis
rather than at the overall portfolio level and for applying
anticipated credit losses. the prior year amounts have been
adjusted to conform to the current presentation.
(2)
anticipated credit losses are computed only on positions in
which expected credit loss is a key assumption in the
determination of fair values.
(3)
the impacts of adverse change take into account credit mitigants
incorporated in the retained interests, including
over-collateralization
and subordination provisions.
(4)
includes retained interests in bonds and other types of
financial assets that are not subject to prepayment risk.
the preceding table does not give effect to the offsetting
benefit of other financial instruments that are held to mitigate
risks inherent in these retained interests. changes in fair
value based on an adverse variation in assumptions generally
cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in
assumptions to the change in fair value is not usually linear.
in addition, the impact of a change in a particular assumption
is calculated independently of changes in any other assumption.
in practice, simultaneous changes in assumptions might magnify
or counteract the sensitivities disclosed above.
in addition to the retained interests described above, the firm
also held interests in residential mortgage qspes purchased in
connection with secondary
market-making
activities. these purchased interests approximated
$8billion and $5billion as of november 2006 and
november2005, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
variable interest entities (vies)
the firm, in the ordinary course of business, retains interests
in vies in connection with its securitization activities. the
firm also purchases and sells variable interests in vies, which
primarily issue
mortgage-backed and
other asset-backed
securities and collateralized debt obligations (cdos), in
connection with its
market-making
activities and makes investments in and loans to vies that hold
performing and nonperforming debt, equity, real estate,
power-related and other assets. in addition, the firm utilizes
vies to provide investors with
principal-protected
notes, credit-linked
notes and asset-repackaged notes designed to meet their
objectives.
vies generally purchase assets by issuing debt and equity
instruments. in certain instances, the firm provides guarantees
to vies or holders of variable interests in vies. in such cases,
the maximum exposure to loss included in the tables set forth
below is the notional amount of such guarantees. such amounts do
not represent anticipated losses in connection with these
guarantees.
the firms variable interests in vies include senior and
subordinated debt; loan commitments; limited and general
partnership interests; preferred and common stock; interest
rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit
derivatives; guarantees; and residual interests in
mortgage-backed and
asset-backed securitization vehicles and cdos. the firms
exposure to the obligations of vies is generally limited to its
interests in these entities.
the following tables set forth total assets in nonconsolidated
vies in which the firm holds significant variable interests and
the firms maximum exposure to loss associated with these
interests. the firm has aggregated nonconsolidated vies based on
principal business activity, as reflected in the first column.
the nature of the firms variable interests can take
different forms, as described in the columns under maximum
exposure to loss.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
as of november 2006
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated vies
purchased
commitments
vie
and retained
and
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives(1)
investments
total
(in millions)
collateralized debt obligations
$
37,610
$
2,406
$
$
9,782
$
$
12,188
real estate, credit-related and
other
investing(2)
16,300
2,088
2,209
municipal bond securitizations
1,182
1,182
1,182
mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed
8,239
power-related
3,422
principal-protected notes
4,363
3,437
3,437
asset repackagings and
credit-linked notes
1,360
total
$
72,476
$
2,893
$
1,368
$
13,648
$
2,685
$
20,594
as of november 2005
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated vies
purchased
commitments
vie
and retained
and
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives(1)
investments
total
(in millions)
collateralized debt obligations
$
24,295
$
$
$
4,536
$
$
5,316
real estate, credit-related and
other
investing(2)
16,065
1,508
1,767
municipal bond securitizations
mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed
4,545
power-related
6,667
1,070
1,167
principal-protected notes
1,387
1,312
1,312
asset repackagings and
credit-linked notes
1,181
total
$
54,140
$
0,990
$
0,354
$
06,115
$
2,578
$
10,037
(1)
derivatives related to cdos consist of total return swaps on
investment-grade securities issued by vies and
out-of-the-money
written put options on investment-grade collateral held by vies.
derivatives related to principal-protected notes consist of
out-of-the-money
written put options that provide principal protection to clients
invested in various fund products, with risk to the firm
mitigated through portfolio rebalancing. derivatives related to
asset repackagings and credit-linked notes consist of interest
rate swaps, equity swaps, commodity swaps and purchased credit
default protection, through which the firm creates structured
notes designed for specific needs of investors. the derivative
transactions included in the above table do not expose the firm
to a majority of the vies expected losses or expected
residual returns and, consequently, the firm is not the primary
beneficiary of the vie. in certain cases, the firm is the
primary beneficiary in these types of transactions (see table of
consolidated vies below).
(2)
the firm obtains interests in these vies in connection with
making proprietary investments in real estate, distressed loans
and other types of debt, mezzanine instruments and equities. the
transactions included in the above table do not expose the firm
to a majority of the vies expected losses or expected
residual returns and, consequently, the firm is not the primary
beneficiary of the vie. in certain cases, the firm is the
primary beneficiary in these types of transactions (see table of
consolidated vies below).
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the following table sets forth the firms total assets and
maximum exposure to loss associated with its significant
variable interests in consolidated vies where the firm does not
hold a majority voting interest. the firm has aggregated
consolidated vies based on principal business activity, as
reflected in the first column.
as of november 2006
as of november 2005
maximum
maximum
exposure
exposure
vie assets(1)
to loss
vie assets(1)
to loss
(in millions)
real estate, credit-related and
other investing
$
3,077
$
1,368
$
2,999
$
1,268
municipal bond securitizations
2,715
2,715
1,587
1,587
mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed
1,537
foreign exchange and commodities
principal-protected notes
asset repackagings and
credit-linked notes
total
$
9,044
$
5,253
$
6,624
$
3,944
(1)
consolidated vie assets include assets financed on a nonrecourse
basis.
collateralized transactions
the firm receives financial instruments as collateral, primarily
in connection with resale agreements, securities borrowed,
derivative transactions and customer margin loans. such
financial instruments may include obligations of the
u.s.government, federal agencies, sovereigns and
corporations, as well as equities and convertibles.
in many cases, the firm is permitted to deliver or repledge
these financial instruments in connection with entering into
repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements and other
secured financings, collateralizing derivative transactions and
meeting firm or customer settlement requirements. as of november
2006 and november 2005, the fair value of financial instruments
received as collateral by the firm that it was permitted to
deliver or repledge was $746.08billion and
$629.94billion, respectively, of which the firm delivered
or repledged $639.87billion and $550.76billion,
respectively.
the firm also pledges assets that it owns to counterparties who
may or may not have the right to deliver or repledge them.
financial instruments owned and pledged to counterparties that
have the right to deliver or repledge are reported as
financial instruments owned and pledged as collateral, at
fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and were $36.00billion and $38.98billion
as of november 2006 and november 2005, respectively. financial
instruments owned and pledged in connection with repurchase
agreements, securities lending agreements and other secured
financings to counterparties that did not have the right to sell
or repledge are included in financial instruments owned,
at fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and were $134.31billion and $116.27billion
as of november 2006 and november 2005, respectively. other
assets (primarily real estate, power generation facilities and
related assets, and
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
cash) owned and pledged in connection with other secured
financings to counterparties that did not have the right to sell
or repledge were $5.34billion and $5.04billion as of
november 2006 and november 2005, respectively.
in addition to repurchase agreements and securities lending
agreements, the firm obtains secured funding through the use of
other arrangements. other secured financings include
arrangements that are nonrecourse, that is, only the subsidiary
that executed the arrangement or a subsidiary guaranteeing the
arrangement is obligated to repay the financing. other secured
financings consist of liabilities related to the firms
william street program, consolidated variable interest entities,
collateralized central bank financings, transfers of financial
assets that are accounted for as financings rather than sales
(primarily pledged bank loans and mortgage whole loans),
consolidated power generation facilities and other structured
financing arrangements.
other secured financings are set forth in the table below:
as of november
(in millions)
other secured financings
(short-term)(1)(2)(3)
$
24,290
$
7,972
other secured financings
(long-term):
2,159
5,535
3,420
1,894
3,352
5,105
2012-thereafter
12,723
5,224
total other secured financings
(long-term)(4)(5)
26,134
15,669
total other secured
financings(6)(7)
$
50,424
$
23,641
(1)
as of november2006, consists of
u.s.dollar-denominated financings of $14.28billion
with a weighted average interest rate of 5.22% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated financings of
$10.01billion with a weighted average interest rate of
2.00%. as of november2005, consists of
u.s.dollar-denominated financings of $5.01billion
with a weighted average interest rate of 4.16% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated financings of
$2.96billion with a weighted average interest rate of
3.25%.
(2)
includes $3.30billion of hybrid financial instruments
accounted for at fair value under sfasno.155 as of
november2006.
(3)
includes other secured financings maturing within one year of
the financial statement date and other secured financings that
are redeemable within one year of the financial statement date
at the option of the holder.
(4)
as of november2006, consists of
u.s.dollar-denominated financings of $16.97billion
with a weighted average interest rate of 5.61% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated financings of
$9.16billion with a weighted average interest rate of
3.81%. as of november2005, consists of
u.s.dollar-denominated financings of $9.65billion
with a weighted average interest rate of 4.65% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated financings of
$6.02billion with a weighted average interest rate of
3.08%.
(5)
secured long-term financings that are repayable prior to
maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their
contractual maturity dates. secured long-term financings that
are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holder are
reflected at the dates such options become exercisable.
(6)
includes $19.79billion and $14.29billion of
nonrecourse financings as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively.
(7)
as of november 2006, $47.22billion of these financings
were collateralized by financial instruments and
$3.20billion by other assets (primarily real estate, power
generation facilities and related assets, and cash). as of
november2005, $20.51billion of these financings were
collateralized by financial instruments and $3.13billion
by other assets.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
note4.
unsecured short-term borrowings
the firm obtains unsecured short-term borrowings primarily
through the issuance of promissory notes, commercial paper and
hybrid debt instruments. as of november 2006 and november 2005,
these borrowings were $47.90billion and
$47.25billion, respectively. such amounts include the
portion of unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one
year of the financial statement date and unsecured long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder. the carrying value
of these short-term obligations approximates fair value due to
their short-term nature.
unsecured short-term borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
13,811
$
17,339
commercial paper
1,489
5,154
current portion of unsecured
long-term borrowings
14,115
15,819
hybrid debt
instruments(1)
14,060
3,901
other short-term borrowings
4,429
5,034
total(2)
$
47,904
$
47,247
(1)
hybrid debt instruments are financial instruments that contain
bifurcatable embedded derivatives, $10.22billion of which
were accounted for at fair value under sfasno.155 as
of november 2006.
(2)
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings were
5.13% and 4.01% as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively. the weighted average interest rates, after giving
effect to hedging activities, were 5.16% and 3.99% as of
november 2006 and november 2005, respectively. the weighted
average interest rates as of november 2006 excluded hybrid debt
instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.155.
note5.
unsecured long-term borrowings
the firm obtains unsecured long-term borrowings that consist
principally of senior borrowings with maturities extending to
2036. as of november 2006 and november 2005, these borrowings
were $122.84billion and $84.34billion, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
unsecured long-term borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate
obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
41,719
$
34,792
non-u.s.dollar
22,854
16,079
floating rate
obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
38,342
23,041
non-u.s.dollar
19,927
10,426
total(3)
$
122,842
$
84,338
(1)
as of both november 2006 and november 2005, interest rates on
u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from 3.88% to
12.00%. as of november 2006 and november 2005, interest rates on
non-u.s.dollar
fixed rate obligations ranged from 0.31% to 8.88% and from 0.67%
to 8.88%, respectively.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the
federal funds rate. certain equity-linked and indexed
instruments are included in floating rate obligations.
(3)
includes $7.25billion of hybrid financial instruments
accounted for at fair value under sfasno.155 as of
november2006.
unsecured long-term borrowings by maturity date are set forth
below:
as of november
2006(1)(2)
2005(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
11,597
$
$
12,363
14,848
3,038
17,886
5,662
2,725
8,387
12,398
2,978
15,376
6,123
2,793
8,916
5,034
4,945
9,979
5,163
5,595
10,758
5,675
4,389
10,064
4,434
1,024
5,458
2012-thereafter
42,106
27,431
69,537
24,854
13,602
38,456
total
$
80,061
$
42,781
$
122,842
$
57,833
$
26,505
$
84,338
(1)
unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one year of the
financial statement date and certain unsecured long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder are included as
unsecured short-term borrowings in the consolidated statements
of financial condition.
(2)
unsecured long-term borrowings that are repayable prior to
maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their
contractual maturity dates. unsecured long-term borrowings that
are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holder are
reflected at the dates such options become exercisable.
the firm enters into derivative contracts, such as interest rate
futures contracts, interest rate swap agreements, currency swap
agreements, and equity-linked and indexed contracts, to
effectively convert a substantial portion of its unsecured
long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based floating rate
obligations. accordingly, the carrying value of unsecured
long-term borrowings approximated fair value as of november 2006
and november 2005.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the effective weighted average interest rates for unsecured
long-term borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
1,997
6.13
%
$
2,289
6.05
%
floating rate
obligations(1)
120,845
5.75
82,049
4.42
total
$
122,842
5.75
$
84,338
4.46
(1)
includes fixed rate obligations that have been converted into
floating rate obligations through derivative contracts.
subordinated borrowings
unsecured long-term borrowings include $7.51billion and
$2.99billion of subordinated borrowings as of november
2006 and november 2005, respectively, as set forth below.
subordinated notes. as of november 2006, the firm had
$4.67billion of subordinated notes outstanding with
maturities ranging from 2007 to 2036. the effective weighted
average interest rate on these subordinated notes was 6.24%,
after giving effect to derivative contracts used to convert
fixed rate obligations into floating rate obligations. as of
november 2005, the firm had $150million of subordinated
notes outstanding with maturities ranging from 2006 to 2019 and
with an effective weighted average interest rate of 6.39%. these
notes are junior in right of payment to all of the firms
senior indebtedness.
junior subordinated debentures. the firm issued
$2.84billion of junior subordinated debentures in its
first quarter of 2004 to goldman sachs capital trusti (the
trust), a delaware statutory trust created for the exclusive
purposes of (i)issuing $2.75billion of guaranteed
preferred beneficial interests and $85million of common
beneficial interests in the trust, (ii)investing the
proceeds from the sale to purchase junior subordinated
debentures issued by the firm and (iii)engaging in only
those other activities necessary or incidental to these
purposes. the preferred beneficial interests were purchased by
third parties, and, as of november 2006 and november 2005, the
firm held all the common beneficial interests. the trust is a
wholly owned finance subsidiary of the firm for regulatory and
legal purposes but is not consolidated for accounting purposes.
the firm pays interest semiannually on these debentures at an
annual rate of 6.345% and the debentures mature on
february15, 2034. the coupon rate and the payment dates
applicable to the beneficial interests are the same as the
interest rate and payment dates applicable to the debentures.
the firm has the right, from time to time, to defer payment of
interest on the debentures, and, therefore, cause payment on the
trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in
each case up to ten consecutive semiannual periods. during any
such extension period, the firm will not be permitted to, among
other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of
its common stock. the trust is not permitted to pay any
distributions on the common beneficial interests held by the
firm unless all dividends payable on the preferred beneficial
interests have been paid in full. these notes are junior in
right of payment to all of the firms senior indebtedness
and all of the firms subordinated notes (described above).
see note6 for information regarding the firms
guarantee of the preferred beneficial interests issued by the
trust.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
note6.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
commitments
forward starting collateralized agreements and
financings. the firm had forward starting resale agreements
and securities borrowing agreements of $18.29billion and
$20.83billion as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively. the firm had forward starting repurchase
agreements and securities lending agreements of
$17.15billion and $29.10billion as of
november2006 and november 2005, respectively.
commitments to extend credit. in connection with its
lending activities, the firm had outstanding commitments to
extend credit of $100.48billion and $61.12billion as
of november 2006 and november 2005, respectively. the
firms commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend
to counterparties that have fixed termination dates and are
contingent on the satisfaction of all conditions to borrowing
set forth in the contract. since these commitments may expire
unused or be reduced or cancelled at the counterpartys
request, the total commitment amount does not necessarily
reflect the actual future cash flow requirements. the firm
accounts for these commitments at fair value.
the following table summarizes the firms commitments to
extend credit at november 2006 and november 2005:
commitments to extend credit
year ended november
(in millions)
william street program
$
18,831
$
14,505
other commercial lending commitments
investment-grade
7,604
17,592
non-investment-grade
57,017
18,536
warehouse financing
17,026
10,489
total commitments to extend credit
$
100,478
$
61,122
william street program. substantially all of the
commitments provided under the william street credit extension
program are to investment-grade corporate borrowers. commitments
under the program are primarily extended by william street
commitment corporation (commitment corp.), a consolidated wholly
owned subsidiary of group inc. whose assets and liabilities are
legally separated from other assets and liabilities of the firm,
and, to a lesser extent, by william street credit corporation,
another consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of group inc. a
majority of the commitments extended by commitment corp. are
supported by funding raised by william street funding
corporation (funding corp.), another consolidated wholly owned
subsidiary of group inc. whose assets and liabilities are also
legally separated from other assets and liabilities of the firm.
the assets of commitment corp. and of funding corp. will not be
available to their respective shareholders until the claims of
their respective creditors have been paid. in addition, no
affiliate of either commitment corp. or funding corp., except in
limited cases as expressly agreed in writing, is responsible for
any obligation of either entity. with respect to substantially
all of the william street commitments, smfg provides the firm
with credit loss protection that is generally limited to 95% of
the first loss the firm realizes on approved loan commitments,
up to a maximum of $1.00billion. in addition, subject to
the satisfaction of certain conditions, upon the firms
request, smfg will provide protection for 70% of the second loss
on such
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
commitments, up to a maximum of $1.13billion. the firm
also uses other financial instruments to mitigate credit risks
related to certain william street commitments not covered by
smfg.
other commercial lending commitments. in addition to the
commitments issued under the william street credit extension
program, the firm extends other credit commitments, primarily in
connection with contingent acquisition financing and other types
of corporate lending. the total commitment amount does not
necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow requirements, as
the firm often syndicates all or substantial portions of these
commitments, the commitments may expire unused, or the
commitments may be cancelled or reduced at the request of the
counterparty. in addition, commitments that are extended for
contingent acquisition financing are often short-term in nature,
as borrowers often replace them with other funding sources.
warehouse financing. the firm provides financing for the
warehousing of financial assets to be securitized, primarily in
connection with cdos and mortgage securitizations. these
financings are expected to be repaid from the proceeds of the
related securitizations for which the firm may or may not act as
underwriter. these arrangements are secured by the warehoused
assets, primarily consisting of mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed securities, residential and commercial mortgages
and corporate debt instruments.
letters of credit. the firm provides letters of credit
issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu of securities
or cash to satisfy various collateral and margin deposit
requirements. letters of credit outstanding were
$5.73billion and $9.23billion as of november 2006
and november 2005, respectively.
merchant banking commitments. the firm acts as an
investor in merchant banking transactions, which includes making
long-term investments in equity and debt instruments in
privately negotiated transactions, corporate acquisitions and
real estate transactions. in connection with these activities,
the firm had commitments to invest up to $6.36billion and
$3.54billion in corporate and real estate investment funds
as of november 2006 and november 2005, respectively.
construction-related commitments. as of november 2006 and
november 2005, the firm had construction-related commitments of
$1.63billion and $579million, respectively,
including commitments of $1.07billion and
$481million, respectively, related to the development of
wind energy projects. construction-related commitments also
include outstanding commitments of $500million and
$47million as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively, related to the firms new world headquarters
in new york city, which is expected to cost between
$2.3billion and $2.5billion.
underwriting commitments. as of november 2006, the firm
had commitments to purchase $2.62billion of securities in
connection with its underwriting activities. as of november
2005, the firm had no such commitments.
other. the firm had other purchase commitments of
$393million and $563million as of november 2006 and
november 2005, respectively. in addition, the firm had other
investment commitments of $1.88billion and
$81million as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively.
leases. the firm has contractual obligations under
long-term noncancelable lease agreements, principally for office
space, expiring on various dates through 2069. certain
agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for
increases in real estate taxes and other charges.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
future minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals,
and rent charged to operating expense for the last three years
are set forth below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2012-thereafter
2,195
total
$
4,052
net rent expense
$
contingencies
the firm is involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and
arbitration proceedings concerning matters arising in connection
with the conduct of its businesses. management believes, based
on currently available information, that the results of such
proceedings, in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse
effect on the firms financial condition, but may be
material to the firms operating results for any particular
period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such
period. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome
of the firms litigation and regulatory matters,
particularly in cases or proceedings in which substantial or
indeterminate damages or fines are sought, the firm cannot
estimate losses or ranges of losses for cases or proceedings
where there is only a reasonable possibility that a loss may be
incurred.
in connection with its insurance business, the firm is
contingently liable to provide guaranteed minimum death benefits
to certain contract holders. the total account balances of
contract holders to whom the firm has provided such guaranteed
minimum death benefits was $8.04billion as of november
2006, and the weighted average attained age of these contract
holders was 70years. the net amount at risk, representing
guaranteed minimum death benefits in excess of contract holder
account balances, was $1.27billion as of november 2006.
the firm has established a reserve for its liability related to
guaranteed minimum death benefits (see note10 for more
information on the firms insurance liabilities).
guarantees
the firm enters into various derivative contracts that meet the
definition of a guarantee under finno.45,
guarantors accounting and disclosure requirements
for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of indebtedness of
others. such derivative contracts include credit default
and total return swaps, written equity and commodity put
options, written currency contracts and interest rate caps,
floors and swaptions. finno.45 does not require
disclosures about derivative contracts if such contracts may be
cash settled and the firm has no basis to conclude it is
probable that the counterparties held, at inception, the
underlying instruments related to the derivative contracts. the
firm has concluded that these conditions have been met for
certain large, internationally active commercial and investment
bank end users and certain other users. accordingly, the firm
has not included such contracts in the tables below.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the firm, in its capacity as an agency lender, indemnifies most
of its securities lending customers against losses incurred in
the event that borrowers do not return securities and the
collateral held is insufficient to cover the market value of the
securities borrowed.
in connection with the firms establishment of the trust,
group inc. effectively provided for the full and unconditional
guarantee of the beneficial interests in the trust held by third
parties. timely payment by group inc. of interest on the junior
subordinated debentures and other amounts due and performance of
its other obligations under the transaction documents will be
sufficient to cover payments due by the trust on its beneficial
interests. as a result, management believes that it is unlikely
the firm will have to make payments related to the trust other
than those required under the junior subordinated debentures and
in connection with certain expenses incurred by the trust.
in the ordinary course of business, the firm provides other
financial guarantees of the obligations of third parties (e.g.,
standby letters of credit and other guarantees to enable clients
to complete transactions and merchant banking fund-related
guarantees). these guarantees represent obligations to make
payments to beneficiaries if the guaranteed party fails to
fulfill its obligation under a contractual arrangement with that
beneficiary.
the following tables set forth certain information about the
firms derivative contracts that meet the definition of a
guarantee and certain other guarantees as of november 2006 and
november2005:
as of november 2006
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(5)
2008-
2010-
2012-
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives(1)
$
379,256
$
428,258
$
460,088
$
399,449
$
1,667,051
securities lending
indemnifications(2)
19,023
19,023
guarantees of trust preferred
beneficial
interest(3)
6,676
7,548
other financial
guarantees(4)
as of november 2005
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(5)
2007-
2009-
2011-
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives(1)
$
356,131
$
244,163
$
259,332
$
289,459
$
1,149,085
securities lending
indemnifications(2)
16,324
16,324
guarantees of trust preferred
beneficial
interest(3)
6,851
7,723
other financial
guarantees(4)
1,067
(1)
the aggregate carrying value of these derivatives as of november
2006 was an asset of $1.12billion, consisting of contracts
with an asset value of $11.06billion and contracts with a
liability value of $9.94billion. the aggregate carrying
value as of november 2005 was a liability of $8.22billion,
consisting of contracts with an asset value of
$1.91billion and contracts with a liability value of
$10.13billion. the carrying value excludes the effect of a
legal right of setoff that may exist under an enforceable
netting agreement.
(2)
collateral held by the lenders in connection with securities
lending indemnifications was $19.70billion and
$16.89billion as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively.
(3)
includes the guarantee of all payments scheduled to be made over
the life of the trust, which could be shortened in the event the
firm redeems the junior subordinated debentures issued to fund
the trust. see note5 for further information regarding the
trust.
(4)
the carrying value of these guarantees was a liability of
$15million and $4million as of november2006
and november2005, respectively.
(5)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated losses in
connection with these contracts.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
in the ordinary course of business, the firm indemnifies and
guarantees certain service providers, such as clearing and
custody agents, trustees and administrators, against specified
potential losses in connection with their acting as an agent of,
or providing services to, the firm or its affiliates. the firm
also indemnifies some clients against potential losses incurred
in the event specified third-party service providers, including
sub-custodians and third-party brokers, improperly execute
transactions. in addition, the firm is a member of payment,
clearing and settlement networks as well as securities exchanges
around the world that may require the firm to meet the
obligations of such networks and exchanges in the event of
member defaults. in connection with its prime brokerage and
clearing businesses, the firm agrees to clear and settle on
behalf of its clients the transactions entered into by them with
other brokerage firms. the firms obligations in respect of
such transactions are secured by the assets in the clients
account as well as any proceeds received from the transactions
cleared and settled by the firm on behalf of the client. in
connection with joint venture investments, the firm may issue
loan guarantees under which it may be liable in the event of
fraud, misappropriation, environmental liabilities and certain
other matters involving the borrower. the firm is unable to
develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these guarantees
and indemnifications. however, management believes that it is
unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under
these arrangements, and no liabilities related to these
guarantees and indemnifications have been recognized in the
consolidated statements of financial condition as of november
2006 and november 2005.
the firm provides representations and warranties to
counterparties in connection with a variety of commercial
transactions and occasionally indemnifies them against potential
losses caused by the breach of those representations and
warranties. the firm may also provide indemnifications
protecting against changes in or adverse application of certain
u.s.tax laws in connection with ordinary-course
transactions such as securities issuances, borrowings or
derivatives. in addition, the firm may provide indemnifications
to some counterparties to protect them in the event additional
taxes are owed or payments are withheld, due either to a change
in or an adverse application of certain
non-u.s.tax laws.
these indemnifications generally are standard contractual terms
and are entered into in the ordinary course of business.
generally, there are no stated or notional amounts included in
these indemnifications, and the contingencies triggering the
obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur. the firm is
unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these
guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes
that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material
payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities related to
these arrangements have been recognized in the consolidated
statements of financial condition as of november 2006 and
november 2005.
note7.
shareholders equity
dividends declared per common share were $1.30 in 2006, $1.00 in
2005, and $1.00 in 2004. on december11, 2006, the board of
directors of group inc. (the board) declared a dividend of
$0.35per common share to be paid on february22,
2007, to common shareholders of record on january23, 2007.
during 2006, the firm repurchased 50.2million shares of
its common stock at a total cost of $7.82billion, and
during 2005, the firm repurchased 63.7million shares of
its common stock at a total cost of $7.11billion. the
average price paid per share for repurchased shares was $155.64
and $111.57 for the years ended november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively. in addition, to satisfy minimum statutory employee
tax withholding requirements related to the delivery of common
stock underlying restricted stock units, the firm cancelled
3.0million restricted stock units with a total value of
$375million in 2006, and it canceled 1.6million
restricted stock units with a total value of $163million
in 2005.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
during 2006, the firm issued 54,000shares of perpetual
floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesd. as
of november 2006, the firm had 124,000shares of perpetual
non-cumulative
preferred stock outstanding in four series as set forth in the
following table:
preferred stock by series
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
issued
authorized
dividend rate
redemption date
(in millions)
a
30,000
50,000
3month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 3.75%per annum
april25, 2010
$
b
32,000
50,000
6.20%per annum
october31,2010
c
8,000
25,000
3month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 4%per annum
october31,2010
d
54,000
60,000
3month libor + 0.67%,
with floor of 4%per annum
may24, 2011
1,350
124,000
185,000
$
3,100
each share of preferred stock has a par value of $0.01, has a
liquidation preference of $25,000, is represented by 1,000
depositary shares and is redeemable at the firms option at
a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus declared and unpaid
dividends. dividends on each series of preferred stock, if
declared, are payable quarterly in arrears. the firms
ability to declare or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or
otherwise acquire, its common stock is subject to certain
restrictions in the event that the firm fails to pay or set
aside full dividends on the preferred stock for the latest
completed dividend period. all preferred stock also has a
preference over the firms common stock upon liquidation.
dividends declared per preferred share were $1,434.79,
$1,593.06, $1,465.19 and $709.10 for seriesa,
seriesb, seriesc and seriesd preferred stock,
respectively, in 2006. dividends declared per share of
seriesa preferred stock were $578.72 in 2005. on
december11,2006, the board declared a dividend per
preferred share of $391.28, $387.50, $391.28 and $386.17 for
seriesa, seriesb, seriesc and seriesd
preferred stock, respectively, to be paid on february10,
2007 to preferred shareholders of record on january26,
2007.
the following table sets forth the firms accumulated other
comprehensive income by type:
as of
november
(in millions)
currency translation adjustment,
net of tax
$
$
(16
)
minimum pension liability
adjustment, net of tax
(38
)
(11
)
net gains/(losses) on cash flow
hedges, net of tax
net unrealized gains on
available-for-sale securities, net of tax
(1)
total accumulated other
comprehensive income, net of tax
$
$
(1)
consists of net unrealized gains of $10million on
available-for-sale securities held by the firms bank and
insurance subsidiaries and net unrealized gains of
$18million on available-for-sale securities held by
investees accounted for under the equity method.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
note8.
earnings per common share
the computations of basic and diluted earnings per common share
are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
numerator for basic and diluted
eps net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
9,398
$
5,609
$
4,553
denominator for basic
eps weighted average number of common shares
449.0
478.1
489.5
effect of dilutive securities
restricted stock units
13.6
9.9
9.6
stock options
14.8
12.2
11.4
dilutive potential common shares
28.4
22.1
21.0
denominator for diluted
eps weighted average number of common shares and
dilutive potential common
shares(1)
477.4
500.2
510.5
basic eps
$
20.93
$
11.73
$
9.30
diluted eps
19.69
11.21
8.92
(1)
the diluted eps computations do not include the antidilutive
effect of the following options:
year ended november
(in millions)
number of antidilutive options, end
of period
note9.
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
goodwill
the following table sets forth the carrying value of the
firms goodwill by operating segment, which is included in
other assets in the consolidated statements of
financial condition:
as of november
(in millions)
investment banking
financial advisory
$
$
underwriting
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities(1)
2,381
2,390
principal investments
asset management and securities
services
asset
management(2)
securities services
total
$
3,184
$
3,148
(1)
primarily related to slk llc (slk).
(2)
primarily related to the ayco company, l.p. (ayco).
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
identifiable intangible assets
the following table sets forth the gross carrying amount,
accumulated amortization and net carrying amount of identifiable
intangible assets:
as of november
(in millions)
customer
lists(1)
gross carrying amount
$
1,034
$
1,021
accumulated amortization
(297
)
(244
)
net carrying amount
$
$
power
contracts(2)
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(83
)
(16
)
net carrying amount
$
$
new york stock
gross carrying amount
$
$
exchange (nyse)
accumulated amortization
(172
)
(134
)
specialist rights
net carrying amount
$
$
insurance-related
gross carrying amount
$
$
assets(3)
accumulated amortization
(34
)
net carrying amount
$
$
exchange-traded
gross carrying amount
$
$
fund (etf)
accumulated amortization
(33
)
(27
)
specialist rights
net carrying amount
$
$
other(4)
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(246
)
(206
)
net carrying amount
$
$
total
gross carrying amount
$
3,367
$
2,682
accumulated amortization
(865
)
(627
)
net carrying amount
$
2,502
$
2,055
(1)
primarily includes the firms clearance and execution and
nasdaq customer lists related to slk and financial counseling
customer lists related to ayco.
(2)
primarily relates to above-market power contracts of
consolidated power generation facilities related to cogentrix
energy, inc. and national energy& gas transmission,
inc. (negt). substantially all of these power contracts have
been pledged to counterparties in connection with the
firms secured financings. the weighted average remaining
life of these power contracts is approximately 11years.
the increase in the carrying value of power contracts in 2006
was due to a restructuring of certain contracts, which resulted
in the consolidation of the associated power generation
facilities that had been previously accounted for under the
equity method.
(3)
consists of voba and dac. voba represents the present value of
estimated future gross profits of the variable annuity and
variable life insurance business acquired in 2006. dac results
from commissions paid by the firm to the primary insurer (ceding
company) on life and annuity reinsurance agreements as
compensation to place the business with the firm and to cover
the ceding companys acquisition expenses. voba and dac are
amortized over the estimated life of the underlying contracts
based on estimated gross profits, and amortization is adjusted
based on actual experience. the weighted average remaining
amortization period for voba and dac is seven years as of the
end of 2006.
(4)
primarily includes technology-related and other assets related
to slk.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
substantially all of the firms identifiable intangible
assets are considered to have finite lives and are amortized
over their estimated useful lives. the weighted average
remaining life of the firms identifiable intangibles is
approximately 12years.
amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible
assets was $246million, $165million and
$125million for the years ended november 2006, november
2005 and november2004, respectively. amortization expense
associated with the firms consolidated power generation
facilities is reported within cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings.
the estimated future amortization for existing identifiable
intangible assets through 2011 is set forth below:
(in millions)
$
note10.
other assets and other liabilities
other assets
other assets are generally less liquid, nonfinancial assets. the
following table sets forth the firms other assets by type:
as of november
(in millions)
goodwill and identifiable
intangible
assets(1)
$
5,686
$
5,203
property, leasehold improvements
and
equipment(2)
6,990
5,097
equity-method investments
2,764
2,965
income tax-related assets
3,427
1,304
miscellaneous receivables and other
3,009
2,743
total
$
21,876
$
17,312
(1)
see note9 for further information regarding the
firms goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
(2)
net of accumulated depreciation and amortization of
$5.06billion and $4.62billion for november 2006 and
november 2005, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
other liabilities
other liabilities and accrued expenses primarily includes
insurance-related
liabilities, compensation and benefits, minority interest in
consolidated entities, litigation and regulatory liabilities,
tax-related payables,
deferred revenue and other payables. the following table sets
forth the firms other liabilities and accrued expenses by
type:
as of november
(in millions)
insurance-related
liabilities(1)
$
11,471
$
compensation and benefits
9,165
6,598
minority
interest(2)
4,759
3,164
income tax-related liabilities
2,639
accrued expenses and other payables
3,832
3,200
total
$
31,866
$
13,830
(1)
insurance-related liabilities are set forth in the table below:
as of november
(in millions)
separate account liabilities
$
7,957
$
liabilities for future benefits and
unpaid claims
2,123
contract holder account balances
1,134
reserves for guaranteed minimum
death and income benefits
total insurance-related liabilities
$
11,471
$
separate account liabilities are offset by separate account
assets, representing segregated contract holder funds under
variable annuity and variable life insurance contracts. separate
account assets are included in cash and securities
segregated for regulatory and other purposes in the
consolidated statements of financial condition.
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims include
liabilities arising from reinsurance provided by the firm to
other insurers. the firm has a receivable for $1.33billion
related to such reinsurance contracts, which is reported in
receivables from customers and counterparties in the
consolidated statements of financial condition. in addition, the
firm has ceded risks to reinsurers related to certain of its
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims and has a
receivable of $786million related to such reinsurance
contracts, which is reported in receivables from customers
and counterparties in the consolidated statements of
financial condition. contracts to cede risks to reinsurers do
not relieve the firm from its obligations to contract holders.
reserves for guaranteed minimum death and income benefits
represent a liability for the expected value of guaranteed
benefits in excess of projected annuity account balances. these
reserves are computed in accordance with aicpa statement of
position03-1,
accounting and reporting by insurance enterprises for
certain nontraditional
long-duration contracts
and for separate accounts, and are based on total payments
expected to be made less total fees expected to be assessed over
the life of the contract.
(2)
includes $3.31billion and $2.04billion related to
consolidated merchant banking funds as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively.
note11.
employee benefit plans
the firm sponsors various pension plans and certain other
postretirement benefit plans, primarily healthcare and life
insurance. the firm also provides certain benefits to former or
inactive employees prior to retirement.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
defined benefit pension plans and postretirement
plans
employees of certain
non-u.s.subsidiaries
participate in various defined benefit pension plans. these
plans generally provide benefits based on years of credited
service and a percentage of the employees eligible
compensation. the firm also maintains a defined benefit pension
plan for substantially all u.s.employees hired prior to
november1,2003. as of november2004, this plan
has been closed to new participants and no further benefits will
be accrued to existing participants. in addition, the firm has
unfunded postretirement benefit plans that provide medical and
life insurance for eligible retirees and their dependents
covered under these programs.
the following table provides a summary of the changes in the
plans benefit obligations and the fair value of assets for
november2006 and november2005 and a statement of the
funded status of the plans as of november2006 and
november2005:
as of or for the year ended november
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
benefit obligation
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
service cost
interest cost
plan amendments
actuarial loss
(13
)
benefits paid
(6
)
(4
)
(8
)
(6
)
(67
)
(6
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
(50
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
fair value of plan assets
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
actual return on plan assets
firm contributions
employee contributions
benefits paid
(6
)
(3
)
(8
)
(6
)
(43
)
(6
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
(42
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
funded status
$
$
(167
)
$
(372
)
$
(39
)
$
(94
)
$
(277
)
unrecognized loss
unrecognized transition
(asset)/obligation
(17
)
(20
)
unrecognized prior service cost
adjustment to recognize additional
minimum liability
(10
)
(46
)
(18
)
(1
)
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
$
$
(44
)
$
(224
)
$
$
$
(176
)
the accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit
pension plans was $944million and $795million as of
november2006 and november2005, respectively.
for plans in which the accumulated benefit obligation exceeded
plan assets, the aggregate projected benefit obligation and
accumulated benefit obligation was $771million and
$647million, respectively, as of november2006, and
$135million and $126million, respectively, as of
november2005. the fair value of plan assets for each of
these plans was $583million and $64million as of
november2006 and november2005, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the components of pension expense/(income) and postretirement
expense are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(26
)
(27
)
(23
)
net amortization
total
$
$
(2
)
$
non-u.s.pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(29
)
(23
)
(20
)
net amortization
other(1)
(17
)
total
$
$
$
postretirement
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
net amortization
total
$
$
$
(1)
represents a benefit as a result of the termination of a
japanese pension plan.
the weighted average assumptions used to develop the actuarial
present value of the projected benefit obligation and net
periodic pension cost are set forth below. these assumptions
represent a weighted average of the assumptions used for the
u.s. and
non-u.s.plans and
are based on the economic environment of each applicable country.
year ended november
defined benefit pension plans
u.s.pensionprojected
benefit obligation
discount rate
5.50
%
5.25
%
5.50
%
rate of increase in future
compensation levels
n/a
n/a
n/a
u.s.pensionnet
periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.25
5.50
6.00
rate of increase in future
compensation levels
n/a
n/a
5.00
expected long-term rate of return
on plan assets
7.50
7.50
8.50
non-u.s.pensionprojected
benefit obligation
discount rate
4.85
4.81
4.63
rate of increase in future
compensation levels
4.98
4.75
4.49
non-u.s.pensionnet
periodic benefit cost
discount rate
4.81
4.63
4.76
rate of increase in future
compensation levels
4.75
4.49
4.37
expected long-term rate of return
on plan assets
6.93
6.35
6.25
postretirement
plansbenefit obligation
discount rate
5.50
%
5.25
%
5.50
%
rate of increase in future
compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
postretirement
plansnet periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.25
5.50
6.00
rate of increase in future
compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
generally, the firm determined the discount rates for its
defined benefit plans by referencing indices for long-term,
high-quality bonds and ensuring that the discount rate does not
exceed the yield reported for those indices after adjustment for
the duration of the plans liabilities.
the firms approach in determining the long-term rate of
return for plan assets is based upon historical financial market
relationships that have existed over time with the presumption
that this trend will generally remain constant in the future.
for measurement purposes, an annual growth rate in the per
capita cost of covered healthcare benefits of 10.74% was assumed
for the year ending november2007. the rate was assumed to
decrease ratably to 5.00% for the year ending november2015
and remain at that level thereafter.
the assumed cost of healthcare has an effect on the amounts
reported for the firms postretirement plans. a 1% change
in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would have the
following effects:
1% increase
1% decrease
(in millions)
cost
$
$
$
(7
)
$
(5
)
obligation
(62
)
(37
)
the following table sets forth the composition of plan assets
for the u.s. and
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans by asset category:
as of november
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
pension
pension
pension
pension
equity securities
%
%
%
%
debt securities
other
total
%
%
%
%
the investment approach of the firms u.s. and major
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans involves employing a sufficient level of
flexibility to capture investment opportunities as they occur,
while maintaining reasonable parameters to ensure that prudence
and care are exercised in the execution of the investment
programs. the plans employ a total return on investment
approach, whereby a mix, which is broadly similar to the actual
asset allocation as of november 2006, of equity securities, debt
securities and other assets, is targeted to maximize the
long-term return on assets for a given level of risk. investment
risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis by the
firms retirement committee through periodic portfolio
reviews, meetings with investment managers and annual liability
measurements.
the firm will contribute a minimum of $30million to its
pension plans and $9million to its postretirement plans in
2007.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the following table sets forth benefits projected to be paid
from the firms u.s. and
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension and postretirement plans (net of medicare
subsidy receipts) and reflects expected future service, where
appropriate:
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
$
$
$
2012-2016
defined contribution plans
the firm contributes to employer-sponsored u.s. and
non-u.s.defined
contribution plans. the firms contribution to these plans
was $230million, $305million and $189million
for the years ended november 2006, november2005 and
november2004, respectively.
note12.
employee incentive plans
stock incentive plan
the firm sponsors a stock incentive plan, the goldman sachs
amended and restated stock incentive plan (the amended sip),
which provides for grants of incentive stock options,
nonqualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, dividend
equivalent rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and
other share-based
awards. in the second quarter of 2003, the amended sip was
approved by the firms shareholders, effective for grants
after april1,2003, and no further awards were or
will be made under the original plan after that date, although
awards granted under the original plan prior to that date remain
outstanding.
the total number of shares of common stock that may be issued
under the amended sip through 2008 may not exceed
250million shares and, in each year thereafter, may not
exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock,
determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding year,
increased by the number of shares available for awards in
previous years but not covered by awards granted in such years.
as of november2006 and november2005,
180.0million and 196.6million shares, respectively,
were available for grant under the amended sip, after taking
into account
stock-based
compensation awards that were issued subsequent to year end, as
part of year-end
compensation.
other compensation arrangements
in november 2004, the firm adopted new deferred compensation
plans for eligible employees. in general, under the plans,
participants are able to defer payment of a portion of their
cash year-end
compensation. during the deferral period, participants are able
to nominally invest their deferrals in certain alternatives
available under the plans. generally, under current tax law,
participants are not subject to income tax on amounts deferred
or on any notional investment earnings until the returns are
distributed, and the firm is not entitled to a corresponding tax
deduction until the amounts are distributed. the firm has
recognized compensation expense for the amounts deferred under
these plans. as of november2006 and november2005,
$245million and $134million, respectively, related
to these plans was included in other liabilities and
accrued expenses in the consolidated statements of
financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
in november 2004, the firm adopted a discount stock program
through which eligible senior executives may acquire restricted
stock units in 2006 and 2005 under the firms amended sip
at an effective 25% discount. the 25% discount is effected by an
additional grant of restricted stock units equal to
one-third of the number
of restricted stock units purchased by qualifying participants.
the purchased restricted stock units are 100% vested when
granted, but the shares underlying them are not able to be sold
or transferred (other than to satisfy tax obligations) before
the third anniversary of the grant date. the shares underlying
the restricted stock units that are granted in order to effect
the 25% discount will generally vest in equal installments on
the second and third anniversaries following the grant date and
will not be transferable before the third anniversary of the
grant date. compensation expense related to these restricted
stock units is recognized over the vesting period. the total
value of restricted stock units granted in 2006 and 2005 in
order to effect the 25% discount was $72million and
$79million, respectively.
restricted stock units
the firm issued restricted stock units to employees under the
amended sip, primarily in connection with
year-end compensation
and acquisitions.
year-end restricted
stock units generally vest as outlined in the applicable
restricted stock unit agreements and deliver shortly after the
third anniversary of the grant date. all employee restricted
stock unit agreements provide that vesting is accelerated in
certain circumstances, such as upon retirement, death and
extended absence. of the total restricted stock units
outstanding as of november2006 and november2005,
(i)26.4million units and 30.1million units,
respectively, required future service as a condition to the
delivery of the underlying shares of common stock and
(ii)38.9million units and 25.0million units,
respectively, did not require future service. in all cases,
delivery of the underlying shares of common stock is conditioned
on the grantees satisfying certain vesting and other
requirements outlined in the award agreements. when delivering
the underlying shares to employees, the firm generally issues
new shares of common stock, as opposed to reissuing treasury
shares. the activity related to these restricted stock units is
set forth below:
weighted average grant-date
restricted stock
fair value of restricted
units outstanding
stock units outstanding
future
no future
future
no future
service
service
service
service
required
required
required
required
outstanding, november 2005
(1)
30,117,820
24,993,866
$
112.01
$
107.18
granted(2)(3)(4)
7,499,157
12,217,441
191.08
200.62
forfeited
(940,930
)
(189,715
)
109.85
98.95
delivered(5)
(8,399,126
)
92.00
vested(4)
(10,295,675
)
10,295,675
101.08
101.08
outstanding, november 2006
26,380,372
38,918,141
$
138.83
$
138.22
(1)
includes restricted stock units granted to employees during the
year ended november2006 as part of compensation for 2005.
(2)
includes restricted stock units granted to employees subsequent
to november 2006 as part of compensation for 2006.
(3)
the weighted average grant-date fair value of restricted stock
units granted during the years ended november2006,
november2005 and november2004 was $196.99, $129.03
and $104.15, respectively.
(4)
the aggregate fair value of awards vested during the years ended
november2006, november2005 and november2004
was $4.40billion, $2.05billion and
$1.64billion, respectively.
(5)
includes restricted stock units that were cash settled.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
stock options
stock options granted to employees generally vest as outlined in
the applicable stock option agreement and first become
exercisable on or after the third anniversary of the grant date.
year-end stock options
for 2006 and 2005 become exercisable in january2010 and
january2009, respectively, and expire on
november25,2016 and november27,2015,
respectively. shares received on exercise prior to
january2011 for
year-end 2006 options
and january2010 for
year-end 2005 options
can not be sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of until
january2011 and january2010, respectively. all
employee stock option agreements provide that vesting is
accelerated in certain circumstances, such as upon retirement,
death and extended absence. in general, all stock options expire
on the tenth anniversary of the grant date, although they may be
subject to earlier termination or cancellation under certain
circumstances in accordance with the terms of the amended sip
and the applicable stock option agreement. the dilutive effect
of the firms outstanding stock options is included in
average common shares
outstandingdiluted on the consolidated
statements of earnings.
the activity related to these stock options is set forth below:
weighted
aggregate
weighted average
options
average
intrinsic value
remaining
outstanding
exercise price
(in millions)
life(years)
outstanding,
november2005(1)
64,237,687
$
83.24
granted(2)
2,937,772
199.84
exercised(3)
(21,323,726
)
78.09
forfeited
(204,637
)
90.27
outstanding, november2006
45,647,096
$
93.12
$
4,952
5.31
exercisable, november2006
38,781,928
81.87
4,643
4.62
(1)
includes stock options granted to employees during the year
ended november 2006 as part of compensation for 2005.
(2)
includes stock options granted to employees subsequent to
november 2006 as part of compensation for 2006.
(3)
includes stock options that were cash settled.
the total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years
ended november2006, november2005 and
november2004 was $1.52billion, $766million and
$363million, respectively.
the options outstanding as of november2006 are set forth
below:
weighted
weighted average
options
average
remaining
exercise price
outstanding
exercise price
life (years)
$
45.00
$
59.99
5,037,067
$
52.97
2.50
60.00
74.99
75.00
89.99
17,604,474
81.12
4.89
90.00
104.99
16,938,811
91.91
5.09
105.00
119.99
120.00
134.99
3,128,972
131.64
9.00
135.00
194.99
195.00
209.99
2,937,772
199.84
10.00
outstanding, november 2006
45,647,096
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the weighted average fair value of options granted for 2006,
2005 and 2004 was $49.96per option, $32.91per option
and $32.22per option, respectively. fair value was
estimated as of the grant date based on a
black-scholes
option-pricing
model using the following weighted average assumptions:
year ended november
risk-free interest rate
4.6
%
4.5
%
3.4
%
expected volatility
27.5
30.0
35.0
dividend yield
0.7
0.9
1.0
expected life
7.5 years
7.5 years
5 years
the fair value of options granted in 2006 and 2005 reflects an
additional discount for sales restrictions on the shares of
common stock underlying such options that apply until
january2011 and january2010, respectively. the
expected life of the options granted in 2006 and 2005 has been
extended to 7.5years to reflect the estimated impact of
the sales restrictions on the expected life of the awards.
the following table sets forth share-based compensation and the
related tax benefit:
year ended november
(in millions)
share-based compensation
$
3,669
$
1,758
$
1,225
excess tax benefit related to
options exercised
excess tax benefit related to
share-based
compensation(1)
(1)
represents the tax benefit, recognized in additional
paid-in capital, on
stock options exercised and the delivery of common stock
underlying restricted stock units.
as of november 2006, there was $2.51billion of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested
share-based
compensation arrangements. this cost is expected to be
recognized over a weighted average period of 2.15years.
the firms stock repurchase program is intended to maintain
its total shareholders equity at appropriate levels and to
substantially offset increases in share count over time
resulting from employee
share-based
compensation. the repurchase program has been effected primarily
through regular
open-market purchases
and is influenced by, among other factors, the level of the
firms common shareholders equity, its overall
capital position,
share-based awards and
exercises of employee stock options, the prevailing market price
of its common stock and general market conditions.
note13.
transactions with affiliated funds
the firm has formed numerous nonconsolidated investment funds
with third-party
investors. the firm generally acts as the investment manager for
these funds and, as such, is entitled to receive management fees
and, in certain cases, advisory fees, incentive fees or
overrides from these funds. these fees amounted to
$3.37billion, $2.08billion and $1.72billion
for the years ended november2006, november2005 and
november2004, respectively. as of november2006 and
november2005, the fees receivable from these funds were
$362million and $388million, respectively.
additionally, the firm may invest alongside the
third-party
investors in certain funds. the aggregate carrying value of the
firms interests in these funds was $3.94billion and
$2.17billion as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively. in the ordinary course of
business, the firm
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
may also engage in other activities with these funds, including,
among others, securities lending, trade execution, trading and
custody. see note6 for the firms commitments related
to these funds.
note14.
income taxes
the components of the net tax expense reflected in the
consolidated statements of earnings are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
current taxes
u.s.federal
$
3,736
$
1,504
$
state and local
non-u.s.
2,165
1,380
total current tax expense
6,528
3,097
1,083
deferred taxes
u.s.federal
(635
)
state and local
(262
)
(4
)
non-u.s.
(608
)
(449
)
total deferred tax (benefit)/expense
(1,505
)
(450
)
1,040
net tax expense
$
5,023
$
2,647
$
2,123
deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of
assets and liabilities. these temporary differences result in
taxable or deductible amounts in future years and are measured
using the tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such
differences are expected to reverse.
significant components of the firms deferred tax assets
and liabilities are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
deferred tax assets
compensation and benefits
$
2,763
$
1,563
other, net
1,104
3,867
1,882
valuation
allowance(1)
(81
)
(6
)
total deferred tax assets
3,786
1,876
deferred tax liabilities
depreciation and amortization
1,040
unrealized gains
total deferred tax liabilities
$
1,407
$
1,080
(1)
relates primarily to the ability to utilize losses in various
tax jurisdictions.
the firm permanently reinvests eligible earnings of certain
foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly, does not accrue any
u.s.income taxes that would arise if such earnings were
repatriated. as of
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
november2006, this policy resulted in an unrecognized net
deferred tax liability of $210million attributable to
reinvested earnings of $2.90billion.
during 2006, the valuation allowance was increased by
$75million, primarily due to the acquisition of deferred
tax assets considered more likely than not to expire unused. net
operating loss carryforwards were $1.78billion and
$352million as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively.
the firm had federal net operating loss carryforwards, primarily
resulting from acquisitions, of $203million and
$24million as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively. the firm recorded a related
net deferred income tax asset of $69million and
$8million as of november2006 and november2005,
respectively. these carryforwards are subject to annual
limitations on utilization and will begin to expire in 2010.
acquired alternative minimum tax credit carryforwards of
$7million as of november2005 were fully utilized in
2006.
the firm had state and local net operating loss carryforwards,
primarily resulting from acquisitions, of $1.52billion and
$328million as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively. the firm recorded a related
net deferred income tax asset of $31million and
$24million as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively. these carryforwards are
subject to annual limitations on utilization and will begin to
expire in 2007.
the firm had foreign net operating loss carryforwards of
$50million as of november2006 and recorded a related
net deferred income tax asset of $13million. these
carryforwards are subject to limitation on utilization and can
be carried forward indefinitely.
the firm is subject to examination by the u.s.internal
revenue service (irs) and other taxing authorities in certain
countries, such as japan, the united kingdom, korea and
u.s.states in which the firm has significant business
operations, such as new york. the irs is currently examining the
firms 2003 and 2004 fiscal years. during fiscal 2006, the
japanese taxing authority concluded their examination of the tax
years 2000 through 2004. during fiscal 2005, the irs concluded
its examination of fiscal years 1999 through 2002, and new york
state and city substantially concluded their examinations
covering periods through fiscal year 2003. the firm regularly
assesses the likelihood of additional assessments by each
jurisdiction to which the firm pays taxes resulting from the
impact of current and future examinations. tax reserves have
been established, which the firm believes are adequate in
relation to the potential for additional assessments. the
resolution of tax matters is not expected to have a material
effect on the firms financial condition but may be
material to the firms operating results for a particular
period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for that
period and the firms effective tax rate for that period.
a reconciliation of the u.s.federal statutory income tax
rate to the firms effective income tax rate is set forth
below:
year ended november
u.s.federal statutory income
tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase related to state and local
taxes, net of u.s.income tax effects
1.6
1.6
1.4
tax credits
(0.6
)
(1.6
)
(3.6
)
foreign operations
(1.3
)
(1.2
)
(1.2
)
tax-exempt income, including
dividends
(0.4
)
(0.6
)
(0.7
)
other
0.2
(1.2
) (1)
0.9
effective income tax rate
34.5
%
32.0
%
31.8
%
(1)
primarily includes the effect of audit settlements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
tax benefits of approximately $653million in november
2006, $272million in november 2005 and $330million
in november 2004, related to the delivery of common stock
underlying restricted stock units and the exercise of options,
were credited directly to additional paid-in capital
in the consolidated statements of financial condition and
changes in shareholders equity.
note15.
regulation
the firm is regulated by the u.s.securities and exchange
commission (sec)as a consolidated supervised entity (cse).
as such, it is subject to group-wide supervision and examination
by the sec and to minimum capital requirements on a consolidated
basis. as of november 2006 and november 2005, the firm was in
compliance with the cse capital requirements.
the firms principal u.s.regulated subsidiaries
include goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.) and goldman
sachs execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec). gs&co. and
gsec are registered u.s.broker-dealers and futures
commission merchants subject to
rule15c3-1 of the
sec and rule1.17 of the commodity futures trading
commission, which specify uniform minimum net capital
requirements, as defined, for their registrants, and also
require that a significant part of the registrants assets
be kept in relatively liquid form. gs&co. and gsec have
elected to compute their minimum capital requirements in
accordance with the alternative net capital
requirement as permitted by
rule15c3-1. as of
november 2006 and november 2005, gs&co. and gsec had net
capital in excess of their minimum capital requirements. in
addition to its alternative minimum net capital requirements,
gs&co. is also required to hold tentative net capital in
excess of $1billion and net capital in excess of
$500million in accordance with the market and credit risk
standards of appendixe of
rule15c3-1.
gs&co. is also required to notify the sec in the event that
its tentative net capital is less than $5billion. as of
november 2006 and november 2005, gs&co. had tentative net
capital and net capital in excess of both the minimum and the
notification requirements.
goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank), a wholly owned industrial
bank, is regulated by the federal deposit insurance corporation
and the state of utah department of financial institutions and
is subject to minimum capital requirements. as of november 2006,
gs bank was in compliance with all regulatory capital
requirements. gs bank had approximately $10.59billion of
interest-bearing deposits as of november 2006, which are
included in payables to customers and counterparties
in the consolidated statements of financial condition.
the firm has u.s.insurance subsidiaries that are subject
to state insurance regulation in the states in which they are
domiciled and in the other states in which they are licensed. in
addition, certain of the firms insurance subsidiaries are
regulated by the bermuda registrar of companies. the firms
insurance subsidiaries were in compliance with all regulatory
capital requirements as of november 2006 and november 2005.
the firms principal
non-u.s.regulated
subsidiaries include goldman sachs international (gsi)and
goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl). gsi, the firms
regulated u.k. broker-dealer, is subject to the capital
requirements of the u.k.s financial services authority.
gsjcl, the firms regulated japanese broker-dealer, is
subject to the capital requirements of japans financial
services agency. prior to october1, 2006, goldman sachs
(japan) ltd. (gsjl), the predecessor to gsjcl, was the primary
regulated subsidiary based in japan. as of november 2006 and
november2005, gsi, gsjcl and gsjl were in compliance with
their local capital adequacy requirements. certain other
non-u.s.subsidiaries
of the firm are also subject to capital adequacy requirements
promulgated by authorities of the countries in which they
operate. as of november2006 and november 2005, these
subsidiaries were in compliance with their local capital
adequacy requirements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
the regulatory requirements referred to above restrict group
inc.s ability to withdraw capital from its regulated
subsidiaries. as of november 2006, approximately
$14.15billion of net assets of regulated subsidiaries were
restricted as to the payment of dividends to group inc.
note16.
business segments
in reporting to management, the firms operating results
are categorized into the following three segments: investment
banking, trading and principal investments, and asset management
and securities services.
basis of presentation
in reporting segments, certain of the firms business lines
have been aggregated where they have similar economic
characteristics and are similar in each of the following areas:
(i)the nature of the services they provide,
(ii)their methods of distribution, (iii)the types of
clients they serve and (iv)the regulatory environments in
which they operate.
the cost drivers of the firm taken as a whole
compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of the
firms business segments. compensation and benefits
expenses within the firms segments reflect, among other
factors, the overall performance of the firm as well as the
performance of individual business units. consequently, pre-tax
margins in one segment of the firms business may be
significantly affected by the performance of the firms
other business segments.
the firm allocates revenues and expenses among the three
segments. due to the integrated nature of the business segments,
estimates and judgments have been made in allocating certain
revenue and expense items. transactions between segments are
based on specific criteria or approximate third-party rates.
total operating expenses include corporate items that have not
been allocated to individual business segments. the allocation
process is based on the manner in which management views the
business of the firm.
the segment information presented in the table below is prepared
according to the following methodologies:
revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are
included in determining pre-tax earnings.
net revenues in the firms segments include allocations of
interest income and interest expense to specific securities,
commodities and other positions in relation to the cash
generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying
positions. net interest is included within segment net revenues
as it is consistent with the way in which management assesses
segment performance.
overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments
are allocated ratably based on direct segment expenses.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
segment operating results
management believes that the following information provides a
reasonable representation of each segments contribution to
consolidated pre-tax earnings and total assets:
as of or for the year ended november
(in millions)
investment
net revenues
$
5,629
$
3,671
$
3,374
banking
operating expenses
4,062
3,258
2,973
pre-tax earnings
$
1,567
$
$
segment assets
$
4,967
$
4,869
$
4,759
trading and principal
net
revenues(1)
$
25,562
$
16,818
$
13,728
investments
operating
expenses(1)
14,962
10,600
8,688
pre-tax earnings
$
10,600
$
6,218
$
5,040
segment assets
$
566,499
$
505,536
$
358,137
assetmanagementand
net revenues
$
6,474
$
4,749
$
3,849
securities services
operating expenses
4,036
3,070
2,430
pre-tax earnings
$
2,438
$
1,679
$
1,419
segment assets
$
266,735
$
196,399
$
167,957
total
net
revenues(1)(2)
$
37,665
$
25,238
$
20,951
operating
expenses(3)
23,105
16,965
14,275
pre-tax
earnings(4)
$
14,560
$
8,273
$
6,676
total
assets(5)
$
838,201
$
706,804
$
531,379
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to the firms reported
pre-tax earnings.
(2)
net revenues include net interest as set forth in the table
below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
1,535
1,366
1,744
asset management and securities
services
1,947
1,659
1,194
total net interest
$
3,498
$
3,097
$
3,026
(3)
includes the following expenses that have not been allocated to
the firms segments: (i)net provisions for a number
of litigation and regulatory proceedings of $45million,
$37million and $103million for the years ended
november2006, november 2005 and november 2004,
respectively; (ii)$62million in connection with the
establishment of the firms joint venture in china for the
year ended november 2004; and (iii)the amortization of
employee initial public offering awards, net of forfeitures, of
$19million for the year ended november 2004.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial
statements(continued)
(4)
pre-tax earnings include total depreciation and amortization as
set forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
asset management and securities
services
total depreciation and amortization
$
$
$
(5)
includes deferred tax assets relating to the firms
conversion to corporate form and certain assets that management
believes are not allocable to a particular segment for the year
ended november 2004.
geographic information
due to the highly integrated nature of international financial
markets, the firm manages its businesses based on the
profitability of the enterprise as a whole. accordingly,
management believes that profitability by geographic region is
not necessarily meaningful. in addition, as a significant
portion of the firms activities require cross-border
coordination in order to facilitate the needs of the firms
clients, the methodology for allocating the firms
profitability to geographic regions is dependent on the judgment
of management. during 2006, the firm amended its methodology for
allocating profitability by geographic region. prior periods
have been reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
geographic results are generally allocated as follows:
investment banking: location of the client and investment
banking team.
fixed income, currency and commodities, and equities: location
of the trading desk.
principal investments: location of the investment.
asset management: location of the sales team.
securities services: location of the primary market for the
underlying security.
the following table sets forth the total net revenues and
pre-tax earnings of the firm and its consolidated subsidiaries
by geographic region allocated on the methodology described
above:
year ended november
(in millions)
net revenues
americas(1)
$
20,361
$
14,639
$
12,312
emea(2)
9,354
6,063
5,107
asia
7,950
4,536
3,532
total net revenues
$
37,665
$
25,238
$
20,951
pre-tax earnings
americas(1)
$
7,515
$
4,977
3,976
emea(2)
3,075
1,457
1,212
asia
4,015
1,876
1,672
corporate(3)
(45
)
(37
)
(184
)
total pre-tax earnings
$
14,560
$
8,273
$
6,676
(1)
substantially all relates to u.s.results.
(2)
emea (europe, middle east and africa).
(3)
includes the following expenses that have not been allocated to
the firms segments: (i)net provisions for a number
of litigation and regulatory proceedings of $45million,
$37million and $103million for the years ended
november2006, november 2005 and november 2004,
respectively; (ii)$62million in connection with the
establishment of the firms joint venture in china for the
year ended november 2004; and (iii)the amortization of
employee initial public offering awards, net of forfeitures, of
$19million for the year ended november 2004.
table of contents
supplemental financial information
quarterly results (unaudited)
the following represents the firms unaudited quarterly
results for 2006 and 2005. these quarterly results were prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
reflect all adjustments that are, in the opinion of management,
necessary for a fair statement of the results. these adjustments
are of a normal recurring nature.
2006 quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
17,246
$
18,002
$
15,979
$
18,126
interest expense
6,813
7,761
8,395
8,719
revenues, net of interest expense
(1)
10,433
10,241
7,584
9,407
operating
expenses(1)(2)
6,744
6,717
5,222
4,422
pre-tax earnings
3,689
3,524
2,362
4,985
provision for taxes
1,210
1,212
1,833
net earnings
2,479
2,312
1,594
3,152
preferred stock dividend
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders
$
2,453
$
2,286
$
1,555
$
3,104
earnings per common share
basic
$
5.36
$
5.08
$
3.46
$
7.06
diluted
5.08
4.78
3.26
6.59
dividends declared and paid per
common share
0.25
0.35
0.35
0.35
2005 quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
9,964
$
8,949
$
12,333
$
12,145
interest expense
3,449
4,022
4,940
5,742
revenues, net of interest expense
(1)
6,515
4,927
7,393
6,403
operating
expenses(1)(2)
4,370
3,683
4,988
3,924
pre-tax earnings
2,145
1,244
2,405
2,479
provision for taxes
net earnings
1,512
1,617
1,632
preferred stock dividend
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders
$
1,512
$
$
1,608
$
1,624
earnings per common share
basic
$
3.06
$
1.78
$
3.40
$
3.53
diluted
2.94
1.71
3.25
3.35
dividends declared and paid per
common share
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to the firms reported
net earnings.
(2)
the timing and magnitude of changes in the firms bonus
accruals can have a significant effect on results in a given
quarter.
table of contents
supplemental financial information
common stock price range
the following table sets forth, for the quarters indicated, the
high and low sales prices per share of the firms common
stock as reported by the consolidated tape association.
sales price
high
low
high
low
high
low
first quarter
$
146.35
$
124.23
$
113.93
$
101.79
$
108.00
$
95.73
second quarter
169.31
139.18
114.25
95.16
109.29
90.08
third quarter
157.00
136.79
114.87
94.75
95.15
83.29
fourth quarter
203.35
145.66
134.99
108.86
105.40
88.46
as of january 26, 2007, there were 6,804holders of record
of the firms common stock.
on january 26, 2007, the last reported sales price for the
firms common stock on the new york stock exchange was
$213.50 per share.
table of contents
supplemental financial information
selected financial data
as of or for the year ended november
income statement data
(in millions)
total revenues
$
69,353
$
43,391
$
29,839
$
23,623
$
22,854
interest expense
31,688
18,153
8,888
7,600
8,868
revenues, net of interest
expense(1)
37,665
25,238
20,951
16,023
13,986
compensation and
benefits(1)
16,457
11,758
9,681
7,515
7,037
other operating
expenses(1)
6,648
5,207
4,594
4,063
3,696
pre-tax earnings
$
14,560
$
8,273
$
6,676
$
4,445
$
3,253
balance sheet data
(in millions)
total assets
$
838,201
$
706,804
$
531,379
$
403,799
$
355,574
other secured financings (long-term)
26,134
15,669
12,087
6,043
unsecured long-term borrowings
122,842
84,338
68,609
51,439
38,181
total liabilities
802,415
678,802
506,300
382,167
336,571
total shareholders equity
35,786
28,002
25,079
21,632
19,003
common share data
(in millions, except per share amounts)
earnings per common share
basic
$
20.93
$
11.73
$
9.30
$
6.15
$
4.27
diluted
19.69
11.21
8.92
5.87
4.03
dividends declared and paid per
common share
1.30
1.00
1.00
0.74
0.48
book value per common
share(2)
72.62
57.02
50.77
43.60
38.69
average common shares outstanding
basic
449.0
478.1
489.5
488.4
495.6
diluted
477.4
500.2
510.5
511.9
525.1
selected data
(unaudited)
employees
united states
15,477
14,466
13,846
13,189
12,928
non-u.s.
10,990
9,157
7,890
7,170
7,705
total
employees(3)
26,467
23,623
21,736
20,359
20,633
assets under management
(in
billions)(4)(5)
asset class
alternative
investments(6)
$
$
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006, cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings was
reclassified to operating expenses. cost of power
generation was previously reported as a reduction to
revenues. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation, with no impact to the firms reported
pre-tax earnings.
(2)
book value per common share is based on common shares
outstanding, including restricted stock units granted to
employees with no future service requirements, of
450.1million, 460.4million, 494.0million,
496.1million and 491.2million as of november 2006,
november 2005, november 2004, november 2003 and november 2002,
respectively.
(3)
beginning in 2006, includes employees of the firms
consolidated property management and loan servicing
subsidiaries. prior periods have been adjusted to conform to the
current presentation.
(4)
substantially all assets under management are valued as of
calendar month-end.
(5)
in the first quarter of 2006, the firm changed the methodology
for classifying certain non-money market assets. the changes
were made primarily to reclassify certain assets allocated to
external investment managers out of alternative investment
assets and to reclassify currency funds into alternative
investment assets. the changes did not impact total assets under
management and prior periods have been reclassified to conform
to the current presentation.
(6)
primarily includes hedge funds, private equity, real estate,
currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
table of contents
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting
and financial disclosure
there were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure during the last two fiscal
years.
item9a.
controls and procedures
as of the end of the period covered by this report, an
evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs management,
with the participation of our chief executive officer and chief
financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in
rule13a-15(e)
under the securities exchange act of 1934). based upon that
evaluation, our chief executive officer and chief financial
officer concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures
were effective as of the end of the period covered by this
report. in addition, no change in our internal control over
financial reporting (as defined in
rule13a-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934) occurred during the
fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended november24, 2006
that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting and the report of independent registered public
accounting firm thereon are set forth in partii,
item8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
item9b.
other information
not applicable.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
information relating to the registrants executive officers
is included on pages43 to 44 of the annual report on
form10-k.
information relating to directors of the registrant, including
its audit committee and audit committee financial experts, and
its executive officers will be in the registrants
definitive proxy statement for its 2007 annual meeting of
shareholders to be held on march27, 2007, which will be
filed within 120days of the end of our fiscal year ended
november24, 2006 (the 2007 proxy statement) and is
incorporated herein by reference. information relating to the
registrants code of business conduct and ethics that
applies to its senior financial officers, as defined in the
code, is included in parti, item1 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
item11.
executive compensation
information relating to the registrants executive officer
and director compensation will be in the 2007 proxy statement
and is incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters
information relating to security ownership of certain beneficial
owners of the registrants common stock and information
relating to the security ownership of the registrants
management will be in the 2007 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
the following table provides information generally as of
november24, 2006, the last day of fiscal 2006 (but taking
into consideration equity-based awards granted on
december15, 2006 in respect of fiscal 2006 performance),
regarding securities to be issued on exercise of stock options,
and securities remaining available for issuance under our equity
compensation plans that were in effect during fiscal 2006.
number of securities
number of
remaining available
securities to be
for future issuance
issued upon
weighted-average
under equity
exercise of
exercise price of
compensation plans
outstanding
outstanding
(excluding securities
options, warrants
options, warrants
reflected in the
plan category
and rights
and rights
second column)
equity compensation plans approved
by security holders
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan(1)
45,647,096
(2)
$
93.1232
(2)
240,201,596
(3)
equity compensation plans not
approved by security holders
none
total
45,647,096
(2)
240,201,596
(3)(4)
(1)
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (the
sip) was approved by the shareholders of goldman sachs at our
2003 annual meeting of shareholders and is a successor plan to
the goldman sachs 1999 stock incentive plan (the 1999 plan),
which was approved by our shareholders immediately prior to our
initial public offering in may 1999 and under which no
additional awards have been granted since approval of the sip.
(2)
includes options that are subject to vesting and other
conditions.
(3)
of these shares, 65,070,431shares may be issued pursuant
to outstanding restricted stock units, including
64,615,717shares granted under the sip and
454,714shares granted under the 1999 plan.
table of contents
(4)
represents shares remaining to be issued under the sip
(239,746,882shares) and the 1999 plan
(454,714shares). the total number of shares of common
stock that may be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the
sip initially may not exceed 250,000,000shares. beginning
november29, 2008 and each fiscal year thereafter, the
number of shares of common stock that may be delivered pursuant
to awards granted after april1, 2003 under the sip may not
exceed 5% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock,
determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding
fiscal year, increased by the number of shares that were
available for awards in previous fiscal years but were not, at
the date of determination, covered by awards granted in previous
years.
item13.certain
relationships and related transactions
information regarding certain relationships and related
transactions will be in the 2007 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
item14.principal
accountant fees and services
information regarding principal accountant fees and services
will be in the 2007 proxy statement and is incorporated herein
by reference.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)
documents filed as part of this report:
1.consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed in
the annual report on
form10-k are
listed on pagef-1
hereof and in partii, item8 hereof.
2.financial statement schedule
the financial statement schedule required in the annual report
on form10-k is
listed on pagef-1
hereof. the required schedule appears on
pagesf-2 through
f-11 hereof.
3.exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation (incorporated
by reference to the corresponding exhibit to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.
333-74449)).
3.1
restated certificate of
incorporation of the goldman sachs group, inc. (incorporated by
reference to exhibit3.1 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november25, 2005).
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the
goldman sachs group, inc. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3.1 to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed december12, 2006).
3.3
certificate of designations of the
goldman sachs group, inc. relating to the seriesd
preferred stock (incorporated by reference to exhibit3 to
group inc.s registration statement on form8-a, filed
on may23, 2006).
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19,
1999, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new
york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit6 to
the registrants registration statement on form8-a,
filed june29, 1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated
as of february20, 2004, between the goldman sachs group,
inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.2 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november28, 2003).
4.3
warrant indenture, dated as of
february14, 2006, between the goldman sachs group, inc.
and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference
to exhibit4.34 to the registrants post-effective
amendment no.3 to forms-3, filed on march1,
2006).
certain instruments defining the
rights of holders of long-term debt securities of the registrant
and its subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to
item601(b)(4)(iii) of regulations-k. the registrant
hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon request, copies of
any such instruments.
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and
restated stock incentive plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended february28,
2003).
10.2
the goldman sachs defined
contribution plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.16 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.3
the goldman sachs amended and
restated restricted partner compensation plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended
february24, 2006).
table of contents
10.4
form of employment agreement for
pre-ipo participating managing directors (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.19 to the registrants registration
statement on form s-1 (no. 333-75213)).
10.5
form of agreement relating to
noncompetition and other covenants (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.20 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.6
form of option agreement
(discretionary options) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.24 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.7
tax indemnification agreement,
dated as of may7, 1999, by and among the goldman sachs
group, inc. and various parties (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.25 to the registrants registration
statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.8
amended and restated
shareholders agreement, dated june22, 2004, among
the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties (incorporated
by reference to exhibitm to amendment no.54 to
schedule 13d, filed june23, 2004, relating to the
registrants common stock).
10.9
instrument of indemnification
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.27 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.
333-75213)).
10.10
form of indemnification agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.28 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november26, 1999).
10.11
registration rights instrument,
dated as of december10, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibitg to amendment no.1 to schedule 13d, filed
december17, 1999, relating to the registrants common
stock (no. 005-56295)).
10.12
supplemental registration rights
instrument, dated as of december10, 1999 (incorporated by
reference to exhibith to amendment no.1 to schedule
13d, filed december17, 1999, relating to the
registrants common stock).
10.13
form of indemnification agreement
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.44 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november26, 1999).
10.14
form of indemnification agreement,
dated as of july5, 2000 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.15
amendment no.1, dated as of
september5, 2000, to the tax indemnification agreement,
dated as of may7, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.3 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.16
supplemental registration rights
instrument, dated as of december21, 2000 (incorporated by
reference to exhibitaa to amendment no.12 to
schedule 13d, filed january23, 2001, relating to the
registrants common stock).
10.17
supplemental registration rights
instrument, dated as of december21, 2001 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4 to registrants registration
statement on forms-3 (no.333-74006)).
10.18
supplemental registration rights
instrument, dated as of december20, 2002 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4 to registrants registration
statement on forms-3 (no. 333-101093)).
10.19
letter, dated february6,
2001, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to dr.ruth j.
simmons (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.63 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.20
letter, dated february6,
2001, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.john h.
bryan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.64 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
table of contents
10.21
letter, dated february6,
2001, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.james a.
johnson (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.65 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november24, 2000).
10.22
letter, dated february6,
2001, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to lord browne of
madingley (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.66 to
the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.23
letter, dated december18,
2002, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.william w.
george (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.39 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november29, 2002).
10.24
letter, dated june20, 2003,
from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.claes
dahlbck (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to
the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.25
letter, dated june20, 2003,
from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.edward m. liddy
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may30, 2003).
10.26
supplemental registration rights
instrument, dated as of december19, 2003 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.4 to the registrants
registration statement on forms-3 (no. 333-110371)).
10.27
letter, dated march31, 2004,
from the goldman sachs group, inc. to ms.lois d. juliber
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended may28, 2004).
10.28
letter, dated april6, 2005,
from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.stephen friedman
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants current report on form8-k, filed
april8, 2005).
10.29
form of amendment, dated
november27, 2004, to agreement relating to noncompetition
and other covenants, dated may7, 1999 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.32 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 2004).
10.30
form of rsu award agreement for pmd
discount stock program (subject to transfer
restrictions).
10.31
form of rsu award agreement for pmd
discount stock program (not subject to transfer
restrictions).
10.32
the goldman sachs group, inc.
non-qualified deferred compensation plan for
u.s.participating managing directors (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.32 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november25, 2005).
10.33
the goldman sachs group, inc.
non-qualified deferred compensation plan for u.s.extended
managing directors and other select employees (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.36 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 2004).
10.34
the goldman sachs group, inc.
non-qualified deferred compensation plan for u.k. participating
managing directors (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.34 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended november25,
2005).
10.35
the goldman sachs group, inc.
non-qualified deferred compensation for u.k. extended managing
directors and other select u.k. employees (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.38 to the registrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26, 2004).
10.36
form of year-end option award
agreement.
10.37
form of year-end rsu award
agreement.
table of contents
10.38
form of year-end restricted stock
award agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.3
to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed
december9, 2005).
10.39
form of non-employee director
option award agreement.
10.40
form of non-employee director rsu
award agreement.
10.41
description of non-employee
director compensation.
10.42
description of certain benefits for
participating managing directors (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.42 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended november25,
2005).
10.43
form of one-time rsu award
agreement.
10.44
ground lease, dated august23,
2005, between battery park city authority d/b/a/ hugh l. carey
battery park city authority, as landlord, and goldman sachs
headquarters llc, as tenant (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed august26, 2005).
10.45
general guarantee agreement, dated
january30, 2006, made by the goldman sachs group, inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.45 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november25, 2005).
10.46
letter, dated november10,
2006, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.rajat k.
gupta (incorporated by reference to exhibit99.1 to the
registrants current report on form8-k, filed
november13, 2006).
10.47
goldman, sachs& co.
executive life insurance policy and certificate with
metropolitan life insurance company for participating managing
directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended august25, 2006).
10.48
form of goldman, sachs&
co. executive life insurance policy with pacific life&
annuity company for participating managing directors, including
policy specifications and form of restriction on policy
owners rights (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended august25,
2006).
10.49
form of signature card for
2006year-end awards.
10.50
form of employment agreement for
post-ipo participating managing directors.
10.51
form of second amendment, dated
november25, 2006, to agreement relating to noncompetition
and other covenants, dated may7, 1999, as amended
effective november27, 2004.
12.1
statement re: computation of ratios
of earnings to fixed charges and ratios of earnings to combined
fixed charges and preferred stock dividends.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries of
the goldman sachs group, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered
public accounting firm.
24.1
powers of attorney (included on
signature page).
31.1
rule 13a-14(a) certifications.
32.1
section1350 certifications.
99.1
report of independent registered
public accounting firm on selected financial data.
this exhibit is a management contract or a compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
index to financial statements and financial statement
schedule
items15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
page
no.
managements
report on internal control over financial reporting
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated
statements of earnings
consolidated
statements of financial condition
consolidated
statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated
statements of cash flows
consolidated
statements of comprehensive income
notes to
consolidated financial statements
supplemental financial information
quarterly
results
common stock
price range
selected
financial data
financial statement schedule
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
schedulei
condensed nonconsolidated financial information of registrant
(parent company only)
f-2
condensed
nonconsolidated statements of earnings
f-2
condensed
nonconsolidated statements of financial condition
f-3
condensed
nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
f-4
notes to
condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
f-5
schedules not listed are omitted because of the absence of the
conditions under which they are required or because the
information is in the consolidated financial statements and
notes thereto.
f-1
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions)
revenues
equity in earnings of subsidiaries
$
9,877
$
4,763
$
4,785
principal investments
1,789
1,927
1,561
interest income
9,931
5,351
2,843
total revenues
21,597
12,041
9,189
interest expense
9,460
5,069
2,834
revenues, net of interest expense
12,137
6,972
6,355
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other expenses
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
11,715
6,550
5,972
provision for taxes
2,178
1,419
net earnings
9,537
5,626
4,553
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common
shareholders
$
9,398
$
5,609
$
4,553
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed
nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-2
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial
condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
cash segregated for margin purposes
1,965
1,569
receivables from subsidiaries
7,468
5,797
loans to subsidiaries
97,985
83,876
subordinated loans to subsidiaries
35,187
27,848
investments in subsidiaries
32,582
25,260
financial instruments owned, at
fair value
17,741
10,026
other assets
4,843
2,572
total assets
$
197,776
$
156,949
liabilities and
shareholders equity
unsecured short-term borrowings:
with third parties
$
32,632
$
39,976
with subsidiaries
1,539
1,439
total unsecured short-term
borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured long-term
borrowings
34,171
41,415
payables to subsidiaries
secured short-term financings
financial instruments sold, but not
yet purchased, at fair value
1,885
1,970
other liabilities and accrued
expenses
3,027
2,005
unsecured long-term borrowings:
with third parties
119,043
79,756
with subsidiaries
3,275
3,470
total unsecured long-term borrowings
122,318
83,226
total liabilities
161,990
128,947
commitments, contingencies and
guarantees
shareholders
equity
preferred stock, par value
$0.01per share; 150,000,000shares authorized,
124,000 and 70,000shares issued and outstanding as of
november 2006 and november2005, respectively, with
liquidation preference of $25,000per share
3,100
1,750
common stock, par value
$0.01per share; 4,000,000,000shares authorized,
599,697,200 and 573,970,935shares issued as of november
2006 and november2005, respectively, and 412,666,084 and
437,170,695shares outstanding as of november 2006 and
november 2005, respectively
restricted stock units and employee
stock options
6,290
3,415
nonvoting common stock, par value
$0.01per share; 200,000,000shares authorized, no
shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
19,731
17,159
retained earnings
27,868
19,085
accumulated other comprehensive
income
common stock held in treasury, at
cost, par value $0.01per share; 187,031,116 and
136,800,240shares as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively
(21,230
)
(13,413
)
total shareholders equity
35,786
28,002
total liabilities and
shareholders equity
$
197,776
$
156,949
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed
nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-3
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating
activities
net earnings
$
9,537
$
5,626
$
4,553
non-cash items included in net
earnings
undistributed earnings of
subsidiaries
(4,840
)
(4,293
)
(3,663
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
1,017
share-based compensation
changes in operating assets and
liabilities
net receivables from subsidiaries
1,883
(1,020
)
2,730
financial instruments owned, at
fair value
(7,763
)
(661
)
(3,317
)
financial instruments sold, but not
yet purchased, at fair value
(85
)
1,832
other, net
4,187
(899
)
(1,000
)
net cash provided by operating
activities
3,605
1,269
cash flows from investing
activities
purchase of property, leasehold
improvements and equipment
(162
)
(46
)
issuance of short-term loans to
subsidiaries, net of repayments
(12,953
)
(13,248
)
(9,775
)
issuance of term loans to
subsidiaries
(12,362
)
(12,015
)
(9,180
)
repayment of term loans by
subsidiaries
3,967
7,540
2,386
dividends received
1,398
capital distributions
from/(contributions to) subsidiaries, net
(2,537
)
1,943
(648
)
net cash used for investing
activities
(23,531
)
(15,472
)
(15,865
)
cash flows from financing
activities
secured short-term financings, net
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
(6,621
)
1,118
(2,869
)
proceeds from issuance of unsecured
long-term borrowings
44,043
31,382
30,004
repayment of unsecured long-term
borrowings, including the
current portion
(12,590
)
(13,579
)
(10,102
)
common stock repurchased
(7,817
)
(7,108
)
(1,805
)
dividends and dividend equivalents
paid on common stock, preferred stock and restricted stock units
(754
)
(511
)
(497
)
proceeds from issuance of common
stock
1,613
1,143
proceeds from issuance of preferred
stock, net of issuance costs
1,349
1,719
excess tax benefit related to
share-based compensation
cash settlement of share-based
compensation
(137
)
net cash provided by financing
activities
19,930
14,164
15,252
net increase/(decrease) in cash and
cash equivalents
(39
)
cash and cash equivalents,
beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of
year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for third-party interest, net of capitalized
interest, were $6.11billion, $3.69billion and
$1.70billion for the years ended november 2006, november
2005 and november 2004, respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were
$2.86billion, $1.52billion and $284million for
the years ended november 2006, november 2005 and november 2004,
respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed
nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-4
table of contents
schedule i
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial statements
note1.
significant accounting policies
basis of presentation
the condensed nonconsolidated financial statements of the
goldman sachs group, inc. (the parent company), a delaware
corporation, should be read in conjunction with the consolidated
financial statements of the goldman sachs group, inc. and
subsidiaries (the firm) and notes thereto (the consolidated
financial statements), which are included in partii,
item8 of the annual report on
form10-k. these
condensed nonconsolidated financial statements reflect the
results of operations, financial condition and cash flows for
the parent company only. investments in subsidiaries are
accounted for using the equity method of accounting prescribed
by accounting principles board (apb)opinion no.18,
the equity method of accounting for investments in common
stock.
unless otherwise stated herein, all references to
november2006, november2005 and november2004
refer to the parent companys fiscal years ended, or the
dates, as the context requires, november24,2006,
november25,2005 and november26,2004,
respectively. certain reclassifications have been made to
previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
the parent companys significant accounting policies are
identical to those used by the firm, to the extent applicable to
the parent companys activities. for further information
regarding the firms significant accounting policies, refer
to note2 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
use of estimates
these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements have been
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles that require management to make certain estimates and
assumptions. the most important of these estimates and
assumptions relate to fair value measurements, the accounting
for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets and the
provision for potential losses that may arise from litigation
and regulatory proceedings and tax audits. although these and
other estimates and assumptions are based on the best available
information, actual results could be materially different from
these estimates.
equity method investments
substantially all of the firms unsecured funding is raised
by the parent company. the parent company then lends the
necessary funds to its subsidiaries, some of which are
regulated, to meet their asset financing and capital
requirements. in addition, the parent company provides its
regulated subsidiaries with the necessary capital to meet their
regulatory requirements. such funding is included in loans
to subsidiaries and subordinated loans to
subsidiaries in the condensed nonconsolidated statements
of financial condition. intercompany exposure is managed by
requiring senior and subordinated intercompany loans to have
maturities equal to or shorter than the maturities of the
aggregate borrowings of the parent company. this policy ensures
that the subsidiaries obligations to the parent company
will generally mature in advance of the parent companys
third-party borrowings.
in addition, many of the subsidiaries pledge collateral at loan
value to cover their intercompany borrowings (other than
subordinated debt) in order to mitigate parent company liquidity
risk. equity investments in subsidiaries are generally funded
with equity
f-5
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
capital and included in investments in subsidiaries
in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial
condition.
the parent company enters into derivative contracts with
subsidiaries to hedge its net investment in
non-u.s.operations
and to manage the interest rate and currency exposure on its
unsecured long-term
borrowings and certain unsecured
short-term borrowings.
to manage exposure on its borrowings, the parent company uses
derivatives to effectively convert a substantial portion of its
unsecured long-term
borrowings into
u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. the parent company applies fair value
hedge accounting to derivative contracts that hedge the
benchmark interest rate (i.e., london interbank offered rate
(libor)) on its fixed rate unsecured
long-term borrowings.
derivative balances with subsidiaries, included in
financial instruments owned, at fair value and
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair
value in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of
financial condition, were $6.16billion and
$347million, and $2.79billion and $464million,
as of november2006 and november2005, respectively.
interest income is largely generated from loans made to
subsidiaries.
the parent company also allocates substantially all rental and
other costs relating to properties occupied by certain
subsidiaries. the parent company additionally allocates the cost
of share-based
compensation programs to subsidiaries relating to costs
associated with employees of those subsidiaries.
note2.
unsecured short-term
borrowings
the parent company obtains
third-party unsecured
short-term borrowings
primarily through the issuance of promissory notes, commercial
paper and hybrid debt instruments. as of november2006 and
november2005, these borrowings were $32.63billion
and $39.98billion, respectively. such amounts include the
portion of third-party
unsecured long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement
date and third-party
unsecured long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder. the carrying value
of these short-term
obligations approximates fair value due to their
short-term nature.
unsecured short-term
borrowings with third parties are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
13,811
$
17,339
commercial paper
5,098
current portion of unsecured
long-term borrowings
13,755
13,905
hybrid debt
instruments(1)
2,275
other short-term borrowings
1,848
3,590
total(2)
$
32,632
$
39,976
(1)
hybrid debt instruments are financial instruments that contain
bifurcatable embedded derivatives, $1.17billion of which
were accounted for at fair value under statement of financial
accounting standards (sfas)no.155, accounting
for certain hybrid financial instrumentsan
amendment of fasb statements no.133 and 140, as of
november2006.
(2)
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings were
5.33% and 4.17% as of november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively. the weighted average interest rates, after giving
effect to hedging activities, were 5.36% and 4.16% as of
november2006 and november2005, respectively. the
weighted average interest rates as of november 2006 excluded
hybrid debt instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.155.
f-6
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
in addition, the parent company may borrow overnight funds from
certain subsidiaries on an unsecured basis. as of
november2006 and november2005, such amounts were
$1.54billion and $1.44billion, respectively, and
included in unsecured
short-term
borrowingswith subsidiaries in the
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
note3.
unsecured long-term
borrowings
the parent company obtains
third-party unsecured
long-term borrowings
that consist principally of senior borrowings with maturities
extending to 2036. as of november2006 and
november2005, these borrowings were $119.04billion
and $79.76billion, respectively.
unsecured long-term
borrowings with third parties are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate
obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
40,008
$
33,053
non-u.s.dollar
22,739
15,739
floating rate
obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
36,472
22,065
non-u.s.dollar
19,824
8,899
total(3)
$
119,043
$
79,756
(1)
as of both november2006 and november2005, interest
rates on u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from
3.88% to 12.00%. as of both november2006 and
november2005, interest rates on
non-u.s. dollar
fixed rate obligations ranged from 0.67% to 8.88%.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the
federal funds rate. certain
equity-linked and
indexed instruments are included in floating rate obligations.
(3)
includes $1.98billion of hybrid financial instruments
accounted for at fair value under sfasno.155 as of
november2006.
f-7
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
unsecured long-term
borrowings with third parties by maturity date are set forth
below:
as of november
2006(1)(2)
2005(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
11,193
$
$
11,961
14,645
2,742
17,387
4,705
2,286
6,991
12,435
2,914
15,349
6,091
2,610
8,701
5,064
4,843
9,907
5,192
4,388
9,580
5,703
4,420
10,123
4,431
1,051
5,482
2012-thereafter
38,633
27,644
66,277
23,506
13,535
37,041
total
$
76,480
$
42,563
$
119,043
$
55,118
$
24,638
$
79,756
(1)
unsecured long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement
date and certain unsecured
long-term borrowings
that are redeemable within one year of the financial statement
date at the option of the holder are included as unsecured
short-term borrowings
in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial
condition.
(2)
unsecured long-term
borrowings that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of
the parent company are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. unsecured
long-term borrowings
that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the
holder are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
the parent company enters into derivative contracts with
subsidiaries, such as interest rate futures contracts, interest
rate swap agreements, currency swap agreements, and
equity-linked and
indexed contracts, to effectively convert a substantial portion
of its third-party
unsecured long-term
borrowings into
u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. accordingly, the carrying value of
these unsecured
long-term borrowings
approximated fair value as of november2006 and
november2005.
the effective weighted average interest rates for unsecured
long-term borrowings
with third parties are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
8.98
%
$
6.76
%
floating rate
obligations(1)
118,906
5.73
79,419
4.49
total
$
119,043
5.73
$
79,756
4.50
(1)
includes fixed rate obligations that have been converted into
floating rate obligations through derivative contracts.
f-8
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
unsecured long-term
borrowings with subsidiaries are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate
obligations(1)
u.s.dollar
$
$
non-u.s.dollar
floating rate
obligations(2)
u.s.dollar
1,500
1,797
non-u.s.dollar
total
$
3,275
$
3,470
(1)
as of both november2006 and november2005, interest
rates on u.s.dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from
4.68% to 5.78%. as of both november2006 and
november2005, interest rates on
non-u.s.dollar
fixed rate obligations ranged from 5.44% to 6.00%.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the
federal funds rate.
unsecured long-term
borrowings with subsidiaries by maturity date are set forth
below:
as of november
2006(1)
2005(1)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
$
$
2,182
2,182
2,182
2,182
2012-thereafter
total
$
2,235
$
1,040
$
3,275
$
2,532
$
$
3,470
(1)
unsecured long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement
date and certain unsecured
long-term borrowings
that are redeemable within one year of the financial statement
date at the option of the holder are included as unsecured
short-term borrowings
in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial
condition.
subordinated borrowings
unsecured long-term borrowings with third parties include
$7.34billion and $2.88billion of subordinated
borrowings as of november 2006 and november 2005, respectively,
as set forth below.
subordinated notes. as of november 2006, the parent
company had $4.50billion of subordinated notes outstanding
with maturities ranging from 2008 to 2036. the effective
weighted average interest rate on these subordinated notes was
5.45%, after giving effect to derivative contracts used to
convert fixed rate obligations into floating rate obligations.
as of november 2005, the parent company had $40million of
subordinated notes outstanding maturing in 2008 with an interest
rate of 12.00%. these notes are junior in right of payment to
all of the parent companys senior indebtedness.
f-9
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
refer to note5 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
information on junior subordinated debentures issued by the
parent company to goldman sachs capital trusti (the trust).
note4.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
commitments
letters of credit. the parent company provides letters of
credit issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu of
securities or cash to satisfy various collateral requirements.
letters of credit outstanding were $171million and
$25million as of november2006 and
november2005, respectively.
merchant banking commitments. the parent company acts as
an investor in merchant banking transactions, which includes
making long-term
investments in equity and debt instruments in privately
negotiated transactions, corporate acquisitions and real estate
transactions. in connection with these activities, the parent
company had commitments to invest up to $6.34billion and
$3.49billion in corporate and real estate investment funds
as of november2006 and november2005, respectively.
construction-related
commitments. as of november2006 and
november2005, the parent company had
construction-related
commitments of $2million and $19million,
respectively.
other. the parent company had other commitments of
$2million and $305million as of november2006
and november2005, respectively.
leases. the parent company has contractual obligations
under long-term
noncancelable lease agreements, principally for office space,
expiring on various dates through 2029. certain agreements are
subject to periodic escalation provisions for increases in real
estate taxes and other charges. future minimum rental payments,
net of minimum sublease rentals, which are generally reimbursed
by subsidiaries, are set forth below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2012-thereafter
total
$
1,275
contingencies
refer to note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
information on contingencies.
f-10
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
guarantees
the parent company has guaranteed the payment obligations of
goldman, sachs& co., its principal
u.s.broker-dealer subsidiary (other than nonrecourse
payment obligations). in addition, the parent company guarantees
many of the obligations of its other consolidated subsidiaries
on a
transaction-by-transaction
basis, as negotiated with the counterparty. the parent company
is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under its
subsidiary guarantees; however, because these guaranteed
obligations are also obligations of consolidated subsidiaries
and included in the consolidated statements of financial
condition or disclosed in note6 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k, the
parent companys liabilities as guarantor are not
separately disclosed herein.
the following tables set forth certain information about the
parent companys guarantees as of november2006 and
november2005:
as of november 2006
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(3)
2008 -
2010 -
2012 -
thereafter
total
(in millions)
guarantees of trust preferred
beneficial
interest(1)
$174
$349
$349
$6,676
$7,548
other financial
guarantees(2)
as of november 2005
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration(3)
2007 -
2009 -
2011 -
thereafter
total
(in millions)
guarantees of trust preferred
beneficial
interest(1)
$174
$349
$349
$6,851
$
7,723
other financial
guarantees(2)
(1)
includes the guarantee of all payments scheduled to be made over
the life of the trust, which could be shortened in the event the
parent company redeems the junior subordinated debentures issued
to fund the trust. see note5 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding the trust.
(2)
the carrying value of these guarantees was a liability of
$4million as of both november2006 and
november2005.
(3)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated losses in
connection with these contracts.
refer to note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k for
further information regarding the parent companys
guarantees.
f-11
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/ david a. viniar
name: david a. viniar
title: chief financial officer
date: february5, 2007
ii-1
table of contents
power of attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each person whose
signature appears below constitutes and appoints lloyd c.
blankfein, gary d. cohn, jon winkelried, david a. viniar,
gregory k. palm and esta e. stecher, and each of them severally,
his or her true and lawful
attorney-in-fact with
power of substitution and resubstitution to sign in his or her
name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to do any and
all things and execute any and all instruments that such
attorney may deem necessary or advisable under the securities
exchange act of 1934 and any rules, regulations and requirements
of the u.s.securities and exchange commission in
connection with the annual report on
form10-k and any
and all amendments hereto, as fully for all intents and purposes
as he or she might or could do in person, and hereby ratifies
and confirms all said
attorneys-in-fact and
agents, each acting alone, and his or her substitute or
substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue
hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of
1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
signature
capacity
date
/s/
lloyd c. blankfein
lloyd
c. blankfein
director, chairman and chief
executive officer (principal executive officer)
february5, 2007
/s/
lord browne of
madingley
lord
browne of madingley
director
february5, 2007
/s/
john h. bryan
john
h. bryan
director
february5, 2007
/s/
gary d. cohn
gary
d. cohn
director
february5, 2007
/s/
claes dahlbck
claes
dahlbck
director
february5, 2007
/s/
stephen friedman
stephen
friedman
director
february5, 2007
/s/
william w. george
william
w. george
director
february5, 2007
/s/
rajat k. gupta
rajat
k. gupta
director
february5, 2007
/s/
james a. johnson
james
a. johnson
director
february5, 2007
/s/
lois d. juliber
lois
d. juliber
director
february5, 2007
/s/
edward m. liddy
edward
m. liddy
director
february5, 2007
/s/
ruth j. simmons
ruth
j. simmons
director
february5, 2007
/s/
jon winkelried
jon
winkelried
director
february5, 2007
ii-2
table of contents
signature
capacity
date
/s/
david a. viniar
david
a. viniar
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
february5, 2007
/s/
sarah e. smith
sarah
e. smith
principal accounting officer
february5, 2007
ii-3
