10-k
y46519e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange
commission
washington,d.c.
form10-k
annual report pursuant to
section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007
commission file number:
001-14965
the goldman sachs group,
inc.
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
delaware
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
13-4019460
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
85 broad street
new york, n.y.
(address of principal executive
offices)
(zip
code)
(212)902-1000
(registrants telephone
number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the
act:
title of each class:
name of each exchange on which registered:
common stock, par value $.01 per share, and attached
shareholder protection rights
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000thinterest
in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock,
seriesa
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000thinterest
in a share of 6.20% non-cumulative preferred stock,
seriesb
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000thinterest
in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock,
seriesc
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000thinterest
in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock,
seriesd
new york stock exchange
5.793% fixed-to-floating rate normal automatic preferred
enhanced capital securities of goldman sachs capitalii
(and registrants guarantee with respect thereto)
new york stock exchange
floating rate normal automatic preferred enhanced capital
securities of goldman sachs capitaliii (and
registrants guarantee with respect thereto)
new york stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb, index-linked notes due
february 2013; index-linked notes due april 2013; index-linked
notes due may 2013; index-linked notes due 2010; and
index-linked notes due 2011
american stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesb, 7.35%notes due 2009;
7.80%notes due 2010; floating rate notes due 2008; and
floating rate notes due 2011
new york stock exchange
medium-term notes, seriesa, index-linked notes due 2037
of gs finance corp. (and registrants guarantee with
respect thereto)
nyse arca
medium-term notes, seriesb, index-linked notes due
nyse arca
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the
act: none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer,
as defined in rule405 of the securities act.
yesxnoo
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the act.
yesonox
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all
reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesxnoo
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of the annual report on
form10-k
or any amendment to the annual report on
form10-k.x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated
filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer. see
definition of accelerated filer and large accelerated
filer in
rule12b-2
of the exchange act. (check one):
large accelerated
filerxaccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filero
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as
defined in
rule12b-2
of the exchange act).
yesonox
as of
may25, 2007, the aggregate market value of the common
stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant
was approximately $89.1billion.
as of
january18, 2008, there were 395,907,302shares of the
registrants common stock outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference:portions of the
goldman sachs group, inc.s proxy statement for its 2008
annual meeting of shareholders to be held on april10, 2008
are incorporated by reference in the annual report on
form10-k
in response to partiii, items10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november 30, 2007
index
page
form 10-k item
number:
no.
part i
item 1.
business
introduction
cautionary statement pursuant to the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995
segment operating results
where we conduct business
business segments
global investment research
technology
business continuity and information security
employees
competition
regulation
item 1a.
risk factors
item 1b.
unresolved staff comments
item 2.
properties
item 3.
legal proceedings
item 4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
executive officers of the goldman sachs group,
inc.
partii
item 5.
market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item 6.
selected financial data
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item 7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
item 9a.
controls and procedures
item 9b.
other information
partiii
item 10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
item 11.
executive compensation
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item 13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
item 14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
item 15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
index to financial statements and financial
statement schedule items 15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
f-1
signatures
ii-1
power of attorney
ii-2
ex-10.29: form of rsu award agreement (subject to restrictions)
ex-10.30: form of rsu award agreement (not subject to restrictions)
ex-10.31: form of rsu award agreement (french alternative, subject to restrictions)
ex-10.32: form of rsu award agreement (french alternative, not subject to restrictions)
ex-10.33: form of rsu award agreement (uk ebt)
ex-10.34: form of year-end restricted stock award
ex-10.35: form of year-end restricted stock award (outstanding rsus)
ex-10.36: non-qualified deferred compensation plan (us pmd)
ex-10.37: non-qualified deferred compensation plan (us emd and other)
ex-10.40: form of year-end option award agreement
ex-10.41: form of year-end rsu award agreement (fully vested)
ex-10.42: form of year-end rsu award agreement (not fully vested)
ex-10.43: form of year-end rsu award agreement (french alternative)
ex-10.44: amendments to 2005 and 2006 year-end rsu and option award agreements
ex-10.45: form of non-employee director option award agreement
ex-10.46: form of non-employee director rsu award agreement
ex-10.47: description of non-employee director compensation
ex-10.54: form of signature card for equity awards
ex-10.57: description of goldman sachs gives program
ex-12.1: statement re computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
ex-21.1: list of significant subsidiaries
ex-23.1: consent of independent registered public accounting firm
ex-31.1: rule 13a-14(a) certifications
ex-32.1: section 1350 certifications
ex-99.1: report of independent registered public accounting firm
table of contents
parti
item1.
business
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global investment banking, securities
and investment management firm that provides a wide range of
services worldwide to a substantial and diversified client base
that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments
and
high-net-worth
individuals. goldman sachs is the successor to a commercial
paper business founded in 1869 by marcus goldman. on may7,
1999, we converted from a partnership to a corporation and
completed an initial public offering of our common stock.
our activities are divided into three segments:
(i)investment banking, (ii)trading and principal
investments and (iii)asset management and securities
services.
all references to 2007, 2006 and 2005 refer to our fiscal years
ended, or the dates, as the context requires, november30,
2007, november24, 2006 and november25, 2005,
respectively. when we use the terms goldman sachs,
the firm, we, us and
our, we mean the goldman sachs group, inc., a
delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.
references herein to the annual report on
form10-k
are to our annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007.
financial information concerning our business segments and
geographic regions for each of 2007, 2006 and 2005 is set forth
in managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, and the consolidated
financial statements and the notes thereto, which are in
partii, items7, 7a and 8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
our internet address is www.gs.com and the investor
relations section of our web site is located at
www.gs.com/shareholders. we make available free of
charge, on or through the investor relations section of our web
site, annual reports on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q
and current reports on
form8-k
and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, as well as proxy statements, as soon as reasonably
practicable after we electronically file such material with, or
furnish it to, the u.s.securities and exchange commission.
also posted on our web site, and available in print upon request
of any shareholder to our investor relations department, are our
certificate of incorporation and by-laws, charters for our audit
committee, compensation committee, and corporate governance and
nominating committee, our policy regarding director independence
determinations, our policy on reporting of concerns regarding
accounting and other matters, our corporate governance
guidelines and our code of business conduct and ethics governing
our directors, officers and employees. within the time period
required by the sec and the new york stock exchange, we will
post on our web site any amendment to the code of business
conduct and ethics and any waiver applicable to any executive
officer, director or senior financial officer (as defined in the
code). in addition, our web site includes information concerning
purchases and sales of our equity securities by our executive
officers and directors, as well as disclosure relating to
certain non-gaap financial measures (as defined in the
secs regulationg)that we may make public
orally, telephonically, by webcast, by broadcast or by similar
means from time to time.
our investor relations department can be contacted at the
goldman sachs group, inc., 85broad street,
17thfloor, new york, new york 10004, attn: investor
relations, telephone:
212-902-0300,
e-mail:
gs-investor-relations@gs.com.
table of contents
cautionary
statement pursuant to the private securities litigation reform
act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by reference in the annual
report on
form10-k,
and from time to time our management may make, statements that
may constitute forward-looking statements within the
meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995.
forward-looking
statements are not historical facts but instead represent only
our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their
nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. these
statements include statements other than historical information
or statements of current condition and may relate to our future
plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may
also include our belief regarding the effect of various legal
proceedings, as set forth under legal proceedings in
parti, item3 of the annual report on
form10-k,
as well as statements about the objectives and effectiveness of
our risk management and liquidity policies, statements about
trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses and
statements about our investment banking transaction backlog, in
partii, item7 of the annual report on
form10-k.
by identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are
alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and
financial condition may differ, possibly materially, from the
anticipated results and financial condition indicated in these
forward-looking statements. important factors that could cause
our actual results and financial condition to differ from those
indicated in the forward-looking statements include, among
others, those discussed below and under risk factors
in parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k
and managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations in partii,
item7 of the annual report on
form10-k.
in the case of statements about our investment banking
transaction backlog, such statements are subject to the risk
that the terms of these transactions may be modified or that
they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net revenues,
if any, that we actually earn from these transactions may
differ, possibly materially, from those currently expected.
important factors that could result in a modification of the
terms of a transaction or a transaction not being completed
include, in the case of underwriting transactions, a decline in
general economic conditions, outbreak of hostilities, volatility
in the securities markets generally or an adverse development
with respect to the issuer of the securities and, in the case of
financial advisory transactions, a decline in the securities
markets, an inability to obtain adequate financing, an adverse
development with respect to a party to the transaction or a
failure to obtain a required regulatory approval. for a
discussion of other important factors that could adversely
affect our investment banking transactions, see risk
factors in parti, item1a of the annual report
on
form10-k
and managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations in partii,
item7 of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
segment operating
results
(in
millions)
year ended november
investment
net revenues
$
7,555
$
5,629
$
3,671
banking
operating expenses
4,985
4,062
3,258
pre-tax earnings
$
2,570
$
1,567
$
trading and principal
net revenues
$
31,226
$
25,562
$
16,818
investments
operating expenses
17,998
14,962
10,600
pre-tax earnings
$
13,228
$
10,600
$
6,218
asset management and
net revenues
$
7,206
$
6,474
$
4,749
securities services
operating expenses
5,363
4,036
3,070
pre-tax earnings
$
1,843
$
2,438
$
1,679
total
net revenues
$
45,987
$
37,665
$
25,238
operating expenses
(1)
28,383
23,105
16,965
pre-tax earnings
$
17,604
$
14,560
$
8,273
(1)
includes net provisions for a
number of litigation and regulatory proceedings of
$37million, $45million and $37million for the
years ended november 2007, november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively, that have not been allocated to our segments.
table of contents
where we conduct
business
as of november30, 2007, we operated offices in over 25
countries and 43% of our 30,522employees were based
outside the united states. in 2007, we derived 49% of our net
revenues and 57% of our pre-tax earnings outside of the
americas. see geographic information in note16 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on
form10-k.
our clients and customers are located worldwide, and we are an
active participant in financial markets around the world. we
have developed and continue to build strong investment banking
relationships in new and developing markets. we also continue to
expand our presence throughout these markets to invest
strategically when opportunities arise and to work more closely
with our asset management clients in these regions. our global
reach is illustrated by the following:
we are a member of and an active participant in most of the
worlds major stock, options and futures exchanges and
marketplaces;
we are a primary dealer in many of the largest government bond
markets around the world;
we have interbank dealer status in currency markets around the
world;and
we are a member of or have relationships with major commodities
exchanges worldwide.
our businesses are supported by our global investment research
division, which, as of november 2007, provided research coverage
of over 3,250companies worldwide and over 50 national
economies, and maintained a presence in locations around the
world.
we continue to expand our geographic reach. for example, over
the past two years we have opened offices in mumbai, moscow, sao
paulo, dubai, qatar and tel aviv, become licensed as a
broker-dealer in russia, india and china, opened a bank in
brazil and entered into the asset management business in south
korea. in december 2007, we established two wholly owned banks
in dublin, ireland. through this banking presence, we will
initially focus on our private client business, underwrite
commercial bank loans, undertake fund administration for our
european global securities services business and facilitate
funding transactions for the firm.
table of contents
business
segments
the primary products and activities of our business segments are
set forth in the following chart:
business
segment/component
primary products and
activities
investment banking:
financial advisory
mergers and acquisitions advisory services
financial restructuring advisory services
underwriting
equity and debt underwriting
trading and principal investments:
fixed income, currency and commodities
commodities and commodity derivatives, including
power generation and related activities
credit products, including trading and investing in
credit derivatives, investment-grade corporate securities,
high-yield securities, bank and secured loans, municipal
securities, emerging market and distressed debt, public and
private equity securities and real estate
currencies and currency derivatives
interest rate products, including interest rate
derivatives, global government securities and money market
instruments, including matched book positions
mortgage-related securities and loan products and
other asset-backed instruments
equities
equity securities and derivatives
securities, futures and options clearing services
market-making and specialist activities in equity
securities and options
insurance activities
principal investments
principal investments in connection with merchant
banking activities
investment in the ordinary shares of industrial and
commercial bank of china limited
investment in the convertible preferred stock of
sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc.
asset management and securities services:
asset management
investment advisory services, financial planning and
investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles) across all major asset
classes, including money markets, fixed income, equities and
alternative investments (including hedge funds, private equity,
real estate, currencies, commodities and asset allocation
strategies), for institutional and individual investors
(including high-net-worth clients, as well as retail clients
through third-party channels)
management of merchant banking funds
securities services
prime brokerage
financing services
securities lending
table of contents
investment
banking
investment banking represented 16% of 2007net revenues. we
provide a broad range of investment banking services to a
diverse group of corporations, financial institutions,
investment funds, governments and individuals and seek to
develop and maintain long-term relationships with these clients
as their lead investment bank.
our current structure, which is organized by regional, industry
and product groups, seeks to combine client-focused investment
bankers with execution and industry expertise. we continually
assess and adapt our organization to meet the demands of our
clients in each geographic region. through our commitment to
teamwork, we believe that we provide services in an integrated
fashion for the benefit of our clients.
our goal is to make available to our clients the entire
resources of the firm in a seamless fashion, with investment
banking serving as front of the house. to accomplish
this objective, we focus on coordination among our equity and
debt underwriting activities and our corporate risk and
liability management activities. this coordination is intended
to assist our investment banking clients in managing their asset
and liability exposures and their capital.
our investment banking segment is divided into two components:
financial advisory and underwriting.
financial
advisory
financial advisory includes advisory assignments with respect to
mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense
activities, restructurings and spin-offs. our mergers and
acquisitions capabilities are evidenced by our significant share
of assignments in large, complex transactions for which we
provide multiple services, including one-stop
acquisition financing and cross-border structuring expertise, as
well as services in other areas of the firm, such as interest
rate and currency hedging. in particular, a significant number
of the loan commitments and bank and bridge loan facilities that
we enter into arise in connection with our advisory assignments.
underwriting
underwriting includes public offerings and private placements of
a wide range of securities and other financial instruments,
including common and preferred stock, convertible and
exchangeable securities, investment-grade debt, high-yield debt,
sovereign and emerging market debt, municipal debt, bank loans,
asset-backed securities and real estate-related securities, such
as mortgage-related securities and the securities of real estate
investment trusts.
equity underwriting.equity underwriting has
been a long-term core strength of goldman sachs. as with mergers
and acquisitions, we have been particularly successful in
winning mandates for large, complex transactions. we believe our
leadership in worldwide initial public offerings and worldwide
public common stock offerings reflects our expertise in complex
transactions, prior experience and distribution capabilities.
debt underwriting.we engage in the
underwriting and origination of various types of debt
instruments, including investment-grade debt securities,
high-yield debt securities, bank and bridge loans and emerging
market debt securities, which may be issued by, among others,
corporate, sovereign and agency issuers. in addition, we
underwrite and originate structured securities, which include
mortgage-related securities and other asset-backed securities
and collateralized debt obligations.
table of contents
trading and
principal investments
trading and principal investments represented 68% of
2007net revenues. trading and principal investments
facilitates client transactions with a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals and takes proprietary positions
through market making in, trading of and investing in fixed
income and equity products, currencies, commodities and
derivatives on these products. in addition, we engage in
market-making and specialist activities on equities and options
exchanges, and we clear client transactions on major stock,
options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection with our
merchant banking and other investing activities, we make
principal investments directly and through funds that we raise
and manage.
to meet the needs of our clients, trading and principal
investments is diversified across a wide range of products. we
believe our willingness and ability to take risk to facilitate
client transactions distinguishes us from many of our
competitors and substantially enhances our client relationships.
our trading and principal investments segment is divided into
three components: fixed income, currency and commodities;
equities; and principal investments.
fixed income,
currency and commodities and equities
fixed income, currency and commodities (ficc) and equities are
large and diversified operations through which we engage in a
variety of customer-driven and proprietary trading and investing
activities.
in our customer-driven businesses, ficc and equities strive to
deliver high-quality service by offering broad market-making and
market knowledge to our clients on a global basis. in addition,
we use our expertise to take positions in markets, by committing
capital and taking risk, to facilitate client transactions and
to provide liquidity. our willingness to make markets, commit
capital and take risk in a broad range of fixed income,
currency, commodity and equity products and their derivatives is
crucial to our client relationships and to support our
underwriting business by providing secondary market liquidity.
we generate trading net revenues from our customer-driven
businesses in three ways:
first, in large, highly liquid markets, we undertake a high
volume of transactions for modest spreads and fees.
second, by capitalizing on our strong relationships and capital
position, we undertake transactions in less liquid markets where
spreads and fees are generally larger.
finally, we structure and execute transactions that address
complex client needs.
our ficc and equities businesses operate in close coordination
to provide clients with services and cross-market knowledge and
expertise.
in our proprietary activities in both ficc and equities, we
assume a variety of risks and devote resources to identify,
analyze and benefit from these exposures. we capitalize on our
analytical models to analyze information and make informed
trading judgments, and we seek to benefit from perceived
disparities in the value of assets in the trading markets and
from macroeconomic and issuer-specific trends.
table of contents
ficc
we make markets in and trade interest rate and credit products,
mortgage-related securities and loan products and other
asset-backed instruments, currencies and commodities, structure
and enter into a wide variety of derivative transactions, and
engage in proprietary trading and investing. ficc has five
principal businesses: commodities; credit products; currencies;
interest rate products, including money market instruments; and
mortgage-related securities and loan products and other
asset-backed instruments.
commodities.we enter into trades with our
clients in, make markets in, and trade for our own account a
wide variety of commodities, commodity derivatives and interests
in commodity-related assets, including oil and oil products,
metals, natural gas and electricity, and forest products.
as part of our commodities business, we acquire and dispose of
interests in, and engage in the development and operation of,
electric power generation facilities and related activities. in
november2007, we disposed of approximately 80% of our
ownership interests in 14power plants, and we have entered
into contractual arrangements to manage these plants. in
addition to our remaining minority interest in these facilities,
we have a portfolio of four other power generation facilities.
credit products.we offer to and trade for our
clients a broad array of credit and credit-linked products all
over the world, including credit derivatives, investment-grade
corporate securities, high-yield securities, bank and secured
loans (origination and trading), municipal securities, and
emerging market and distressed debt. for example, we enter, as
principal, into complex structured transactions designed to meet
client needs.
in addition, we provide credit through bridge and other loan
facilities to a broad range of clients. commitments that are
extended for contingent acquisition financing are often intended
to be short-term in nature, as borrowers often seek to replace
them with other funding sources. as part of our ongoing credit
origination activities, we may seek to reduce our credit risk on
commitments by syndicating all or substantial portions of
commitments to other investors or, upon funding, by securitizing
the positions through investment vehicles sold to other
investors. underwriting fees from syndications of these
commitments are recorded in debt underwriting in our investment
banking segment. however, to the extent that we recognize losses
on these commitments, such losses are recorded within our
trading and principal investments segment, net of any related
underwriting fees. see managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of
operations contractual obligations and
commitments in partii, item7 of the annual
report on
form10-k
for additional information on our commitments.
our credit products business includes making significant
long-term and short-term investments for our own account
(sometimes investing together with our merchant banking funds)
in a broad array of asset classes (including distressed debt)
globally. we opportunistically invest in debt and equity
securities and secured loans, and in private equity, real estate
and other assets.
currencies.we act as a dealer in foreign
exchange and trade for our clients and ourselves in most
currencies on exchanges and in cash and derivative markets
globally.
interest rate products.we trade and make
markets in a variety of interest rate products, including
interest rate swaps, options and other derivatives, and
government bonds, as well as money market instruments, such as
commercial paper, treasury bills, repurchase agreements and
other highly liquid securities and instruments. this business
includes our matched book, which consists of short-term
collateralized financing transactions.
table of contents
mortgage business.we make markets in and
trade for our clients and ourselves commercial and residential
mortgage-related securities and loan products (including prime,
subprime and other nontraditional mortgages) and other
asset-backed and derivative instruments. we acquire positions in
these products for proprietary trading purposes as well as for
securitization or syndication. we also originate and service
commercial and residential mortgages.
equities
we make markets in and trade equities and equity-related
products, structure and enter into equity derivative
transactions, and engage in proprietary trading. we generate
commissions from executing and clearing client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide through our
equities customer franchise and clearing activities.
equities includes two principal businesses: our customer
franchise business and principal strategies. we also engage in
specialist and insurance activities.
customer franchise business.our customer
franchise business includes primarily customer-driven activities
in the shares, equity derivatives and convertible securities
markets. these activities also include clearing client
transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges
worldwide, as well as our options specialist and market-making
businesses. our customer franchise business increasingly
involves providing our clients with access to electronic
low-touch equity trading platforms, and electronic
trades now account for the majority of our customer trading
activity in this business. however, a majority of our net
revenues in this business continues to be derived from our
traditional high-touch handling of more complex
trades. we expect both types of trading activities to remain
important components of our customer franchise business.
we trade equity securities and equity-related products,
including convertible securities, options, futures and
over-the-counter (otc) derivative instruments, on a global basis
as an agent, as a market maker or otherwise as a principal. as a
principal, we facilitate client transactions, often by
committing capital and taking risk, to provide liquidity to
clients with large blocks of stocks or options. for example, we
are active in the execution of large block trades. we also
execute transactions as agent and offer clients direct
electronic access to trading markets.
in the options and futures markets, we structure, distribute and
execute derivatives on market indices, industry groups,
financial measures and individual company stocks to facilitate
client transactions and our proprietary activities. we develop
strategies and render advice with respect to portfolio hedging
and restructuring and asset allocation transactions. we also
create specially tailored instruments to enable sophisticated
investors to undertake hedging strategies and to establish or
liquidate investment positions. we are one of the leading
participants in the trading and development of equity derivative
instruments. in options, we are a specialist and/or market maker
on the international securities exchange, the chicago board
options exchange, nyse arca, the boston options exchange, the
philadelphia stock exchange and the american stock exchange.
principal strategies.our principal strategies
business is a multi-strategy proprietary investment business
that invests and trades for our own account. principal
strategies trades and invests our capital across global markets
employing strategies that are primarily focused on public
markets. most strategies involve fundamental equities and
relative value trading (which involves trading strategies
designed to take advantage of perceived discrepancies in the
relative value of financial instruments, including equity,
equity-related and debt instruments). other strategies involve
event-driven investments (which focus on event-oriented special
situations such as corporate restructurings, bankruptcies,
recapitalizations, mergers and acquisitions, and legal and
regulatory events) as well as convertible bond trading, various
types of volatility trading and principal finance (which
includes private structured investments in public or private
companies).
at the start of our first fiscal quarter of 2008, we reassigned
approximately one-half of the traders and other personnel and
transferred approximately one-half of the firms assets
comprising our principal strategies business in an effort to
strengthen and diversify our asset management offerings. these
assets are now invested in a new alternative investment fund
managed by our asset
table of contents
management business. over time, we intend to replace the
reassigned personnel and transferred assets of our principal
strategies business.
specialist activities.our specialist
activities business consists of our stock and exchange-traded
funds (etf) specialist and market-making businesses. we engage
in specialist and market-making activities on equities
exchanges. in the united states, we are one of the leading stock
specialists on the nyse. for etfs, we are a specialist on the
nyse, the american stock exchange and nyse arca.
insurance activities.through our insurance
subsidiaries, we buy, sell and originate variable annuity and
life insurance contracts, and we participate opportunistically
in reinsurance activities, including life and annuity
reinsurance and property catastrophe reinsurance.
principal
investments
principal investments primarily represents net revenues from
four primary sources: returns on corporate and real estate
investments, overrides on corporate and real estate investments,
our investment in the ordinary shares of industrial and
commercial bank of china limited (icbc) and our investment in
the convertible preferred stock of sumitomo mitsui financial
group, inc. (smfg).
returns on corporate and real estate
investments.as of november 2007, the aggregate
carrying value of our principal investments held directly or
through our merchant banking funds, excluding our investment in
the ordinary shares of icbc and the convertible preferred stock
of smfg, was $11.93billion, comprised of corporate
principal investments with an aggregate carrying value of
$9.50billion and real estate investments with an aggregate
carrying value of $2.43billion. in addition, as of
november 2007, we had outstanding unfunded equity capital
commitments of up to $15.25billion.
overrides.consists of the increased share of
the income and gains derived from our merchant banking funds
when the return on a funds investments over the life of
the fund exceeds certain threshold returns (typically referred
to as an override). overrides are recognized in net revenues
when all material contingencies have been resolved.
icbc.our investment in the ordinary shares of
icbc was acquired on april28, 2006. the ordinary shares
acquired from icbc are subject to transfer restrictions that,
among other things, prohibit any sale, disposition or other
transfer until april28, 2009. from april28, 2009 to
october20,2009, we may transfer up to 50% of the
aggregate ordinary shares of icbc that we owned as of
october20, 2006. we may transfer the remaining shares
after october20, 2009. as of november 2007, the carrying
value of our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc was
$6.81billion. a portion of our interest is held by
investment funds managed by goldman sachs.
smfg.our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg is generally nontransferable without the
consent of smfg but is freely convertible into smfg common
stock. as of november 2007, we had hedged approximately 90% of
the common stock underlying our investment in smfg and there
were no restrictions on our ability to hedge the remainder. as
of november 2007, the carrying value of our investment in the
smfg preferred stock was $4.06billion.
for further information regarding our investments in the
ordinary shares of icbc and the convertible preferred stock of
smfg, see managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
critical accounting policies fair value
cash instruments in partii, item7 of the
annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
asset management
and securities services
asset management and securities services represented 16% of
2007net revenues. our asset management business provides
investment advisory and financial planning services and offers
investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles) across all major asset classes
to a diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
primarily generates revenues in the form of management and
incentive fees. securities services provides prime brokerage
services, financing services and securities lending services to
institutional clients, including hedge funds, mutual funds,
pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide, and generates revenues primarily in the
form of interest rate spreads or fees.
our asset management and securities services segment is divided
into two components: asset management and securities services.
asset
management
we offer a broad array of investment strategies, advice and
planning. we provide asset management services and offer
investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes: money
markets, fixed income, equities and alternative investments
(including hedge funds, private equity, real estate, currencies,
commodities and asset allocation strategies). through our
subsidiary, the ayco company, l.p. (ayco), we also provide
fee-based financial counseling and financial education in the
united states.
assets under management (aum) typically generate fees as a
percentage of asset value, which is affected by investment
performance and by inflows or redemptions. the fees that we
charge vary by asset class, as do our related expenses. in
certain circumstances, we are also entitled to receive incentive
fees based on a percentage of a funds return or when the
return on assets under management exceeds specified benchmark
returns or other performance targets. incentive fees are
recognized when the performance period ends and they are no
longer subject to adjustment. we have numerous incentive fee
arrangements, many of which have annual performance periods that
end on december31. for that reason, incentive fees have
been seasonally weighted to our first quarter.
aum includes our mutual funds, alternative investment funds and
separately managed accounts for institutional and individual
investors. alternative investments include our merchant banking
funds, which generate revenues as described below under
management of merchant banking funds. aum includes
assets in clients brokerage accounts to the extent that
they generate fees based on the assets in the accounts rather
than commissions on transactional activity in the accounts.
aum does not include assets in brokerage accounts that generate
commissions,
mark-ups and
spreads based on transactional activity, or our own investments
in funds that we manage. net revenues from these assets are
included in our trading and principal investments segment. aum
also does not include non-fee-paying assets, including
interest-bearing deposits held through goldman sachs bank usa
(gs bank usa).
see trading and principal investments
equities principal strategies above for a
discussion of the personnel and assets that we moved from our
principal strategies business to our asset management business
at the start of our first fiscal quarter of 2008.
table of contents
the amount of aum is set forth in the graph below. in the
following graph, as well as in the following tables,
substantially all assets under management are valued as of
november 30:
assets under
management
(in
billions)
the following table sets forth aum by asset class:
assets under
management by asset class
(in
billions)
as of november30
asset class
alternative
investments(1)
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
(1)
primarily includes hedge funds,
private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset
allocation strategies.
table of contents
clients.our clients are institutions and
individuals, including both
high-net-worth
and retail investors. we access institutional and
high-net-worth
clients through both direct and third-party channels and retail
clients primarily through third-party channels. our
institutional clients include pension funds, governmental
organizations, corporations, insurance companies, banks,
foundations and endowments. in third-party distribution
channels, we distribute our mutual funds, alternative investment
funds and separately managed accounts through brokerage firms,
banks, insurance companies and other financial intermediaries.
our clients are located worldwide.
the table below sets forth the amount of aum by distribution
channel and client category:
assets under
management by distribution channel
(in
billions)
as of november30
distribution channel
directly distributed
institutional
$
$
$
high-net-worth
individuals
third-party
distributed
institutional,
high-net-worth
individuals and retail
total
$
$
$
management of merchant banking funds.goldman
sachs sponsors numerous corporate and real estate private
investment funds. our strategy with respect to these funds
generally is to invest opportunistically to build a portfolio of
investments that is diversified by industry, product type,
geographic region, and transaction structure and type. our
corporate investment funds pursue, on a global basis, long-term
investments in equity and debt securities in privately
negotiated transactions, leveraged buyouts, acquisitions and
investments in funds managed by external parties. our real
estate investment funds invest in real estate operating
companies, debt and equity interests in real estate assets, and
other real estate-related investments. in addition, our merchant
banking funds include a fund that invests in infrastructure and
infrastructure-related assets and companies on a global basis.
since inception, we have raised $118billion of committed
equity capital in these funds, consisting of $96billion
related to our corporate funds and $22billion related to
our real estate funds. as of november 2007, $68billion of
the committed equity capital was funded and the amount of aum
remaining in these funds after distributions was
$64billion.
merchant banking activities generate three primary revenue
streams. first, we receive a management fee that is generally a
percentage of a funds committed capital, invested capital,
total gross acquisition cost or asset value. these annual
management fees are included in our asset management net
revenues. second, goldman sachs, as a substantial investor in
some of these funds, is allocated its proportionate share of the
funds unrealized appreciation or depreciation arising from
changes in fair value as well as gains and losses upon
realization. third, after a fund has achieved a minimum return
for fund investors, we receive an increased share of the
funds income and gains that is a percentage of the income
and gains from the funds investments. the second and third
of these revenue streams are included in principal investments
within our trading and principal investments segment.
table of contents
securities
services
securities services provides prime brokerage services, financing
services and securities lending services to institutional
clients, including hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and
foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
prime brokerage services.we offer prime
brokerage services to our clients, allowing them the flexibility
to trade with most brokers while maintaining a single source for
financing and consolidated portfolio reports. our prime
brokerage business provides clearing and custody in
49markets and provides consolidated multi-currency
accounting and reporting, fund administration and other
ancillary services.
financing services.a central element of our
prime brokerage business involves providing financing to our
clients for their securities trading activities through margin
and securities loans that are collateralized by securities, cash
or other acceptable collateral.
securities lending services.securities
lending services principally involve the borrowing and lending
of securities to cover clients and goldman sachs
short sales and otherwise to make deliveries into the market. in
addition, we are an active participant in the broker-to-broker
securities lending business and the third-party agency lending
business. net revenues in securities lending services are, as a
general matter, weighted toward our second and third quarters
each year due to seasonally higher activity levels in europe.
global investment
research
global investment research provides fundamental research on
companies, industries, economies, currencies and commodities and
macro strategy research on a worldwide basis.
global investment research employs a team approach that as of
november 2007 provided research coverage of over
3,250companies worldwide and over 50 national economies.
this is accomplished by the following departments:
the equity research departments provide fundamental analysis,
earnings forecasts and investment opinions for equity securities;
the credit research department provides fundamental analysis,
forecasts and investment opinions as to investment-grade and
high-yield corporate bonds and credit derivatives;
the economic research department formulates macroeconomic
forecasts for economic activity, foreign exchange and interest
rates;
the commodities research department provides research on the
commodity markets;and
the strategy research department provides equity market
forecasts, opinions on both asset and industry sector
allocation, equity trading strategies, credit trading strategies
and options research.
further information regarding research at goldman sachs is
provided below under regulation
regulations applicable in and outside the united states
and legal proceedings research independence
matters in parti, item3 of the annual report
on
form10-k.
table of contents
technology
goldman sachs is committed to the ongoing development,
maintenance and use of technology throughout the organization.
our technology initiatives can be broadly categorized into four
efforts:
enhancing client service through increased connectivity and the
provision of value-added, tailored products and services;
improving our trading, execution and clearing capabilities;
risk management; and
overall efficiency, productivity and control.
we have tailored our services to our clients by providing them
with electronic access to our products and services. in
particular, we provide global electronic trading and information
distribution capabilities covering many of our fixed income,
currency, commodity, equity and mutual fund products around the
world.
electronic commerce and technology have changed and will
continue to change the ways that securities and other financial
products are traded, distributed and settled. this creates both
opportunities and challenges for our businesses. we remain
committed to being at the forefront of technological innovation
in the global capital markets.
business
continuity and information security
business continuity and information security are high priorities
for goldman sachs. our business continuity program has been
developed to provide reasonable assurance of business continuity
in the event of disruptions at the firms critical
facilities and to comply with the regulatory requirements of the
financial industry regulatory authority (finra). the sec also
reviews our business continuity program. the key elements of the
program are crisis management, people recovery facilities,
business recovery, systems and data recovery, and process
improvement. in the area of information security, we have
developed and implemented a framework of principles, policies
and technology to protect the information assets of the firm and
our clients. safeguards are applied to maintain the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information
resources.
employees
management believes that a major strength and principal reason
for the success of goldman sachs is the quality and dedication
of our people and the shared sense of being part of a team. we
strive to maintain a work environment that fosters
professionalism, excellence, diversity, cooperation among our
employees worldwide and high standards of business ethics.
instilling the goldman sachs culture in all employees is a
continuous process, in which training plays an important part.
all employees are offered the opportunity to participate in
education and periodic seminars that we sponsor at various
locations throughout the world. another important part of
instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee review
process. employees are reviewed by supervisors, co-workers and
employees they supervise in a
360-degree
review process that is integral to our team approach.
as of november 2007, we had 30,522employees, excluding
4,572employees of certain consolidated entities that are
held for investment purposes only. consolidated entities held
for investment purposes include entities that are held strictly
for capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and are
engaged in activities that are not closely related to our
principal businesses.
table of contents
competition
the financial services industry and all of our
businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect
them to remain so. our competitors are other brokers and
dealers, investment banking firms, commercial banks, insurance
companies, investment advisers, mutual funds, hedge funds,
private equity funds and merchant banks. we compete with some of
our competitors globally and with others on a regional, product
or niche basis. our competition is based on a number of factors,
including transaction execution, our products and services,
innovation, reputation and price.
we also face intense competition in attracting and retaining
qualified employees. our ability to continue to compete
effectively in our businesses will depend upon our ability to
attract new employees and retain and motivate our existing
employees.
over time, there has been substantial consolidation and
convergence among companies in the financial services industry,
due in part to u.s.federal legislation that has expanded
the activities permissible for firms affiliated with a
u.s.bank. in particular, a number of large commercial
banks, insurance companies and other broad-based financial
services firms have established or acquired broker-dealers or
have merged with other financial institutions. many of these
firms have the ability to offer a wide range of products, from
loans, deposit-taking and insurance to brokerage, asset
management and investment banking services, which may enhance
their competitive position. they also have the ability to
support investment banking and securities products with
commercial banking, insurance and other financial services
revenues in an effort to gain market share, which has resulted
in pricing pressure in our investment banking and trading
businesses and could result in pricing pressure in other of our
businesses.
moreover, we have faced, and expect to continue to face,
pressure to retain market share by committing capital to
businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns that may
not be commensurate with their risks. in particular, corporate
clients increasingly seek such commitments (such as agreements
to participate in their commercial paper backstop or other loan
facilities) from financial services firms in connection with
investment banking and other assignments. we provide these
commitments through our william street entities or through gs
bank usa, primarily for investment-grade clients, or through
goldman sachs credit partners l.p. or our other subsidiaries,
primarily for other clients. with respect to most of the william
street commitments, smfg provides us with credit loss protection
that is generally limited to 95% of the first loss we realize on
approved loan commitments, up to a maximum of
$1.00billion. in addition, subject to the satisfaction of
certain conditions, upon our request, smfg will provide
protection for 70% of the second loss on such commitments, up to
a maximum of $1.13billion. we also use other financial
instruments to mitigate credit risks related to certain william
street commitments not covered by smfg. see
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations contractual
obligations and commitments in partii, item7
of the annual report on
form10-k
and note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for more information regarding the william street entities and
for a description of the credit loss protection provided by
smfg. an increasing number of our commitments in connection with
investment banking and other assignments do not meet the
criteria established for the william street entities and do not
benefit from the smfg loss protection. these commitments are
issued through goldman sachs credit partners l.p., gs bank usa
or our other subsidiaries.
the trend toward consolidation and convergence has significantly
increased the capital base and geographic reach of some of our
competitors. this trend has also hastened the globalization of
the securities and other financial services markets. as a
result, we have had to commit capital to support our
international operations and to execute large global
transactions. to take advantage of some of our most significant
challenges and opportunities, we will have to compete
successfully with financial institutions that are larger and
better capitalized and that may have a stronger local presence
and longer operating history outside the united states.
table of contents
we have experienced intense price competition in some of our
businesses in recent years. there has been considerable pressure
in the pricing of block trades. also, equity and debt
underwriting discounts, as well as trading spreads, have been
under pressure for a number of years and the ability to execute
trades electronically, through the internet and through other
alternative trading systems, has increased the pressure on
trading commissions. it appears that this trend toward
electronic and other low-touch, low-commission
trading will continue. we believe that we will continue to
experience competitive pressures in these and other areas in the
future as some of our competitors seek to obtain market share by
reducing prices.
regulation
goldman sachs, as a participant in the securities and commodity
futures and options industries, is subject to extensive
regulation in the united states and the other countries in which
we operate. as a matter of public policy, regulatory bodies
around the world are charged with safeguarding the integrity of
the securities and other financial markets and with protecting
the interests of clients participating in those markets. they
are not, however, charged with protecting the interests of
goldman sachs shareholders or creditors.
broker-dealers, in particular, are subject to regulations that
cover all aspects of the securities business, including sales
methods, trade practices, use and safekeeping of clients
funds and securities, capital structure, recordkeeping, the
financing of clients purchases, and the conduct of
directors, officers and employees. a number of our affiliates
are regulated by investment advisory laws in the countries in
which we operate. see risk factors our
businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and
pervasive regulation around the world in parti,
item1a of the annual report on
form10-k
for a further discussion of the effect that regulation may have
on our businesses.
regulation in the
united states
in the united states, the sec is the federal agency responsible
for the administration of the federal securities laws. the
goldman sachs group, inc. is subject to regulation by the sec as
a consolidated supervised entity. as such, it is subject to
group-wide supervision and examination by the sec and to minimum
capital standards on a consolidated basis. as part of a
consolidated supervised entity, goldman, sachs& co.
(gs&co.), our principal u.s.broker-dealer, is
permitted to calculate its regulatory capital requirements in
accordance with the market and credit risk standards of
appendixe of
rule15c3-1
under the securities exchange act of 1934. we may be required or
may determine to disclose publicly our group-wide consolidated
supervised entity capital ratios on an ongoing basis beginning
in mid-2008.
gs&co. is registered as a broker-dealer and as an
investment adviser with the sec and as a
broker-dealer
in all 50states and the district of columbia.
self-regulatory organizations, such as finra and the nyse, adopt
rules that apply to, and examine, broker-dealers such as
gs&co. finra was formed when the nasd and the nyse merged
their regulatory operations, although the nyse continues to have
oversight over nyse-related market activities. in addition,
state securities and other regulators also have regulatory or
oversight authority over gs&co. similarly, our businesses
are also subject to regulation by various
non-u.s.governmental
and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory authorities in
virtually all countries where we have offices. goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec) and two of its
subsidiaries are registered u.s.broker-dealers and are
regulated by the sec, the nyse and finra. goldman sachs
financial markets, l.p. is registered with the sec as an otc
derivatives dealer and conducts certain otc derivatives
businesses.
the commodity futures and commodity options industry in the
united states is subject to regulation under the commodity
exchange act. the commodity futures trading commission is the
federal agency charged with the administration of the commodity
exchange act. several of goldman sachs subsidiaries,
including gs&co. and gsec, are registered with the cftc and
act as futures
table of contents
commission merchants, commodity pool operators or commodity
trading advisors and are subject to the commodity exchange act.
the rules and regulations of various self-regulatory
organizations, such as the chicago board of trade and the
chicago mercantile exchange, other futures exchanges and the
national futures association, also govern the commodity futures
and commodity options businesses of these entities.
gs&co. and gsec are subject to
rule15c3-1
of the sec and rule1.17 of the cftc, which specify uniform
minimum net capital requirements and also effectively require
that a significant part of the registrants assets be kept
in relatively liquid form. gs&co. and gsec have elected to
compute their minimum capital requirements in accordance with
the alternative net capital requirement as permitted
by
rule15c3-1.
as of november 2007, gs&co. and gsec had net capital in
excess of their minimum capital requirements. in addition to its
alternative minimum net capital requirements, gs&co. is
also required to hold tentative net capital in excess of
$1billion and net capital in excess of $500million
in accordance with the market and credit risk standards of
appendixe of
rule15c3-1.
gs&co. is required to notify the sec in the event that its
tentative net capital is less than $5billion. as of
november 2007, gs&co. had tentative net capital and net
capital in excess of both the minimum and the notification
requirements. these net capital requirements may have the effect
of prohibiting these entities from distributing or withdrawing
capital and may require prior notice to the sec for certain
withdrawals of capital. see note15 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
goldman sachs three limited purpose trust companies
operate under state or federal law. they are not permitted to
and do not accept deposits (other than as incidental to their
trust activities) or make loans and, as a result, are not
considered to be banks for purposes of the bank holding company
act, nor are they insured by the fdic or subject to the
community reinvestment act. the goldman sachs
trustcompany, n.a., a national bank that is limited to
fiduciary activities, is regulated by the office of the
comptroller of the currency and is a member bank of the federal
reserve system. the goldman sachs trustcompany, a new york
limited purpose trust company, is regulated by the new york
state banking department. the goldman sachs trustcompany
of delaware, a delaware limited purpose trust company, is
regulated by the office of the delaware state bank commissioner.
goldman sachs has established gs bank usa, a wholly owned
industrial bank, to extend credit and to take deposits, other
than demand deposits. gs bank usa is regulated by the fdic and
the state of utah department of financial institutions and is
subject to minimum capital requirements. as of november 2007, gs
bank usa was in compliance with all regulatory capital
requirements. because it does not accept demand deposits, gs
bank usa is not considered to be a bank for purposes of the bank
holding company act. the deposits maintained at gs bank usa are
insured by the fdic to the extent provided by law.
our specialist businesses are subject to extensive regulation by
a number of securities exchanges. the rules of these exchanges
generally require our specialists to maintain orderly markets in
the securities in which they are specialists.
j.aron& company is authorized by the federal
energy regulatory commission to sell wholesale physical power at
market-based rates. as a ferc-authorized power marketer,
j.aron&company is subject to regulation
under the federal power act and ferc regulations and to the
oversight of ferc. as a result of our investing activities,
gs&co. is also an exempt holding company under
ferc rules.
in addition, as a result of our power-related activities, we are
subject to extensive and evolving energy, environmental and
other governmental laws and regulations, as discussed under
risk factors our power generation interests
and related activities subject us to extensive regulation, as
well as environmental and other risks associated with power
generation activities in parti, item1a of the
annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
our u.s.insurance subsidiaries are subject to state
insurance regulation and oversight in the states in which they
are domiciled and in the other states in which they are
licensed, and we are subject to oversight as an insurance
holding company in states where our insurance subsidiaries are
domiciled. in addition, a number of our other businesses,
including our lending and mortgage businesses, require us to
obtain licenses, adhere to applicable regulations and be subject
to the oversight of various regulators in the states in which we
conduct these businesses.
the usa patriot act of 2001 contains anti-money laundering and
financial transparency laws and mandates the implementation of
various new regulations applicable to broker-dealers and other
financial services companies, including standards for verifying
client identification at account opening, and obligations to
monitor client transactions and report suspicious activities.
through these and other provisions, the usa patriot act of 2001
seeks to promote the identification of parties that may be
involved in terrorism, money laundering or other suspicious
activities. anti-money laundering laws outside the united states
contain some similar provisions. the obligation of financial
institutions, including goldman sachs, to identify their
clients, to monitor for and report suspicious transactions, to
respond to requests for information by regulatory authorities
and law enforcement agencies, and to share information with
other financial institutions, has required the implementation
and maintenance of internal practices, procedures and controls
that have increased, and may continue to increase, our costs,
and any failure with respect to our programs in this area could
subject us to substantial liability and regulatory fines.
regulationoutside
the united states
goldman sachs provides investment services in and from the
united kingdom under the regulation of the financial services
authority (fsa). goldman sachs international (gsi), our
regulated u.k.
broker-dealer,
is subject to the capital requirements of the fsa. as of
november 2007, gsi was in compliance with the fsa capital
requirements. other subsidiaries, including goldman sachs
international bank, are also regulated by the fsa.
goldman sachs has established two wholly owned banks in dublin,
ireland. these banks are regulated by the irish financial
services regulatory authority. because our irish banks have no
branches, agencies or banking subsidiaries in the united states,
they do not subject goldman sachs to the u.s.bank holding
company act. as of the commencement of business in december
2007, these banks were in compliance with all regulatory capital
requirements.
various other goldman sachs entities are regulated by the
banking, insurance and securities regulatory authorities of the
european countries in which they operate, including, among
others, the federal financial supervisory authority (bafin) and
the bundesbank in germany, banque de france and the
autorit des marchs financiers in france, banca
ditalia and the commissione nazionale per le societ
e la borsa (consob) in italy, the federal financial markets
service in russia and the swiss federal banking commission.
certain goldman sachs entities are also regulated by the
european securities, derivatives and commodities exchanges of
which they are members.
the investment services that are subject to oversight by the fsa
and other regulators within the european union are regulated in
accordance with national laws, many of which implement european
union directives requiring, among other things, compliance with
certain capital adequacy standards, customer protection
requirements and market conduct and trade reporting rules. these
standards, requirements and rules are similarly implemented,
under the same directives, throughout the european union.
on november1, 2007, the national implementing legislation
to the european unions markets in financial instruments
directive (directive 2004/39/ec, known as mifid) became
effective in countries such as the united kingdom, germany and
france. mifid affects several of our subsidiaries by imposing
detailed pan-european requirements in areas such as internal
organization (including conflict management, outsourcing and
recordkeeping), best execution, real-time disclosure of
completed transactions in shares, quoting obligations for
internalized client orders in shares, transaction reporting
table of contents
to regulators, client classification and documentation,
disclosure of fees and other payments received from or paid to
third parties in relation to investment services and the
regulation of investment services related to commodity
derivatives. the lack of detailed regulatory practice under this
regime could lead to regulatory uncertainties.
goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl), our regulated japanese
broker-dealer, is subject to the capital requirements of
japans financial services agency. as of november 2007,
gsjcl was in compliance with its capital adequacy requirements.
gsjcl is also regulated by the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka
securities exchange, the tokyo financial exchange, the japan
securities dealers association, the tokyo commodity exchange and
the ministry of economy, trade and industry in japan.
also in asia, the securities and futures commission in hong
kong, the monetary authority of singapore, the china securities
regulatory commission, the korean financial supervisory service
and the securities and exchange board of india, among others,
regulate various of our subsidiaries and also have capital
standards and other requirements comparable to the rules of the
sec.
various goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking and
regulatory authorities of other
non-u.s.countries
in which goldman sachs operates, including, among others, brazil
and dubai. in addition, certain of our insurance subsidiaries
are regulated by the bermuda registrar of companies.
regulations
applicable in and outside the united states
the u.s.and
non-u.s.government
agencies, regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations,
as well as state securities commissions and other state
regulators in the united states, are empowered to conduct
administrative proceedings that can result in censure, fine, the
issuance of cease and desist orders, or the suspension or
expulsion of a broker-dealer or its directors, officers or
employees. from time to time, our subsidiaries have been subject
to investigations and proceedings, and sanctions have been
imposed for infractions of various regulations relating to our
activities, none of which has had a material adverse effect on
us or our businesses.
the basel committee on banking supervision has issued the
baselii capital standards, which are designed to promote
enhanced risk management practices among large, international
financial services firms by aligning regulatory capital
requirements more closely with the underlying risks faced by
these firms. gsi, as well as our other subsidiaries in the
united kingdom and elsewhere in europe, became subject to the
baselii requirements on january1, 2008. the
consolidated supervised entity rules described above under
regulation in the united states, which
provide for group-wide supervision, are consistent with basel
ii. complying with these new standards has required us to
develop and apply new and sophisticated measurement techniques
to determine our regulatory capital adequacy. as an increasing
number of financial institutions become subject to basel ii, new
interpretations may arise, and harmonization among regulators
could then impact the regulatory capital standards under which
we operate as a consolidated supervised entity, as well as the
requirements for some of our regulated subsidiaries.
the research areas of investment banks have been and remain the
subject of regulatory scrutiny. the sec, the nyse and finra have
adopted rules governing research analysts, including rules
imposing restrictions on the interaction between equity research
analysts and investment banking personnel at member securities
firms. various
non-u.s.jurisdictions
have imposed both substantive and
disclosure-based
requirements with respect to research and may impose additional
regulations. in 2003, gs&co. agreed to a global settlement
with certain federal and state securities regulators and
self-regulatory organizations to resolve investigations into
equity research analysts alleged conflicts of interest.
the global settlement includes certain restrictions and
undertakings that have imposed additional costs and limitations
on the conduct of our businesses, including restrictions on the
interaction between research and investment banking areas.
table of contents
in connection with the research settlement, we have also
subscribed to a voluntary initiative imposing restrictions on
the allocation of shares in initial public offerings to
executives and directors of public companies. the fsa in the
united kingdom has imposed requirements on the conduct of the
allocation process in equity and fixed income securities
offerings (including initial public offerings and secondary
distributions). the sec, the fsa, the nyse, finra and other
u.s.or
non-u.s.regulators
may in the future adopt additional and more stringent rules with
respect to offering procedures and the management of conflicts
of interest, and we cannot fully predict the effect that any new
requirements will have on our business.
our investment management businesses are subject to significant
regulation in numerous jurisdictions around the world relating
to, among other things, the safeguarding of client assets and
our management of client funds.
as discussed above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to
regulatory capital requirements in jurisdictions throughout the
world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold
capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency
requirements or internal policies, including policies concerning
the minimum amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based
upon its underlying risk.
certain of our businesses are subject to compliance with
regulations enacted by u.s.federal and state governments,
the european union or other jurisdictions
and/or
enacted by various regulatory organizations or exchanges
relating to the privacy of the information of clients, employees
or others, and any failure to comply with these regulations
could expose us to liability
and/or
reputational damage.
item1a.risk
factors
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in
our businesses, including market, liquidity, credit,
operational, legal and regulatory risks. the following are some
of the more important factors that could affect our businesses.
our businesses
may be adversely affected by conditions in the global financial
markets and economic conditions generally.
our business, by its nature, does not produce predictable
earnings. while we have achieved record earnings per common
share in each of our last four fiscal years, reflecting a
favorable trading and investing environment and an increase in
investment banking activity, an adverse change in these market
conditions may adversely affect our results of operations.
our businesses are materially affected by conditions in the
global financial markets and economic conditions generally, and
these conditions may change suddenly and dramatically. a
favorable business environment is generally characterized by,
among other factors, high global gross domestic product growth,
stable geopolitical conditions, transparent, liquid and
efficient capital markets, low inflation, high business and
investor confidence, and strong business earnings. unfavorable
or uncertain economic and market conditions, which can be caused
by: outbreaks of hostilities or other geopolitical instability;
declines in economic growth, business activity or investor or
business confidence; limitations on the availability or
increases in the cost of credit and capital; increases in
inflation, interest rates, exchange rate volatility, default
rates or the price of basic commodities; corporate, political or
other scandals that reduce investor confidence in capital
markets; natural disasters or pandemics; or a combination of
these or other factors, have adversely affected, and may in the
future adversely affect, our business and profitability in many
ways, including the following:
increasing or high interest rates
and/or
widening credit spreads, especially if such changes are rapid,
may create a less favorable environment for certain of our
businesses, and may affect the fair value of financial
instruments that we issue or hold. for example, beginning in the
second half of 2007, difficulties in the mortgage and broader
credit markets in the united states and elsewhere resulted in a
relatively sudden and substantial decrease in the
table of contents
availability of credit and a corresponding increase in funding
costs. credit spreads widened significantly, affecting
volatility and liquidity in the debt and equity markets,
particularly in the markets for mortgage-related securities and
non-investment-grade debt securities and loans. this negatively
impacted prices of these securities and loans (as well as
commitments for these loans), and, to the extent that we sought
to do so, our ability to sell these securities and loans (and
loan commitments). the sudden decline in liquidity and prices of
these types of securities and loans made it generally more
difficult to value them. these conditions have persisted through
the end of 2007 and we cannot predict how long these conditions
will exist or how our businesses may be affected.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of
our businesses and generally maintain large trading, specialist
and investing positions. market fluctuations and volatility may
adversely affect the value of those positions, including, but
not limited to, our interest rate and credit products, currency,
commodity and equity positions, and our merchant banking
investments, or may reduce our willingness to enter into new
transactions. from time to time, we have incurred significant
trading losses in periods of market turbulence. conversely,
certain of our trading businesses depend on market volatility to
provide trading and arbitrage opportunities, and decreases in
volatility may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect
the results of these businesses.
increases in interest rates or credit spreads, as well as
limitations on the availability of credit, such as occurred in
the second half of 2007, can affect our ability to borrow on a
secured or unsecured basis, which may adversely affect our
liquidity and results of operations. we seek to finance our less
liquid assets on a secured basis and disruptions in the credit
markets are likely to make it harder and more expensive to fund
these assets. in difficult credit markets, we may be forced to
fund our operations at a higher cost or we may be unable to
raise as much funding as we need to support our business
activities. this could cause us to curtail our business
activities and could increase our cost of funding, both of which
could reduce our profitability.
our investment banking business is affected by changes in market
conditions. industry-wide declines in the size and number of
underwritings and mergers and acquisitions may have an adverse
effect on our revenues and, because we may be unable to reduce
expenses correspondingly, our profit margins. in particular,
because a significant portion of our investment banking revenues
are derived from our participation in large transactions, a
decrease in the number of large transactions due to uncertain or
unfavorable market conditions may adversely affect our
investment banking business. our clients engaging in mergers and
acquisitions often rely on access to the secured and unsecured
credit markets to finance their transactions. the lack of
available credit or increased cost of credit may adversely
affect the size, volume and timing of our clients merger
and acquisition transactionsparticularly large
transactions and adversely affect our financial
advisory and underwriting businesses.
we receive asset-based management fees based on the value of our
clients portfolios and, in some cases, we also receive
incentive fees based on increases in the value of our
clients portfolios. reductions in the level of the equity
markets or increases in interest rates tend to reduce the value
of our clients portfolios, which in turn may reduce the
fees we earn for managing assets. increases in interest rates or
attractive conditions in other investments could cause our
clients to transfer their assets out of our funds or other
products. even in the absence of uncertain or unfavorable
economic or market conditions, investment performance by our
asset management business below the performance of benchmarks or
competitors could result in a decline in assets under
management, including through redemptions, and in the incentive
and management fees we receive and might make it more difficult
to attract new investors.
table of contents
market volatility has been relatively low in recent years,
although it generally increased in the second half of 2007. an
increase in volatility increases our measured risk, which might
cause us to reduce our proprietary positions or to reduce
certain of our business activities. in such circumstances, we
may not be able to reduce our positions or our exposure in a
timely, cost-effective way or in a manner sufficient to offset
the increase in measured risk.
the volume of transactions that we execute for our clients and
as a specialist or market maker may decline, which would reduce
the revenues we receive from commissions and spreads. in our
specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock exchange rules
to maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing shares in
a declining market. this may result in trading losses and an
increased need for liquidity. weakness in global equity markets
and the trading of securities in multiple markets and on
multiple exchanges could adversely impact our trading businesses
and impair the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets.
the emergence of a pandemic or other widespread health
emergency, or concerns over the possibility of such an
emergency, could create economic and financial disruptions in
emerging markets and other areas throughout the world, and could
lead to operational difficulties (including travel limitations)
that could impair our ability to manage our businesses around
the world. in addition, unforeseen or catastrophic events,
including health emergencies, terrorist attacks or natural
disasters, could expose our insurance subsidiaries to
significant losses.
we may incur
losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and
strategies.
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a risk
and control framework encompassing a variety of separate but
complementary financial, credit, operational, compliance and
legal reporting systems, internal controls, management review
processes and other mechanisms. our trading risk management
process seeks to balance our ability to profit from trading
positions with our exposure to potential losses. while we employ
a broad and diversified set of risk monitoring and risk
mitigation techniques, those techniques and the judgments that
accompany their application cannot anticipate every economic and
financial outcome or the specifics and timing of such outcomes.
thus, we may, in the course of our activities, incur losses.
the models that we use to assess and control our risk exposures
reflect assumptions about the degrees of correlation or lack
thereof among prices of various asset classes or other market
indicators, and in times of market stress or other unforeseen
circumstances previously uncorrelated indicators may become
correlated, or conversely previously correlated indicators may
move in different directions. in the past, these types of market
movements have at times limited the effectiveness of our hedging
strategies and have caused us to incur significant losses, and
they may do so in the future. these changes in correlation can
be exacerbated where other market participants are using risk or
trading models with assumptions or algorithms that are similar
to ours. in these cases, it may be difficult to reduce our risk
positions due to the activity of other market participants. in
addition, we are increasingly investing our own capital in our
alternative investment and merchant banking funds, and
limitations on our ability to withdraw some or all of our
investments in these funds, whether for legal, reputational or
other reasons, may make it more difficult for us to control the
risk exposures relating to these investments.
for a further discussion of our risk management policies and
procedures, see managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations
risk management in partii, item7 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
our liquidity,
profitability and businesses may be adversely affected by an
inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets,
by a reduction in our credit ratings or by an inability of the
goldman sachs group, inc. to access funds from its
subsidiaries.
liquidity is essential to our businesses. our liquidity could be
impaired by an inability to access secured
and/or
unsecured debt markets, an inability to sell assets or redeem
our investments, or
table of contents
unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this situation may
arise due to circumstances that we may be unable to control,
such as a general market disruption or an operational problem
that affects third parties or us, or even by the perception
among market participants that we are experiencing greater
liquidity risk. the financial instruments that we hold and the
contracts to which we are a party are increasingly complex, as
we employ structured products to benefit our clients and
ourselves, and these complex structured products often do not
have readily available markets to access in times of liquidity
stress. growth of our proprietary investing activities may lead
to situations where the holdings from these activities represent
a significant portion of specific markets, which could restrict
liquidity for our positions. further, our ability to sell assets
may be impaired if other market participants are seeking to sell
similar assets at the same time, as is likely to occur in a
liquidity or other market crisis. in addition, financial
institutions with which we interact may exercise set-off rights
or the right to require additional collateral, including in
difficult market conditions, which could further impair our
access to liquidity.
our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a reduction
in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and
competitive position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our
access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under
certain bilateral provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions,
counterparties could be permitted to terminate contracts with
goldman sachs or require us to post additional collateral.
termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our
liquidity by requiring us to find other sources of financing or
to make significant cash payments or securities movements.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is a holding company and,
therefore, depends on dividends, distributions and other
payments from its subsidiaries to fund dividend payments and to
fund all payments on its obligations, including debt
obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including gs&co.,
are subject to laws that authorize regulatory bodies to block or
reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to the goldman
sachs group, inc. regulatory action of that kind could impede
access to funds that the goldman sachs group, inc. needs to make
payments on obligations, including debt obligations, or dividend
payments.
our
businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely
affected by deterioration in the credit quality of, or defaults
by, third parties who owe us money, securities or other assets
or whose securities or obligations we hold.
the amount and duration of our credit exposures have been
increasing over the past several years, as has the breadth and
size of the entities to which we have credit exposures. we are
exposed to the risk that third parties that owe us money,
securities or other assets will not perform their obligations.
these parties may default on their obligations to us due to
bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational failure or other
reasons. we are also subject to the risk that our rights against
third parties may not be enforceable in all circumstances. in
addition, deterioration in the credit quality of third parties
whose securities or obligations we hold could result in losses
and/or
adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or otherwise use
those securities or obligations for liquidity purposes. a
significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our
counterparties could also have a negative impact on our results.
while in many cases we are permitted to require additional
collateral from counterparties that experience financial
difficulty, disputes may arise as to the amount of collateral we
are entitled to receive and the value of pledged assets. the
termination of contracts and the foreclosure on collateral may
subject us to claims for the improper exercise of our rights.
default rates, downgrades and disputes with counterparties as to
the valuation of collateral tend to increase in times of market
stress and illiquidity.
in addition, as part of our clearing business, we finance our
client positions, and we could be held responsible for the
defaults or misconduct of our clients. although we regularly
review credit exposures to specific clients and counterparties
and to specific industries, countries and regions that we
believe may present credit concerns, default risk may arise from
events or circumstances that are
table of contents
difficult to detect or foresee. in addition, concerns about, or
a default by, one institution could lead to significant
liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other institutions,
which in turn could adversely affect goldman sachs.
concentration
of risk increases the potential for significant
losses.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant
losses in our market-making, proprietary trading and investing,
block trading, merchant banking, underwriting and lending
businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand our
proprietary trading and investing businesses or commit capital
to facilitate customer-driven business. the number and size of
such transactions may affect our results of operations in a
given period. for example, we regularly enter into large
transactions as part of our trading businesses, including large
blocks of securities sold in block trades rather than on a
marketed basis. moreover, because of concentration of risk, we
may suffer losses even when economic and market conditions are
generally favorable for our competitors. in addition, we extend
large commitments as part of our credit origination activities.
our inability to reduce our credit risk by selling, syndicating
or securitizing these positions could negatively affect our
results of operations due to a decrease in the fair value of the
positions, as well as the loss of revenues associated with
selling such securities or loans.
while our activities expose us to many different industries and
counterparties, we routinely execute a high volume of
transactions with counterparties in the financial services
industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial banks,
investment funds and other institutional clients, resulting in
significant credit concentration with respect to this industry.
in the ordinary course of business, we may also be subject to a
concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty,
borrower or issuer.
the financial
services industry is highly competitive.
the financial services industry and all of our
businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect
them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number of
factors, including transaction execution, our products and
services, innovation, reputation and price. we believe that we
will continue to experience pricing pressures in the future as
some of our competitors seek to increase market share by
reducing prices. over time, there has been substantial
consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial
services industry. u.s.federal legislation, which
significantly expanded the activities permissible for firms
affiliated with a u.s.bank, has accelerated this
consolidation and further increased competition. this trend
toward consolidation and convergence has significantly increased
the capital base and geographic reach of our competitors. this
trend has also hastened the globalization of the securities and
other financial services markets. as a result, we have had to
commit capital to support our international operations and to
execute large global transactions. as we expand into new
business areas and new geographic regions, we will face
competitors with more experience and more established
relationships with clients, regulators and industry participants
in the relevant market, which could adversely affect our ability
to expand.
pricing and other competitive pressures in our investment
banking business, as well as our other businesses, have
continued to increase. for example, the trend in the
underwriting business toward multiple book runners and
co-managers handling transactions, where previously there would
have been a single book runner, has adversely affected our
business and reduced our revenues. in addition, we have
experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure to extend and
price credit at levels that may not always fully compensate us
for the risks we take. in particular, corporate clients
sometimes seek to require credit commitments from us in
connection with investment banking and other assignments.
finally, competitive pressures and other industry factors,
including the increasing use by our clients of low-cost
electronic trading, have caused and could continue to cause a
reduction in commissions and spreads.
table of contents
we face
enhanced risks as new business initiatives lead us to transact
with a broader array of clients and expose us to new asset
classes and new markets.
a number of our recent and planned business initiatives and
expansions of existing businesses may bring us into contact,
directly or indirectly, with individuals and entities that are
not within our traditional client base and expose us to new
asset classes and new markets. for example, in recent years we
have begun providing loans to small and mid-sized businesses,
originating and acquiring life insurance policies and
originating residential mortgages, and we are increasingly
transacting business and investing in new regions, including a
wider range of emerging markets. in addition, we are
increasingly offering complex structured products, including
securitized derivatives, and alternative investments to a wider
investor base, including retail investors, both directly and
through third-party distribution channels. furthermore, a number
of our businesses, including our proprietary investing and
merchant banking activities, cause us to directly or indirectly
own interests in, or otherwise become affiliated with the
ownership and operation of, public services, such as airports,
toll roads, shipping ports, electric power generation facilities
and other commodities infrastructure components, both within and
outside the united states. recent market conditions are likely
to lead to an increase in opportunities to acquire distressed
assets, and we may determine opportunistically to increase our
exposure to these types of assets. these business activities
expose us to new and enhanced risks, including reputational
concerns arising from dealing with less sophisticated
counterparties and investors, greater regulatory scrutiny of
these activities, increased credit-related and operational
risks, risks arising from accidents or acts of terrorism, and
reputational concerns with the manner in which these assets are
being operated or held.
derivative
transactions may expose us to unexpected risk and potential
losses.
we are party to a large number of derivative transactions,
including credit derivatives that require that we deliver to the
counterparty the underlying security, loan or other obligation
in order to receive payment. in a number of cases, we do not
hold the underlying security, loan or other obligation and may
have difficulty obtaining, or be unable to obtain, the
underlying security, loan or other obligation through the
physical settlement of other transactions. as a result, we are
subject to the risk that we may not be able to obtain the
security, loan or other obligation within the required
contractual time frame for delivery, particularly if default
rates increase from the historically low levels over the past
several years. this could cause us to forfeit the payments due
to us under these contracts or result in settlement delays with
the attendant credit and operational risk as well as increased
costs to the firm.
derivative contracts and other transactions entered into with
third parties are not always confirmed by the counterparties on
a timely basis. while the transaction remains unconfirmed, we
are subject to heightened credit and operational risk and in the
event of a default may find it more difficult to enforce the
contract. in addition, as new and more complex derivative
products are created, covering a wider array of underlying
credit and other instruments, disputes about the terms of the
underlying contracts could arise, which could impair our ability
to effectively manage our risk exposures from these products and
subject us to increased costs.
a failure in
our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third
parties, could impair our liquidity, disrupt our businesses,
result in the disclosure of confidential information, damage our
reputation and cause losses.
shortcomings or failures in our internal processes, people or
systems could lead to impairment of our liquidity, financial
loss, disruption of our businesses, liability to clients,
regulatory intervention or reputational damage. our businesses
are highly dependent on our ability to process and monitor, on a
daily basis, a large number of transactions, many of which are
highly complex, across numerous and diverse markets in many
currencies. these transactions, as well as information
technology services we provide to clients, often must adhere to
client-specific guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory
standards. as our client base and our geographical reach
expands, developing and maintaining our operational systems and
infrastructure becomes increasingly challenging. our financial,
accounting,
table of contents
data processing or other operating systems and facilities may
fail to operate properly or become disabled as a result of
events that are wholly or partially beyond our control, such as
a spike in transaction volume, adversely affecting our ability
to process these transactions or provide these services. the
inability of our systems to accommodate an increasing volume of
transactions could also constrain our ability to expand our
businesses.
we also face the risk of operational failure, termination or
capacity constraints of any of the clearing agents, exchanges,
clearing houses or other financial intermediaries we use to
facilitate our securities transactions, and as our
interconnectivity with our clients grows, we will increasingly
face the risk of operational failure with respect to our
clients systems. in recent years, there has been
significant consolidation among clearing agents, exchanges and
clearing houses, which has increased our exposure to operational
failure, termination or capacity constraints of the particular
financial intermediaries that we use and could affect our
ability to find adequate and cost-effective alternatives in the
event of any such failure, termination or constraint. any such
failure, termination or constraint could adversely affect our
ability to effect transactions, service our clients and manage
our exposure to risk.
despite the contingency plans and facilities we have in place,
our ability to conduct business may be adversely impacted by a
disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses
and the communities in which we are located. this may include a
disruption involving electrical, communications, transportation
or other services used by goldman sachs or third parties with
which we conduct business. these disruptions may occur, for
example, as a result of events that affect only the buildings of
goldman sachs or such third parties, or as a result of events
with a broader impact globally, regionally or in the cities
where those buildings are located. nearly all of our employees
in our primary locations, including the new york metropolitan
area, london, frankfurt, hong kong, tokyo and bangalore, work in
close proximity to one another, in one or more buildings.
notwithstanding our efforts to maintain business continuity,
given that our headquarters and the largest concentration of our
employees are in the new york metropolitan area, depending on
the intensity and longevity of the event, a catastrophic event
impacting our new york metropolitan area offices could very
negatively affect our business. if a disruption occurs in one
location and our employees in that location are unable to occupy
our offices or communicate with or travel to other locations,
our ability to service and interact with our clients may suffer,
and we may not be able to successfully implement contingency
plans that depend on communication or travel.
our operations rely on the secure processing, storage and
transmission of confidential and other information in our
computer systems and networks. although we take protective
measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances warrant,
our computer systems, software and networks may be vulnerable to
unauthorized access, computer viruses or other malicious code
and other events that could have a security impact. if one or
more of such events occur, this potentially could jeopardize our
or our clients or counterparties confidential and
other information processed and stored in, and transmitted
through, our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause
interruptions or malfunctions in our, our clients, our
counterparties or third parties operations, which
could result in significant losses or reputational damage. we
may be required to expend significant additional resources to
modify our protective measures or to investigate and remediate
vulnerabilities or other exposures, and we may be subject to
litigation and financial losses that are either not insured
against or not fully covered through any insurance maintained by
us.
we routinely transmit and receive personal, confidential and
proprietary information by email and other electronic means. we
have discussed and worked with clients and counterparties to
develop secure transmission capabilities, but we do not have,
and may be unable to put in place, secure capabilities with all
of our clients and counterparties. an interception or
mishandling of personal, confidential or proprietary information
being sent to or received from a client or counterparty could
result in legal liability, regulatory action and reputational
harm. we are exposed to similar risks arising from the
interception of personal, confidential or proprietary
information sent to or received from, or the misuse or
mishandling of personal, confidential or proprietary information
by, vendors, service
table of contents
providers and other third parties who may receive such
information from us, and our efforts to ensure that these third
parties have appropriate controls in place may not be successful.
conflicts of
interest are increasing and a failure to appropriately identify
and deal with conflicts of interest could adversely affect our
businesses.
our reputation is one of our most important assets. as we have
expanded the scope of our businesses and our client base, we
increasingly have to address potential conflicts of interest,
including situations where our services to a particular client
or our own proprietary investments or other interests conflict,
or are perceived to conflict, with the interests of another
client, as well as situations where one or more of our
businesses have access to material non-public information that
may not be shared with other businesses within the firm.
the sec, the nyse, finra, other federal and state regulators and
regulators outside the united states, including in the united
kingdom and japan, have announced their intention to increase
their scrutiny of potential conflicts of interest, including
through detailed examinations of specific transactions. there
have been complaints filed against financial institutions,
including goldman sachs, alleging the violation of antitrust
laws arising from their joint participation in certain leveraged
buyouts, referred to as club deals, as discussed
under legal proceedings private
equity-sponsored acquisitions litigation in parti,
item3 of the annual report on
form10-k.
in addition, a number of class action complaints have also been
filed in connection with certain specific club deal
transactions which name the relevant club deal
participants among the defendants, including goldman sachs
affiliates in several cases, and generally allege that the
transactions constitute a breach of fiduciary duty by the target
company and that the club participants aided and
abetted such breach. we cannot predict the outcome of the
litigation to which we are a party, and we may become subject to
further litigation or regulatory scrutiny in the future in this
regard.
we have extensive procedures and controls that are designed to
identify and address conflicts of interest, including those
designed to prevent the improper sharing of information among
our businesses. however, appropriately identifying and dealing
with conflicts of interest is complex and difficult, and our
reputation could be damaged and the willingness of clients to
enter into transactions in which such a conflict might arise may
be affected if we fail, or appear to fail, to identify and deal
appropriately with conflicts of interest. in addition, potential
or perceived conflicts could give rise to litigation or
enforcement actions.
our businesses
and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive
regulation around the world.
goldman sachs, as a participant in the financial services
industry, is subject to extensive regulation in jurisdictions
around the world. we face the risk of significant intervention
by regulatory authorities in all jurisdictions in which we
conduct our businesses. among other things, we could be fined,
prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities or
subject to limitations or conditions on our business activities.
new laws or regulations or changes in enforcement of existing
laws or regulations applicable to our businesses or those of our
clients may also adversely affect our businesses. regulatory
changes could lead to business disruptions, could require us to
change certain of our business practices and could expose us to
additional costs and liabilities as well as reputational harm.
for a discussion of the extensive regulation to which our
businesses are subject, see business
regulation in parti, item1 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
our firm is subject to regulatory capital requirements at a
number of levels, as described above under
business regulation in parti,
item1 of the annual report on
form10-k.
as a consolidated supervised entity, we are subject to minimum
capital standards on a consolidated basis. a number of our
subsidiaries, including gs&co., gsec, gsi, gs bank usa, our
irish banking entities, gsjcl and goldman, sachs& co.
ohg, are separately subject to their own minimum capital
table of contents
requirements imposed by various regulatory bodies. complying
with these requirements may cause us to limit our business
activities or require us to liquidate assets or otherwise raise
capital in a manner that adversely affects our shareholders and
creditors. while we currently disclose these ratios to the sec
and the fsa and to rating agencies, we may be required or may
determine to disclose publicly our group-wide consolidated
supervised entity capital ratios beginning in mid-2008. it is
unclear how our ratios will compare to those of our competitors,
or how our investors, counterparties or clients may react to any
difference, positive or negative, in such ratios.
firms in the financial services industry have been operating in
a difficult regulatory environment. the industry has experienced
increased scrutiny from a variety of regulators, both within and
outside the united states. penalties and fines sought by
regulatory authorities have increased substantially over the
last several years, and certain regulators have been more likely
in recent years to commence enforcement actions. for example,
regulators, both within and outside the united states, continue
to scrutinize complex, structured finance transactions and have
brought enforcement actions against a number of financial
institutions in connection with such transactions. we seek to
create innovative solutions to address our clients needs,
and we have entered into, and continue to enter into, structured
transactions with clients.
this environment has led some of our clients to be less willing
to engage in transactions that may carry a risk of increased
scrutiny by regulators and has created uncertainty with respect
to a number of transactions that had historically been entered
into by financial services firms, including our firm, and that
were generally believed to be permissible and appropriate. this
environment also has led us and our competitors to modify
transaction structures and, in some cases, to limit or cease our
execution of some types of transactions. while we have policies
and procedures in place that are intended to ensure that the
transactions we enter into are appropriately reviewed and comply
with applicable laws and regulations, it is possible that
certain transactions could give rise to litigation or
enforcement actions or that the regulatory scrutiny of, and
litigation in connection with, transactions will make our
clients less willing to enter into these transactions with us,
and will adversely affect our business.
substantial
legal liability or significant regulatory action against goldman
sachs could have material adverse financial effects or cause
significant reputational harm to goldman sachs, which in turn
could seriously harm our business prospects.
we face significant legal risks in our businesses, and the
volume of claims and amount of damages and penalties claimed in
litigation and regulatory proceedings against financial
institutions remain high. see legal proceedings in
parti, item3 of the annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of certain legal proceedings in which we are
involved.
there have been a number of highly publicized cases involving
fraud or other misconduct by employees in the financial services
industry in recent years, and we run the risk that employee
misconduct could occur. it is not always possible to deter or
prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we take to
prevent and detect this activity may not be effective in all
cases.
the growth of
electronic trading and the introduction of new technology may
adversely affect our business and may increase
competition.
technology is fundamental to our business and our industry. the
growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new
technologies is changing our businesses and presenting us with
new challenges. securities, futures and options transactions are
increasingly occurring electronically, both on our own systems
and through other alternative trading systems, and it appears
that the trend toward alternative trading systems will continue
and probably accelerate. some of these alternative trading
systems compete with our trading businesses, including our
specialist businesses, and we may experience continued
competitive pressures in these and other areas. in addition, the
increased use by our clients of low-cost electronic trading
systems and direct electronic access to trading
table of contents
markets could cause a reduction in commissions and spreads. as
our clients increasingly use our systems to trade directly in
the markets, we may incur liabilities as a result of their use
of our order routing and execution infrastructure. the
nyses adoption and continued refinement of its hybrid
market for trading securities may increase pressure on our
equities business as customers execute more of their
nyse-related trades electronically. we have invested significant
resources into the development of electronic trading systems and
expect to continue to do so, but there is no assurance that the
revenues generated by these systems will yield an adequate
return on our investment, particularly given the relatively
lower commissions arising from electronic trades.
our businesses
may be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain
qualified employees.
competition from within the financial services industry and from
businesses outside the financial services industry, such as
hedge funds, private equity funds and venture capital funds, for
qualified employees is intense. this is particularly the case in
emerging markets, where we are often competing for qualified
employees with entities that have a significantly greater
presence or more extensive experience in the region. our
performance is largely dependent on the talents and efforts of
highly skilled individuals; therefore, our continued ability to
compete effectively in our businesses and to expand into new
businesses and geographic areas depends on our ability to
attract new employees and to retain and motivate our existing
employees. in addition, current and future laws (including laws
relating to immigration and outsourcing) may restrict our
ability to move responsibilities or personnel from one
jurisdiction to another. this may impact our ability to take
advantage of business opportunities or potential efficiencies.
our power
generation interests and related activities subject us to
extensive regulation, as well as environmental and other risks
associated with power generation activities.
the power generation facilities that we own and those that we
operate, as well as our other power-related activities, are
subject to extensive and evolving federal, state and local
energy, environmental and other governmental laws and
regulations, including environmental laws and regulations
relating to, among others, air quality, water quality, waste
management, natural resources, site remediation and health and
safety. in the past several years, intensified scrutiny of the
energy market by federal, state and local authorities and the
public has resulted in increased regulatory and legal
proceedings involving companies engaged in electric power
generation and wholesale sales and trading of electricity and
natural gas.
in addition, we may incur substantial costs in complying with
current or future laws and regulations relating to power
generation, including having to commit significant capital
toward environmental monitoring, installation of pollution
control equipment, payment of emission fees and carbon or other
taxes, and application for, and holding of, permits and licenses
at our power generation facilities. in certain instances,
compliance with applicable laws and regulations may require us
to cease or curtail operations of one or more of our power
generation facilities.
our power generation facilities are also subject to the risk of
unforeseen or catastrophic events, including terrorist attacks,
natural disasters or other hostile or catastrophic events. we
may not have insurance against these risks or other risks,
including environmental risks, that such facilities face, and,
in cases in which we do have insurance, the insurance proceeds
may be inadequate to cover our losses. our overall businesses
and reputation may be adversely affected by legal and regulatory
proceedings, particularly those related to environmental
matters, arising out of our power generation business, as well
as by the occurrence of unforeseen or catastrophic events or
negative publicity associated with our power-related activities.
the operation of our power generation facilities may be
disrupted for many reasons, many of which are outside our
control, including the breakdown or failure of power generation
equipment, transmission lines or other equipment or processes,
and performance below expected levels of output
table of contents
or efficiency. in addition, these facilities could be adversely
affected by the failure of any of our third-party suppliers or
service providers to perform their contractual obligations,
including the failure to obtain raw materials necessary for
operation at reasonable prices. market conditions or other
factors could cause a failure to satisfy or obtain waivers under
agreements with third parties, including lenders and utilities,
which impose significant obligations on our subsidiaries that
own such facilities. the occurrence of any of such events may
prevent the affected facilities from performing under applicable
power sales agreements, may impair their operations or financial
results and may result in litigation or other reputational harm.
in conducting
our businesses around the world, we are subject to political,
economic, legal, operational and other risks that are inherent
in operating in many countries.
in conducting our businesses and maintaining and supporting our
global operations, we are subject to risks of possible
nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital
controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental
actions, as well as the outbreak of hostilities. in many
countries, the laws and regulations applicable to the securities
and financial services industries and many of the transactions
in which we are involved are uncertain and evolving, and it may
be difficult for us to determine the exact requirements of local
laws in every market. any determination by local regulators that
we have not acted in compliance with the application of local
laws in a particular market or our failure to develop effective
working relationships with local regulators could have a
significant and negative effect not only on our businesses in
that market but also on our reputation generally. we are also
subject to the enhanced risk that transactions we structure
might not be legally enforceable in all cases.
our businesses and operations are increasingly expanding into
new regions throughout the world, including emerging markets,
and we expect this trend to continue. various emerging market
countries have experienced severe economic and financial
disruptions, including significant devaluations of their
currencies, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or
negative growth rates in their economies. the possible effects
of any of these conditions include an adverse impact on our
businesses and increased volatility in financial markets
generally.
item1b.unresolved
staff comments
there are no material unresolved written comments that were
received from the sec staff 180days or more before the end
of our fiscal year relating to our periodic or current reports
under the securities exchange act of 1934.
item2.properties
our principal executive offices are located at 85 broad street,
new york, new york, and comprise approximately one million
rentable square feet of leased space, pursuant to a lease
agreement expiring in june 2011. we also occupy over
680,000rentable square feet at one new york plaza under
lease agreements expiring primarily in 2009 (with options to
renew for up to five additional years), and we lease space at
various other locations in the new york metropolitan area. in
total, we lease approximately 3.8million rentable square
feet in the new york metropolitan area.
in august 2005, we leased from battery park city authority a
parcel of land in lower manhattan, pursuant to a ground lease.
we are currently constructing a 2.1million gross square
foot office building on the site that will serve as our world
headquarters. under the lease, battery park city authority holds
title to all improvements, including the office building,
subject to goldman sachs right of exclusive possession and
use through may 2069, the expiration date of the lease.
under the terms of the ground lease, we made a lump-sum ground
rent payment in june 2007 of $161million, which was paid
into escrow, to be released to the battery park city authority
pending performance of specified state and city obligations. we
are required to make additional periodic payments during the
term of the lease. we are obligated under the ground lease to
construct the office building by 2011 (subject to extensions in
the case of force majeure) in accordance with certain
table of contents
pre-approved design standards. construction began on the
building in november 2005, and we expect initial occupancy of
the building during 2009. the building is projected to cost
between $2.3billion and $2.5billion, including
acquisition, development, fitout and furnishings, financing and
other related costs.
we are receiving a number of benefits from the city and state of
new york based on our agreement to construct our world
headquarters in lower manhattan. these benefits are subject to
recoupment or recapture if we do not proceed in accordance with
our agreements with the city and state of new york.
we have offices at 30 hudson street in jersey city, new jersey,
which we own and which include approximately 1.6million
gross square feet of office space, and we own over
575,000square feet of additional office space spread among
four locations in new york and new jersey. we have additional
offices in the u.s.and elsewhere in the americas, which
together comprise approximately 2.5million rentable square
feet of leased space.
in europe, the middle east and africa, we have offices that
total approximately 2.0million rentable square feet. our
european headquarters is located in london at peterborough
court, pursuant to a lease expiring in 2026. in total, we lease
approximately 1.5million rentable square feet in london
through various leases, relating to various properties.
in asia, we have offices that total approximately
1.3million rentable square feet. our headquarters in this
region are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in
hong kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently
lease approximately 390,000rentable square feet through a
lease that will expire in 2018. in hong kong, we currently lease
approximately 220,000rentable square feet under lease
agreements, the majority of which will expire in 2011.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office
space held in excess of our current requirements. this excess
space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is
being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied
space that we may exit in the future. we regularly evaluate our
current and future space capacity in relation to current and
projected staffing levels. in 2007, we incurred exit costs of
$128million related to office space in new york. we may
incur additional exit costs in 2008 and thereafter to the extent
we (i)reduce our space capacity or (ii)commit to, or
occupy, new properties in the locations in which we operate and,
consequently, dispose of existing space that had been held for
potential growth. these exit costs may be material to our
results of operations in a given period.
item3.legal
proceedings
we are involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and
arbitration proceedings (including those described below)
concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of our
businesses. we believe, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our
financial condition, but might be material to our operating
results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the
operating results for such period. given the range of litigation
and investigations presently under way, our litigation expenses
can be expected to remain high.
ipo process
matters
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co.
are among the numerous financial services companies that have
been named as defendants in a variety of lawsuits alleging
improprieties in the process by which those companies
participated in the underwriting of public offerings in recent
years.
certain purported class actions have been brought in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york,
beginning on november3, 1998, by purchasers of securities
in public offerings as well as certain purported issuers of such
offerings, that allege that the defendants have conspired
table of contents
to fix at 7% the discount that underwriting syndicates receive
from issuers of shares in certain offerings in violation of
federal antitrust laws. on march15, 1999, the purchaser
plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended complaint seeking treble
damages as well as injunctive relief. the district court has
granted a motion to dismiss with prejudice the purchasers
damages claims. the district court denied class certification
with respect to the damages claims asserted by the issuers of
securities, but the u.s.court of appeals for the second
circuit granted the issuer plaintiffs petition to review
that certification decision on an interlocutory basis and
reversed and remanded by a decision, dated
september11,2007. the issuer plaintiffs have renewed
their request for certification on remand.
goldman, sachs& co. has also, together with other
underwriters in certain offerings as well as the issuers and
certain of their officers and directors, been named as a
defendant in a number of related lawsuits filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
alleging, among other things, that the prospectuses for the
offerings violated the federal securities laws by failing to
disclose the existence of alleged arrangements tying allocations
in certain offerings to higher customer brokerage commission
rates as well as purchase orders in the aftermarket, and that
the alleged arrangements resulted in market manipulation. the
federal district court denied the motion to dismiss in all
material respects relating to the underwriter defendants and
generally granted plaintiffs motion for class
certification in six focus cases. the
u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit reversed the
district courts order granting class certification, denied
plaintiffs applications for rehearing and rehearing en
banc, and remanded. on august14,2007, plaintiffs
amended their complaints in the six focus cases as
well as their master allegations for all such cases to reflect
new class related allegations. on september27,2007,
plaintiffs filed a new motion for class certification in the
district court, and on november14,2007, goldman,
sachs& co. and the other defendants moved to dismiss
the amended complaints.
the goldman sachs group, inc. is among numerous underwriting
firms named as defendants in a number of complaints filed
commencing october3,2007, in the u.s.district
court for the western district of washington alleging violations
of the federal securities laws in connection with offerings of
securities for 16 issuers during 1999 and 2000. the complaints
generally assert that the underwriters, together with each
issuers directors, officers and principal shareholders,
entered into purported agreements to tie allocations in the
offerings to increased brokerage commissions and aftermarket
purchase orders. the complaints further allege that, based upon
these and other purported agreements, the underwriters violated
the reporting provisions of, and are subject to short-swing
profit recovery under, section16 of the securities
exchange act of 1934. on october29,2007, the cases
were reassigned to a single district judge.
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in
an action commenced on may15,2002 in new york
supreme court, new york county, by an official committee of
unsecured creditors on behalf of etoys, inc., alleging that the
firm intentionally underpriced etoys, inc.s initial public
offering. the action seeks, among other things, unspecified
compensatory damages resulting from the alleged lower amount of
offering proceeds. the court granted goldman, sachs&
co.s motion to dismiss as to five of the claims; plaintiff
appealed from the dismissal of the five claims, and goldman,
sachs& co. appealed from the denial of its motion as
to the remaining claim. the new york appellate division, first
department affirmed in part and reversed in part the lower
courts ruling on the firms motion to dismiss,
permitting all claims to proceed except the claim for fraud, as
to which the appellate court granted leave to replead, and the
new york court of appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part,
dismissing claims for breach of contract, professional
malpractice and unjust enrichment, but permitting claims for
breach of fiduciary duty and fraud to continue. on remand to the
lower court, goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the
surviving claims or, in the alternative, for summary judgment,
but the motion was denied by a decision dated
march21,2006. plaintiff has moved for leave to amend
the complaint again, and goldman, sachs& co. has
cross-moved to dismiss.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and certain of its affiliates
have, together with various underwriters in certain offerings,
received subpoenas and requests for documents and information
table of contents
from various governmental agencies and self-regulatory
organizations in connection with investigations relating to the
public offering process. goldman sachs has cooperated with these
investigations.
iridium
securities litigation
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in
two purported class action lawsuits commenced, beginning on
may26, 1999, in the u.s.district court for the
district of columbia brought on behalf of purchasers of
classa common stock of iridium world communications, ltd.
in a january 1999 underwritten secondary offering of
7,500,000shares of classa common stock at a price of
$33.50 per share, as well as in the secondary market. goldman,
sachs& co. underwrote 996,500shares of common
stock and goldman sachs international underwrote
320,625shares of common stock for a total offering price
of approximately $44million.
the defendants in the actions include iridium, certain of its
officers and directors, motorola, inc. (an investor in iridium)
and the lead underwriters in the offering, including goldman,
sachs& co. the complaints in both actions allege
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws and seek compensatory
and/or
rescissory damages. defendants motion to dismiss was
denied. the district court has certified two subclasses. the
district court denied the plaintiffs motion for summary
judgment as to claims under section11 of the securities
act of 1933, but granted summary judgment dismissing claims
under section12(a)(2) of the securities act against
goldman, sachs& co. and all but one of the other
underwriter defendants. on november3,2006, the
underwriter defendants entered into an agreement in principle to
settle all claims against them for a settlement payment of
$8.25million. the settlement is subject to, among other
things, documentation and court approval.
on august13, 1999, iridium world communications, ltd.
filed for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
world online
litigation
several lawsuits have been commenced in the netherlands courts
based on alleged misstatements and omissions relating to the
initial public offering of world online in march2000.
goldman sachs and abn amro rothschild served as joint global
coordinators of the approximately 2.9billion
offering. goldman sachs international underwrote
20,268,846shares and goldman, sachs& co.
underwrote 6,756,282shares for a total offering price of
approximately 1.16billion.
on september11,2000, several dutch world online
shareholders as well as a dutch entity purporting to represent
the interests of certain world online shareholders commenced a
proceeding in amsterdam district court against abn amro
bank n.v., also acting under the name of abn amro
rothschild, alleging misrepresentations and omissions
relating to the initial public offering of world online. the
lawsuit seeks, among other things, the return of the purchase
price of the shares purchased by the plaintiffs or unspecified
damages. the court held that the claims failed and dismissed the
complaint and the amsterdam court of appeal affirmed dismissal
of the complaint.
in march 2001, a dutch shareholders association initiated legal
proceedings for an unspecified amount of damages against goldman
sachs international in amsterdam district court in connection
with the world online offering. the court rejected the claims
against goldman sachs international, but found world online
liable in an amount to be determined. the dutch shareholders
association appealed from the dismissal of their claims against
goldman sachs international. by a decision dated
may3,2007, the netherlands court of appeals affirmed
in part and reversed in part the decision of the district court
dismissing the complaint, holding that certain of the alleged
disclosure deficiencies were actionable. on
july24,2007, the shareholder association appealed
from the netherlands court of appeals decision to the extent
that it affirmed the decision of the district court dismissing
the complaint. on november2,2007, goldman sachs
international joined the other defendants in
table of contents
appealing from the court of appeals decision to the extent that
it reversed the district courts dismissal.
research
independence matters
goldman, sachs& co. is one of several investment
firms that have been named as defendants in substantively
identical purported class actions filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
alleging violations of the federal securities laws in connection
with research coverage of certain issuers and seeking
compensatory damages. in one such action, relating to coverage
of rsl communications, inc. commenced on
july15,2003, goldman, sachs& co.s
motion to dismiss the complaint was denied. the district court
granted the plaintiffs motion for class certification and
the u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit, by an
order dated january26,2007, vacated the district
courts class certification and remanded for
reconsideration. goldman, sachs& co. is also a
defendant in several actions relating to research coverage of
exodus communications, inc. that commenced beginning in may
2003. the actions were consolidated, goldman, sachs&
co.s motion to dismiss was granted with leave to replead,
and plaintiff filed a second amended complaint. the
defendants motion to dismiss the second amended complaint
was granted by order dated december4,2007. plaintiff
moved for reconsideration on december21,2007.
a purported shareholder derivative action was filed in new york
supreme court, new york county on june13,2003
against the goldman sachs group, inc. and its board of
directors, which, as amended on march3,2004 and
june14, 2005, alleges that the directors breached their
fiduciary duties in connection with the firms research as
well as the firms ipo allocations practices.
the goldman sachs group, inc., goldman, sachs& co.
and henry m. paulson,jr., the former chairman and chief
executive officer of the goldman sachs group, inc., have been
named as defendants in a purported class action filed originally
on july18,2003 in the u.s.district court for
the district of nevada on behalf of purchasers of the goldman
sachs group, inc. stock from july1, 1999 through
may7,2002. the complaint alleges that defendants
breached their fiduciary duties and violated the federal
securities laws in connection with the firms research
activities. the complaint seeks, among other things, unspecified
compensatory damages
and/or
rescission. the action was transferred on consent to the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york,
and the district court granted the defendants motion to
dismiss with leave to amend. plaintiffs filed a second amended
complaint, and defendants filed a motion to dismiss. in a
decision dated september29,2006, the federal
district court granted mr.paulsons motion to dismiss
with leave to replead but otherwise denied the motion.
plaintiffs have moved for class certification.
the goldman sachs group, inc. and its affiliates, together with
other financial services firms, have received requests for
information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations in connection with their review of
research independence issues. goldman sachs has cooperated with
these requests. see business
regulation regulations applicable in and outside the
united states in parti, item1 of the annual
report on
form10-k
for a discussion of our global research settlement.
enron litigation
matters
goldman sachs affiliates are defendants in certain actions
arising relating to enron corp., which filed for protection
under the u.s.bankruptcy laws on
december2,2001.
goldman, sachs& co. and co-managing underwriters have
been named as defendants in certain purported securities class
and individual actions commenced beginning on
december14,2001 in the u.s.district court for
the southern district of texas and california superior court
brought by purchasers of $255,875,000, (including
over-allotments) of exchangeable notes of enron corp. in august
1999. the notes were mandatorily exchangeable in 2002 into
shares of enron oil& gas company held by enron corp.
or their cash equivalent. the complaints also name as defendants
the goldman sachs group, inc. as well as certain past and
present officers and directors of enron corp.
table of contents
and the companys outside accounting firm. the complaints
generally allege violations of the disclosure requirements of
the federal securities laws
and/or state
law, and seek compensatory damages. goldman, sachs&
co. underwrote $127,937,500 (including over-allotments)
principal amount of the notes. the goldman sachs group, inc. and
goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the class action
complaint in the texas federal court and the motion was granted
as to the goldman sachs group, inc. but denied as to goldman,
sachs& co. one of the plaintiffs has moved for class
certification. goldman, sachs& co. has moved for
judgment on the pleadings against all plaintiffs. on
october18,2007, the parties reached a settlement
agreement in principle pursuant to which goldman,
sachs& co. has contributed $11.5million to a
settlement fund, subject to definitive documentation and court
approval. plaintiffs in various consolidated actions relating to
enron entered into a settlement with banc of america securities
llc on july2,2004 and with citigroup, inc. on
june10, 2005, including with respect to claims relating to
the exchangeable notes offering, as to which affiliates of those
settling defendants were two of the three underwriters (together
with goldman, sachs& co.).
several funds which allegedly sustained investment losses of
approximately $125million in connection with secondary
market purchases of the exchangeable notes as well as zero
coupon convertible notes of enron corp. commenced an action in
the u.s.district court for the southern district of new
york on january16,2002. as amended, the lawsuit
names as defendants the underwriters of the august 1999 offering
and the companys outside accounting firm, and alleges
violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws, fraud and misrepresentation. the judicial panel
on multidistrict litigation has transferred that action to the
texas federal district court for purposes of coordinated or
consolidated pretrial proceedings with other matters relating to
enron corp. goldman, sachs& co. moved to dismiss the
complaint and the motion was granted in part and denied in part.
the district court granted the funds motion for leave to
file a second amended complaint on january22, 2007.
goldman, sachs& co. is among numerous defendants in
two substantively identical actions filed in the
u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york
beginning in november 2003 seeking to recover as fraudulent
transfers
and/or
preferences payments made by enron corp. in repurchasing its
commercial paper shortly before its bankruptcy filing. goldman,
sachs& co., which had acted as a commercial paper
dealer for enron corp., resold to enron corp. approximately
$30million of commercial paper as principal, and as an
agent facilitated enron corp.s repurchase of approximately
$340million additional commercial paper from various
customers who have also been named as defendants. the bankruptcy
court denied goldman, sachs& co.s motion to
dismiss as well as similar motions by other defendants. on
august1,2005, various defendants including goldman,
sachs& co. petitioned to have the denial of their
motion to dismiss reviewed by the u.s.district court for
the southern district of new york. on
november21,2007, goldman, sachs& co.
moved to remove the standing reference by the federal district
court.
exodus securities
litigation
by an amended complaint dated july11,2002, goldman,
sachs& co. and the other lead underwriters for the
february 2001 offering of 13,000,000shares of common stock
and $575,000,000 of
51/4%
convertible subordinated notes of exodus communications, inc.
were added as defendants in a purported class action pending in
the u.s.district court for the northern district of
california. the complaint, which also names as defendants
certain officers and directors of exodus communications, inc.,
alleges violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws and seeks compensatory damages. the district
court granted the defendants motion to dismiss with leave
to replead, and the plaintiffs filed a third amended complaint.
the district court denied the underwriter defendants
motion to dismiss the third amended complaint. the underwriter
defendants motion for reconsideration and clarification
was denied. by a decision dated june2,2006, the
district court granted summary judgment dismissing the complaint
on the grounds that the plaintiffs purchases of exodus
securities were not traceable to the relevant offerings. two new
putative plaintiffs filed motions
table of contents
to intervene, those motions were denied and a motion by the
putative intervenors to vacate the resulting judgment was also
denied. plaintiffs filed an appeal and the underwriter
defendants cross-appealed on december11,2006 to the
extent that certain earlier grounds for dismissal had been
rejected by the district court.
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote 5,200,000shares
of common stock for a total offering price of approximately
$96,200,000, and $230,000,000 principal amount of the notes. on
september26,2001, exodus communications, inc. filed
for protection under the u.s.bankruptcy laws.
montana power
litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and the goldman sachs group, inc.
have been named as defendants in a purported class action
commenced originally on october1,2001 in montana
district court, second judicial district on behalf of former
shareholders of montana power company. the complaint generally
alleges that montana power company violated montana law by
failing to procure shareholder approval of certain corporate
strategies and transactions, that the companys board
breached its fiduciary duties in pursuing those strategies and
transactions, and that goldman, sachs& co. aided and
abetted the boards breaches and rendered negligent advice
in its role as financial advisor to the company. the complaint
seeks, among other things, compensatory damages. in addition to
goldman, sachs& co. and the goldman sachs group,
inc., the defendants include montana power company, certain of
its officers and directors, an outside law firm for the montana
power company, and certain companies that purchased assets from
montana power company and its affiliates. the montana state
court denied the goldman sachs defendants motions to
dismiss. following the bankruptcies of certain defendants in the
action, defendants removed the action to federal court, the
u.s.district court for the district of montana, butte
division.
on october26,2004, a creditors committee of touch
america holdings, inc. brought an action against goldman,
sachs& co., the goldman sachs group, inc., and a
former outside law firm for montana power company in montana
district court, second judicial district. the complaint asserts
that touch america holdings, inc. is the successor to montana
power corporation and alleges substantially the same claims as
in the purported class action. defendants removed the action to
federal court. defendants moved to dismiss the complaint, but
the motion was denied by a decision dated
june10,2005.
adelphia
communications fraudulent conveyance litigation
goldman, sachs& co. is among numerous entities named
as defendants in two adversary proceedings commenced in the
u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of new
york, one on july6,2003 by a creditors committee,
and the second on or about july31,2003 by an equity
committee of adelphia communications, inc. those proceedings
have now been consolidated in a single amended complaint filed
by the adelphia recovery trust on october31,2007.
the complaint seeks, among other things, to recover, as
fraudulent conveyances, payments made allegedly by adelphia
communications, inc. and its affiliates to certain brokerage
firms, including approximately $62.9million allegedly paid
to goldman, sachs& co., in respect of margin calls
made in the ordinary course of business on accounts owned by
members of the family that formerly controlled adelphia
communications, inc. goldman, sachs& co. moved to
dismiss the claim related to such margin payments on
december21,2007.
specialist
matters
spear, leeds& kellogg specialists llc (slks) and
certain affiliates have received requests for information from
various governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations
as part of an
industry-wide
investigation relating to activities of floor specialists in
recent years. goldman sachs has cooperated with the requests.
table of contents
on march30,2004, certain specialist firms on the
nyse, including slks, without admitting or denying the
allegations, entered into a final global settlement with the sec
and the nyse covering certain activities during the years 1999
through 2003. the slks settlement involves, among other things,
(i)findings by the sec and the nyse that slks violated
certain federal securities laws and nyse rules, and in some
cases failed to supervise certain individual specialists, in
connection with trades that allegedly disadvantaged customer
orders, (ii)a cease and desist order against slks,
(iii)a censure of slks, (iv)slks agreement to
pay an aggregate of $45.3million in disgorgement and a
penalty to be used to compensate customers, (v)certain
undertakings with respect to slks systems and procedures,
and (vi)slks retention of an independent consultant
to review and evaluate certain of slks compliance systems,
policies and procedures. comparable findings were made and
sanctions imposed in the settlements with other specialist
firms. the settlement did not resolve the related private civil
actions against slks and other firms or regulatory
investigations involving individuals or conduct on other
exchanges.
slks, spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p. and the goldman
sachs group, inc. are among numerous defendants named in
purported class actions brought beginning in october 2003 on
behalf of investors in the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york alleging violations of the federal
securities laws and state common law in connection with nyse
floor specialist activities. the actions seek unspecified
compensatory damages, restitution and disgorgement on behalf of
purchasers and sellers of unspecified securities between
october17, 1998 and october15,2003. plaintiffs
filed a consolidated amended complaint on
september16,2004. the defendants motion to
dismiss the amended complaint was granted in part and denied in
part by a decision dated december13,2005. on
june28,2007, plaintiffs filed a motion seeking to
certify a class.
spear, leeds& kellogg specialists llc and the goldman
sachs group, inc. are among numerous defendants named in a
purported class action brought in june 2007 on behalf of
investors in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york alleging violations of the federal
antitrust and securities laws, as well as common law, in
connection with execution of transactions through the new york
stock exchanges superdot system. the complaint seeks,
among other things, unspecified treble damages.
treasury
matters
on september4,2003, the sec announced that goldman,
sachs& co. had settled an administrative proceeding
arising from certain trading in u.s.treasury bonds over an
approximately eight-minute period after goldman,
sachs& co. received an october31,2001
telephone call from a washington,d.c.-based political
consultant concerning a forthcoming treasury refunding
announcement. without admitting or denying the allegations,
goldman, sachs& co. consented to the entry of an
order that, among other things, (i)censured goldman,
sachs& co.; (ii)directed goldman,
sachs& co. to cease and desist from committing or
causing any violations of section15(c)(1)(a) and
(c)and 15(f) of, and
rule15c1-2
under, the securities exchange act of 1934; (iii)ordered
goldman, sachs& co. to pay disgorgement and
prejudgment interest in the amount of $1,742,642, and a civil
monetary penalty of $5million; and (iv)directed
goldman, sachs& co. to conduct a review of its
policies and procedures and adopt, implement and maintain
policies and procedures consistent with the order and that
review. goldman, sachs& co. also undertook to pay
$2,562,740 in disgorgement and interest relating to certain
trading in u.s.treasury bond futures during the same
eight-minute period.
goldman, sachs& co. has been named as a defendant in
a purported class action filed on march10,2004 in
the u.s.district court for the northern district of
illinois on behalf of holders of short positions in
30-year
u.s.treasury futures and options on the morning of
october31,2001. the complaint alleges that the firm
purchased
30-year
bonds and futures prior to the treasurys refunding
announcement that morning based on non-public information about
that announcement, and that such purchases increased the costs
of covering such short positions. the complaint also names as
defendants the washington,d.c.-based political consultant
who allegedly was the source of the information, a former
goldman, sachs& co. economist who allegedly received
the information, and
table of contents
another company and one of its employees who also allegedly
received and traded on the information prior to its public
announcement. the complaint alleges violations of the federal
commodities and antitrust laws, as well as illinois statutory
and common law, and seeks, among other things, unspecified
damages including treble damages under the antitrust laws. the
district court dismissed the antitrust and illinois state law
claims but permitted the federal commodities law claims to
proceed. on december20,2006, plaintiff moved for
class certification.
mutual
fundmatters
goldman, sachs& co. and certain mutual fund
affiliates have received subpoenas and requests for information
from various governmental agencies and self-regulatory
organizations including the sec as part of the industry-wide
investigation relating to the practices of mutual funds and
their customers. goldman, sachs& co. and its
affiliates have cooperated with such requests.
refco securities
litigation
goldman, sachs& co. and the other lead underwriters
for the august 2005 initial public offering of
26,500,000shares of common stock of refco inc. are among
the defendants in various putative class actions filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
beginning in october 2005 by investors in refco inc. in response
to certain publicly reported events that culminated in the
october17,2005 filing by refco inc. and certain
affiliates for protection under u.s.bankruptcy laws. the
actions, which have been consolidated, allege violations of the
disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and seek
compensatory damages. in addition to the underwriters, the
consolidated complaint names as defendants refco inc. and
certain of its affiliates, certain officers and directors of
refco inc., thomas h. lee partners, l.p. (which held a majority
of refco inc.s equity through certain funds it manages),
grant thornton (refco inc.s outside auditor), and bawag
p.s.k. bank fur arbeit und wirtschaft und osterreichische
postsparkasse aktiengesellschaft (bawag). lead plaintiffs
entered into a settlement with bawag, which was approved
following certain amendments on june29,2007.
goldman, sachs& co. underwrote 5,639,200shares
of common stock at a price of $22 per share for a total offering
price of approximately $124million.
a purported shareholder derivative action was filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
on november2,2005 on behalf of the goldman sachs
group, inc. against certain of its officers and directors. the
complaint alleges that the individual defendants breached their
fiduciary duties by failing to ensure that adequate due
diligence was conducted in connection with the refco inc.
initial public offering.
goldman, sachs& co. has, together with other
underwriters of the refco inc. initial public offering, received
requests for information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations. goldman, sachs& co. is
cooperating with those requests.
short-selling
litigation
the goldman sachs group, inc., goldman, sachs& co.
and goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p. are among
the numerous financial services firms that have been named as
defendants in a purported class action filed on april12,
2006 in the u.s.district court for the southern district
of new york by customers who engaged in short-selling
transactions in equity securities since
april12,2000. the amended complaint generally
alleges that the customers were charged fees in connection with
the short sales but that the applicable securities were not
necessarily borrowed to effect delivery, resulting in failed
deliveries, and that the defendants conspired to set a minimum
threshold borrowing rate for securities designated as hard to
borrow. the complaint asserts a claim under the federal
antitrust laws, as well as claims under the new york business
law and common law, and seeks treble damages as well as
injunctive relief. defendants motion to dismiss the
complaint was granted by a decision dated
december20,2007. on january 18, 2008, plaintiffs
appealed from this decision.
table of contents
fannie mae
litigation
goldman, sachs& co. was added as a defendant in an
amended complaint filed on august14,2006 in a
purported class action, and the goldman sachs group, inc. and
goldman, sachs& co. were added as defendants in an
amended complaint filed on september1,2006 in a
separate shareholder derivative action, both pending in the
u.s.district court for the district of columbia. the
complaints allegations generally arise from allegations
concerning fannie maes accounting practices and, insofar
as they relate to the goldman sachs defendants, assert
violations of the federal securities laws and common law in
connection with certain fannie mae-sponsored remic transactions
that were allegedly arranged by goldman, sachs& co.
the other defendants include fannie mae, certain of its past and
present officers and directors, accountants and other financial
services firms. on november28,2006, the plaintiffs
in the derivative action voluntarily dismissed the goldman sachs
defendants without prejudice, subject to an agreement to toll
the statute of limitations. by a decision dated
may8,2007, the district court granted goldman,
sachs& co.s motion to dismiss.
the goldman sachs group, inc. was named as a defendant in two
purported derivative actions, and goldman, sachs& co.
is named as a defendant in one of such actions, commenced
beginning on june29,2007 in the u.s.district
court for the district of columbia by fannie mae shareholders on
behalf of fannie mae. the claims against the goldman sachs
defendants are substantively identical to the claims raised in
the previous derivative action which had been voluntarily
dismissed subject to a tolling agreement. both complaints
generally allege that the firms conduct in connection with
the remic transactions constituted aiding and abetting a breach
of fiduciary duty by certain fannie mae officers and directors
as well as a breach of contract. the complaints also name as
defendants certain former officers and directors of fannie mae
as well as an outside accounting firm. the complaints seek,
inter alia, unspecified damages.
general american
litigation
on february13,2007, the liquidators of general
american mutual holding corporation amended a pre-existing
complaint pending in missouri circuit court against one of the
companys former officers to assert new claims against the
goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co. the
amended complaint asserts that the goldman sachs defendants
breached certain duties and violated missouri law in the course
of acting as the companys financial advisor during
1998-1999 in
connection with the exploration of a potential demutualization
and initial public offering, and the ensuing sale of certain
company assets. the complaint seeks compensatory and punitive
damages. on july18,2007, the court denied motions by
the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman, sachs& co.
to dismiss the complaint, and to drop them as parties from the
pre-existing action.
executive
compensation litigation
on march16,2007, the goldman sachs group, inc., its
board of directors, executive officers and members of its
management committee were named as defendants in a purported
shareholder derivative action in the u.s.district court
for the eastern district of new york challenging the sufficiency
of the firms february21,2007 proxy statement
and the compensation of certain employees. the complaint
generally alleges that the proxy statement undervalues stock
option awards disclosed therein, that the recipients received
excessive awards because the proper methodology was not
followed, and that the firms senior management received
excessive compensation, constituting corporate waste. the
complaint seeks, among other things, an injunction against the
2007 annual meeting of shareholders, the voiding of any election
of directors in the absence of an injunction and an equitable
accounting for the allegedly excessive compensation. on
july20,2007, defendants moved to dismiss the
complaint.
on january17, 2008, the goldman sachs group, inc., its
board of directors, executive officers and members of its
management committee were named as defendants in a related
purported
table of contents
shareholder derivative action brought by the same plaintiff in
the same court predicting that the firms 2008 proxy
statement will violate the federal securities laws by
undervaluing certain stock option awards and alleging that
senior management received excessive compensation for 2007. the
complaint seeks, among other things, an injunction against the
distribution of the 2008 proxy statement, the voiding of any
election of directors in the absence of an injunction and an
equitable accounting for the allegedly excessive compensation.
on january25, 2008, the plaintiff moved for a preliminary
injunction to prevent the 2008 proxy statement from using
options valuations that the plaintiff alleges are incorrect and
to require the amendment of sec form4s filed by certain of
the executive officers named in the complaint to reflect the
stock option valuations alleged by the plaintiff. defendants
have yet to respond.
mortgage-related
matters
goldman, sachs& co. and certain of its affiliates,
together with other financial services firms, have received
requests for information from various governmental agencies and
self-regulatory organizations relating to subprime mortgages,
and securitizations, collateralized debt obligations and
synthetic products related to subprime mortgages. goldman,
sachs& co. and its affiliates are cooperating with
the requests.
on january10,2008, the city of cleveland filed an
action in the ohio court of common pleas, cuyahoga county,
against numerous financial institutions, including the goldman
sachs group, inc., alleging that the defendants activities
in connection with securitizations of subprime mortgages created
a public nuisance in cleveland. the complaint seeks,
among other things, unspecified compensatory damages. the
defendants have yet to respond. the action was removed to the
u.s.district court for the northern district of ohio,
eastern division, and on january17, 2008, the city of
cleveland moved to remand the action to state court.
private
equity-sponsored acquisitions litigation
the goldman sachs group, inc. and gs capital
partners are among numerous private equity firms and
investment banks named as defendants in a federal antitrust
action filed in the u.s.district court for the district of
massachusetts in december 2007. the complaint generally alleges
that the defendants have colluded to limit competition in
bidding for private equity-sponsored acquisitions of public
companies, thereby resulting in lower prevailing bids and, by
extension, less consideration for shareholders of those
companies in violation of section1 of the sherman act and
common law.
defendants have yet to respond.
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
there were no matters submitted to a vote of security holders
during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended
november30,2007.
table of contents
executive
officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
set forth below are the name, age, present title, principal
occupation and certain biographical information as of
january28, 2008 for our executive officers, as well as for
edward c. forst, who was an executive officer until
december1, 2007. all of our executive officers have been
appointed by and serve at the pleasure of our board of directors.
lloyd c.
blankfein, 53
mr.blankfein has been our chairman and chief executive
officer since june 2006, and a director since april 2003.
previously, he had been our president and chief operating
officer since january 2004. prior to that, from april 2002 until
january 2004, he was a vice chairman of goldman sachs, with
management responsibility for goldman sachs fixed income,
currency and commodities division (ficc) and equities division.
prior to becoming a vice chairman, he had served as co-head of
ficc since its formation in 1997. from 1994 to 1997, he headed
or co-headed the currency and commodities division.
mr.blankfein is not on the board of any public company
other than goldman sachs. he is affiliated with certain
non-profit organizations, including as a member of the harvard
university committee on university resources, the advisory board
of the tsinghua university school of economics and management
and the governing board of the indian school of business, an
overseer of the weill medical college of cornell university, and
a director of the partnership for new york city and catalyst.
alan m. cohen,
mr.cohen has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our global head of compliance since february 2004.
from 1991 until january 2004, he was a partner in the law firm
of omelveny& myers llp.
gary d. cohn,
mr.cohn has been our president and co-chief operating
officer and a director since june2006. previously, he had
been the co-head of goldman sachs global securities
businesses since january2004. he also had been the co-head
of equities since 2003 and the co-head of ficc since september
2002. from march 2002 to september 2002, he served as co-chief
operating officer of ficc. prior to that, beginning in 1999,
mr.cohn managed the ficc macro businesses. from 1996 to
1999, he was the global head of goldman sachs commodities
business. mr.cohn is not on the board of any public
company other than goldman sachs. he is affiliated with certain
non-profit organizations, including as a member of the treasury
borrowing advisory committee of the securities industry and
financial markets association and as a trustee of the gilmour
academy, the nyu child study center, the nyu hospital, the nyu
medical school, the harlem childrens zone and american
university.
edward c. forst,
mr.forst has been the co-head of our investment management
division since november 2007. prior to that, he had been an
executive vice president of goldman sachs and our chief
administrative officer since february 2004. he also had been our
chief of staff for ficc from november 2003 to february 2004
(after having served in that position earlier from july 2000 to
march2002), our chief of staff for the equities division
from august 2003 to february 2004, and co-head of global credit
markets in ficc from march 2002 to august 2003. prior to july
2000, mr.forst served as co-head of our global bank debt
business. mr.forst served as the chair of the securities
industry and financial markets association through november
2007. he also serves as a trustee of carnegie hall, a non-profit
organization, and as co-chair of the harvard university
committee on student excellence and opportunity.
table of contents
kevin w. kennedy,
mr.kennedy has been our executive vice
president human capital management since december
2001. from 1999 until 2001, he served as a member of the
executive office. from 1994 to 1999, he served as head of the
americas group, in the investment banking division, and, from
1988 to 1994, as head of corporate finance. mr.kennedy is
a life trustee and a former chairman of the board of hamilton
college, a managing director and secretary and treasurer of the
board of the metropolitan opera, a trustee of the new york
public library, chairman of the board of directors of the
wallace foundation and an honorary trustee of the chewonki
foundation.
gregory k. palm,
mr.palm has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs since may 1999, and our general counsel and head or
co-head of the legal department since may 1992.
esta e. stecher,
ms.stecher has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our general counsel and co-head of the legal
department since december 2000. from 1994 to 2000, she was head
of the firms tax department, over which she continues to
have senior oversight responsibility. she is also a trustee of
columbia university.
david a. viniar,
mr.viniar has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our chief financial officer since may 1999. he has
been the head of operations, technology, finance and services
division since december 2002. he was head of the finance
division and co-head of credit risk management and advisory and
firmwide risk from december 2001 to december 2002.
mr.viniar was
co-head of
operations, finance and resources from march 1999 to december
2001. he was chief financial officer of the goldman sachs group,
l.p. from march 1999 to may 1999. from july1998 until
march 1999, he was deputy chief financial officer and from 1994
until july 1998, he was head of finance, with responsibility for
controllers and treasury. from 1992 to 1994, he was head of
treasury and prior to that was in the structured finance
department of investment banking. he also serves on the board of
trustees of union college.
john s. weinberg,
mr.weinberg has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs
since june 2006. he has been
co-head of
goldman sachs investment banking division since december
2002. from january 2002 to december 2002, he was
co-head of
the investment banking division in the americas. prior to that,
he served as
co-head of
the investment banking services department since 1997. he is
affiliated with certain non-profit organizations, including as a
board member at
newyork-presbyterian
hospital, the steppingstone foundation, the greenwich country
day school and community
anti-drug
coalitions of america. mr.weinberg also serves on the
visiting committee for harvard business school.
jon winkelried,
mr.winkelried has been our president and
co-chief
operating officer and a director since june2006.
previously, he had been the
co-head of
goldman sachs investment banking division since january
2005. from 2000 to 2005, he was
co-head of
ficc. from 1999 to 2000, he was head of ficc in europe. from
1995 to 1999, he was responsible for goldman sachs
leveraged finance business. mr.winkelried is not on the
board of any public company other than goldman sachs. he is also
a trustee of the university of chicago.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market on which our common stock is traded is the
nyse. information relating to the high and low sales prices per
share of our common stock, as reported by the consolidated tape
association, for each full quarterly period during fiscal 2006
and 2007 is set forth under the heading supplemental
financial information common stock price range
in partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
as of january18, 2008, there were 7,784holders of
record of our common stock.
during fiscal 2007 and 2006, a dividend of $0.25 per share of
common stock was declared on december14, 2005 and
dividends of $0.35 per share of common stock were declared on
march13,2006, june12, 2006, september11,
2006, december11, 2006, march12, 2007,
june13,2007 and september19, 2007. the holders
of our common stock share proportionately on a per share basis
in all dividends and other distributions on common stock
declared by our board of directors.
the declaration of dividends by goldman sachs is subject to the
discretion of our board of directors. our board of directors
will take into account such matters as general business
conditions, our financial results, capital requirements,
contractual, legal and regulatory restrictions on the payment of
dividends by us to our shareholders or by our subsidiaries to
us, the effect on our debt ratings and such other factors as our
board of directors may deem relevant. see
business regulation in parti,
item1 of the annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of potential regulatory limitations on our
receipt of funds from our regulated subsidiaries.
the table below sets forth the information with respect to
purchases made by or on behalf of the goldman sachs group, inc.
or any affiliated purchaser (as defined in
rule10b-18(a)(3)
under the securities exchange act of 1934), of our common stock
during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended
november30, 2007.
total number of
maximum number
total
average
shares purchased
of shares that may
number
price
as part of publicly
yet be purchased
of shares
paid per
announced plans
under the plans or
period
purchased(2)
share
or
programs(3)
programs(3)
month #1
(september1,2007 to september28,2007)
747,400
$
211.67
747,400
22,242,899
month #2
(september29,2007 to october26,2007)
6,394,800
$
226.22
6,394,800
15,848,099
month #3
(october27,2007 to november30,2007)
4,495,500
$
240.09
4,495,500
11,352,599
total(1)
11,637,700
$
230.64
11,637,700
(1)
goldman sachs generally does not
repurchase shares of its common stock as part of the repurchase
program during self-imposed black-out periods, which
run from the last two weeks of a fiscal quarter through and
including the date of the earnings release for such quarter.
(2)
no shares were purchased other than
through our publicly announced repurchase program during the
fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended november30, 2007.
(3)
on march21, 2000, we
announced that our board of directors had approved a repurchase
program, pursuant to which up to 15million shares of our
common stock may be repurchased. this repurchase program was
increased by an aggregate of 280million shares by
resolutions of our board of directors adopted on june18,
2001, march18,2002, november20,2002,
january30, 2004, january25, 2005, september16,
2005, september11, 2006 and december17,2007.
we use our share repurchase program to help maintain the
appropriate level of common equity and to substantially offset
increases in share count over time resulting from employee
share-based
table of contents
compensation. the repurchase
program is effected primarily through regular open-market
purchases, the amounts and timing of which are determined
primarily by our current and projected capital positions (i.e.,
comparisons of our desired level of capital to our actual level
of capital) but which may also be influenced by general market
conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of our
common stock. taking into account the increased authorization in
december 2007, the total remaining authorization under the
repurchase program was 65,412,649shares as of
january18, 2008; the repurchase program has no set
expiration or termination date.
information relating to compensation plans under which our
equity securities are authorized for issuance is set forth in
partiii, item12 of the annual report on
form10-k.
item6.
selected
financial data
the selected financial data table is set forth under
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
index
page
no.
introduction
executive overview
business environment
certain risk factors that may affect our
business
critical accounting policies
fair value
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
use of estimates
results of operations
financial overview
segment operating results
geographic data
off-balance-sheet arrangements
equity capital
contractual obligations and commitments
risk management
risk management structure
market risk
credit risk
derivatives
liquidity and funding risk
operational risk
recent accounting developments
table of contents
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global investment banking, securities
and investment management firm that provides a wide range of
services worldwide to a substantial and diversified client base
that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments
and
high-net-worth
individuals.
our activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking.we provide a broad range of
investment banking services to a diverse group of corporations,
financial institutions, investment funds, governments and
individuals.
trading and principal investments.we facilitate
client transactions with a diverse group of corporations,
financial institutions, investment funds, governments and
individuals and take proprietary positions through market making
in, trading of and investing in fixed income and equity
products, currencies, commodities and derivatives on these
products. in addition, we engage in market-making and specialist
activities on equities and options exchanges and clear client
transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges
worldwide. in connection with our merchant banking and other
investing activities, we make principal investments directly and
through funds that we raise and manage.
asset management and securities services.we provide
investment advisory and financial planning services and offer
investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
provide prime brokerage services, financing services and
securities lending services to institutional clients, including
hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
unless specifically stated otherwise, all references to 2007,
2006 and 2005 refer to our fiscal years ended, or the dates, as
the context requires, november30, 2007, november24,
2006 and november25, 2005, respectively.
when we use the terms goldman sachs, we,
us and our, we mean the goldman sachs
group, inc. (group inc.), a delaware corporation, and its
consolidated subsidiaries. references herein to the annual
report on
form10-k
are to our annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007.
in this discussion, we have included statements that may
constitute forward-looking statements within the
meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the private securities
litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are
not historical facts but instead represent only our beliefs
regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are
inherently uncertain and outside our control. these statements
include statements other than historical information or
statements of current condition and may relate to our future
plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may
also include statements about the objectives and effectiveness
of our risk management and liquidity policies, statements about
trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses and
statements about our investment banking transaction backlog. by
identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are
alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and
financial condition may differ, possibly materially, from the
anticipated results and financial condition indicated in these
forward-looking statements. important factors that could cause
our actual results and financial condition to differ from those
indicated in these forward-looking statements include, among
others, those discussed below under certain
risk factors that may affect our business as well as
risk factors in parti, item1a of the
annual report on
form10-k
and cautionary statement pursuant to the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995 in parti,
item1 of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
executive
overview
our diluted earnings per common share were $24.73 for 2007
compared with $19.69 for 2006. during 2007, we achieved record
results in the americas, europe and asia, and derived over
one-half of our pre-tax earnings outside of the americas. return
on average tangible common shareholders
equity(1)
was 38.2% and return on average common shareholders equity
was 32.7% for 2007. book value per common share increased 25% to
$90.43 at year end. during 2007, we repurchased
41.2million shares of our common stock for a total cost of
$8.96billion.
in 2007, we generated record diluted earnings per common share,
which exceeded the prior year record results by 26%. each of our
three segments produced record net revenues. the increase in
trading and principal investments reflected higher net revenues
in equities, fixed income, currency and commodities (ficc) and
principal investments. net revenues in equities increased 33%
compared with 2006, reflecting significantly higher net revenues
in both our customer franchise businesses and principal
strategies. during 2007, equities operated in an environment
characterized by strong customer-driven activity, generally
higher equity prices and higher levels of volatility,
particularly during the second half of the year. the increase in
ficc reflected significantly higher net revenues in currencies
and interest rate products. in addition, net revenues in
mortgages were higher despite a significant deterioration in the
mortgage market throughout the year, while net revenues in
credit products were strong, but slightly lower compared with
2006. credit products included substantial gains from equity
investments, including a gain of approximately $900million
related to the disposition of horizon wind energy l.l.c., as
well as a loss of approximately $1billion, net of hedges,
related to non-investment-grade credit origination activities.
during 2007, ficc operated in an environment generally
characterized by strong customer-driven activity and favorable
market opportunities. however, during the year, the mortgage
market experienced significant deterioration and, in the second
half of the year, the broader credit markets were characterized
by wider spreads and reduced levels of liquidity. we continued
to capitalize on trading and investing opportunities for our
clients and ourselves and, accordingly, our market risk
increased, particularly in interest rate and equity products. in
addition, our total assets surpassed $1 trillion during the
year, as we grew our balance sheet in order to support these
opportunities, as well as to support increased activity in
securities services. the increase in principal investments
reflected strong results in both corporate and real estate
investing.
the increase in investment banking reflected a 64% increase in
financial advisory net revenues and a strong performance in our
underwriting business. the increase in financial advisory
primarily reflected growth in industry-wide completed mergers
and acquisitions. the increase in underwriting reflected higher
net revenues in debt underwriting, as leveraged finance activity
was strong during the first half of our fiscal year, while net
revenues in equity underwriting were strong but essentially
unchanged from 2006. our investment banking transaction backlog
at the end of 2007 was higher than it was at the end of
2006.(2)
net revenues in asset management and securities services also
increased. the increase in securities services primarily
reflected significant growth in global customer balances. the
increase in asset management reflected significantly higher
asset management fees, partially offset by significantly lower
incentive fees. during the year, assets under management
increased $192billion, or 28%, to a record
$868billion, including net inflows of $161billion.
(1)
return on average tangible common shareholders equity
(rote) is computed by dividing net earnings applicable to common
shareholders by average monthly tangible common
shareholders equity. see results of
operations financial overview below for
further information regarding our calculation of rote.
(2)
our investment banking transaction backlog represents an
estimate of our future net revenues from investment banking
transactions where we believe that future revenue realization is
more likely than not.
table of contents
in 2008, we will remain focused on our clients, geographic
expansion and the importance of effective risk management. we
continue to see opportunities for growth in the businesses and
geographic areas in which we operate and, in particular, we
believe continued expansion of the economies of brazil, russia,
india and china, as well as those of the middle east, will offer
opportunities for us to increase our presence in those markets.
though we generated particularly strong results in 2007, our
business, by its nature, does not produce predictable earnings.
our results in any given period can be materially affected by
conditions in global financial markets and economic conditions
generally. for a further discussion of the factors that may
affect our future operating results, see
certain risk factors that may affect our
business below as well as risk factors in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
business
environment
as an investment banking, securities and investment management
firm, our businesses are materially affected by conditions in
the financial markets and economic conditions generally, both in
the united states and elsewhere around the world. a favorable
business environment is generally characterized by, among other
factors, high global gross domestic product growth, stable
geopolitical conditions, transparent, liquid and efficient
capital markets, low inflation, high business and investor
confidence and strong business earnings. these factors provide a
positive climate for our investment banking activities, for many
of our trading and investing businesses and for wealth creation,
which contributes to growth in our asset management business.
during the first half of 2007, global economic growth was
generally solid, inflation remained contained, global equity
markets rose and corporate activity levels were strong. however,
during the second half of 2007, significant weakness and
volatility in global credit markets, particularly in the u.s.
and europe, spread to broader financial markets and began to
affect global economic growth. for a further discussion of how
market conditions can affect our businesses, see
certain risk factors that may affect our
business below as well as risk factors in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
a further discussion of the business environment in 2007 is set
forth below.
global.growth in the global economy slowed over the
course of 2007. although the pace of economic growth was solid
through the beginning of our third fiscal quarter, global growth
in the latter part of our fiscal year was impacted by volatility
in the credit markets, particularly in the u.s. and europe, and
accelerated weakness in the u.s. housing market. fixed income
and equity markets experienced high volatility, particularly
during the second half of the year. the u.s. mortgage market
experienced significant deterioration throughout the year,
particularly in subprime loans and securities. the broader
global credit markets were characterized by significant weakness
in the second half of the year, which was evident in the
significant dislocation in money market rates in the u.s. and
europe. the u.s. federal reserve lowered its federal funds
target rate towards the end of our fiscal year, while central
banks in the eurozone, united kingdom, japan and china all
raised rates during the year. oil prices rose significantly
during our fiscal year and, in the currency markets, the u.s.
dollar weakened against most major currencies, particularly
against the euro and the british pound. corporate activity was
generally strong during our fiscal year, reflecting significant
growth in mergers and acquisitions and equity underwritings, as
well as strength in leveraged finance during the first half of
our fiscal year.
united states.real gross domestic product growth in
the u.s. economy slowed to an estimated 2.2% in calendar year
2007, down from 2.9% in 2006. while economic growth was
generally solid during the first nine months of our fiscal year,
activity appeared to decelerate sharply during the fourth
quarter. much of the slowdown was attributable to the housing
market, as sales of new and existing homes and residential real
estate investment declined, as well as to the weakness in credit
markets. growth in industrial production slowed from 2006
levels, reflecting reduced growth in domestic demand, partially
offset by stronger growth in net exports. although business
confidence remained fairly strong, consumer confidence declined
over the course of the year. growth in consumer expenditure was
strong in the first quarter but declined thereafter, as concerns
about the housing market intensified and oil prices rose. the
unemployment rate rose during the second half of our fiscal year
and ended the year higher. the rate of inflation increased
sharply over our fiscal year, as energy prices rose
significantly. measures of core inflation, while slowing from
2006 levels, accelerated towards the end of the year. the u.s.
federal reserve reduced its federal funds target rate by a total
of 75basis points to 4.50% during our fourth quarter, the
first reductions since 2003. beginning in august, the u.s.
federal reserve also took other measures to improve liquidity in
credit markets. although the
10-year u.s.
treasury note yield rose during the first half of our fiscal
year, it subsequently declined as credit concerns took hold, and
ended the year 58 basis points lower at 3.97%. the dow jones
industrial average, the s&p 500 index and the nasdaq
composite index ended our fiscal year higher by 9%, 6% and 8%,
respectively.
table of contents
europe.real gross domestic product growth in the
eurozone economies slowed to an estimated 2.7% in calendar year
2007, down from 2.9% in 2006. industrial production and fixed
investment slowed as the year progressed, while growth in
consumer expenditure was weak throughout the year. surveys of
business and consumer confidence declined. however, the labor
market strengthened, as evidenced by a decline in the
unemployment rate. measures of core inflation increased during
the year. the european central bank (ecb) continued to raise
interest rates, increasing its main refinancing operations rate
by a total of 75 basis points to 4.00% by the end of june. the
ecb left the rate unchanged for the rest of our fiscal year, but
engaged in measures to improve liquidity conditions in the last
four months of the year. in the united kingdom, real gross
domestic product rose by an estimated 3.1% for calendar year
2007, up from 2.9% in 2006, but showed signs of slowing late in
the year due to credit market concerns and a slowdown in the
u.k. housing market. measures of inflation remained elevated
during the year. the bank of england increased interest rates,
raising its official bank rate by a total of 75 basis points to
5.75%. long-term bond yields in both the eurozone and the u.k.
ended the year higher. the euro and british pound appreciated by
11% and 7%, respectively, against the u.s. dollar during our
fiscal year. major european equity markets ended our fiscal year
higher.
asia.in japan, real gross domestic product growth
slowed to an estimated 1.9% in calendar year 2007 from 2.4% in
2006. measures of investment activity in the housing sector and
growth in consumption declined during the year. export growth
remained solid but showed signs of deterioration towards year
end as the environment outside of japan worsened. the rate of
inflation remained near zero percent during the year. the bank
of japan raised its target overnight call rate by 25 basis
points for the second consecutive year, bringing it to 0.50%,
while the yield on
10-year
japanese government bonds declined slightly during our fiscal
year. the yen appreciated by 4% against the u.s. dollar. the
nikkei 225 index rose during the first eight months of our
fiscal year but declined significantly in august, and ended our
fiscal year essentially unchanged.
in china, real gross domestic product growth accelerated to an
estimated 11.4% in calendar year 2007 from 11.1% in 2006, with
continued strength in exports, as demonstrated by chinas
large and growing current account surplus and foreign exchange
reserves. industrial production accelerated during the year,
while domestic demand softened but remained solid. the rate of
inflation increased, particularly during the second half of the
year. the peoples bank of china raised its one-year
benchmark lending rate by a total of 117 basis points to 7.29%
and took additional measures to reduce liquidity in the
financial system. the government continued to allow the steady
appreciation of its currency, which ended our fiscal year nearly
6% higher against the u.s. dollar. elsewhere in asia, real gross
domestic product growth in india slowed to an estimated 8.7% in
calendar year 2007 from 9.4% in 2006, as its currency
strengthened and the central bank tightened monetary policy. the
rate of wholesale inflation fell, but the rate of consumer price
inflation remained elevated. other currencies in the region also
generally appreciated against the u.s. dollar. equity markets
rose sharply across the region, with the shanghai composite
index up 138%, and markets in hong kong, india and south korea
ending the year significantly higher.
other markets.real gross domestic product in brazil
rose by an estimated 5.4% in calendar year 2007, supported by
strong capital inflows, strong demand and rising prices in
commodities, and expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. the
central bank reduced interest rates even as the rate of
inflation rose. in russia, real gross domestic product rose by
an estimated 7.3% in calendar year 2007, supported by strong
household consumption and increased capital investment,
particularly in the first half of the year. the rate of
inflation rose sharply in the latter part of the year. brazilian
and russian equity prices ended our fiscal year significantly
higher.
table of contents
certain risk
factors that may affect our business
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in
our businesses, including market, liquidity, credit,
operational, legal and regulatory risks. for a discussion of how
management seeks to manage some of these risks, see
risk management below. a summary of the
more important factors that could affect our business follows
below. for a further discussion of these and other important
factors that could affect our business, see risk
factors in parti, item1a of the annual report
on
form10-k.
market conditions and market risk.our
businesses are materially affected by conditions in the global
financial markets and economic conditions generally, and these
conditions may change suddenly and dramatically. a favorable
business environment is generally characterized by, among other
factors, high global gross domestic product growth, stable
geopolitical conditions, transparent, liquid and efficient
capital markets, low inflation, high business and investor
confidence, and strong business earnings. unfavorable or
uncertain economic and market conditions, which can be caused
by: outbreaks of hostilities or other geopolitical instability;
declines in economic growth, business activity or investor or
business confidence; limitations on the availability or
increases in the cost of credit and capital; increases in
inflation, interest rates, exchange rate volatility, default
rates or the price of basic commodities; corporate, political or
other scandals that reduce investor confidence in capital
markets; natural disasters or pandemics; or a combination of
these or other factors, have adversely affected, and may
in the future adversely affect, our business and profitability
in many ways, including the following:
increasing or high interest rates and/or widening credit
spreads, especially if such changes are rapid, may create a less
favorable environment for certain of our businesses, and may
affect the fair value of financial instruments that we issue or
hold. for example, beginning in the second half of 2007,
difficulties in the mortgage and broader credit markets resulted
in a relatively sudden and substantial decrease in the
availability of credit and credit spreads widened significantly,
affecting volatility and liquidity in the debt and equity
markets.
we have been committing increasing amounts of capital in many of
our businesses and generally maintain large trading, specialist
and investing positions. market fluctuations and volatility may
adversely affect the value of those positions or may reduce our
willingness to enter into new transactions. conversely, certain
of our trading businesses depend on market volatility to provide
trading and arbitrage opportunities, and decreases in volatility
may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect the results
of these businesses.
increases in interest rates or credit spreads, as well as
limitations on the availability of credit, can affect our
ability to borrow on a secured or unsecured basis, which may
adversely affect our liquidity and results of operations. we
seek to finance our less liquid assets on a secured basis and
disruptions in the credit markets are likely to make it harder
and more expensive to fund these assets. in difficult credit
markets, we may be forced to fund our operations at a higher
cost or we may be unable to raise as much funding as we need to
support our business activities. this could cause us to curtail
our business activities and could increase our cost of funding,
both of which could reduce our profitability.
industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings
and mergers and acquisitions may have an adverse effect on our
revenues and, because we may be unable to reduce expenses
correspondingly, our profit margins. our clients engaging in
mergers and acquisitions often rely on access to the secured and
unsecured credit markets to finance their transactions. the lack
of available credit or increased cost of credit may adversely
affect the size, volume and timing of our clients merger
and acquisition transactions particularly large
transactions and adversely affect our financial
advisory and underwriting businesses.
reductions in the level of the equity markets or increases in
interest rates tend to reduce the value of our clients
portfolios, which in turn may reduce the fees we earn for
managing assets.
table of contents
increases in interest rates or attractive conditions in other
investments could cause our clients to transfer their assets out
of our funds or other products. even in the absence of uncertain
or unfavorable economic or market conditions, investment
performance by our asset management business below the
performance of benchmarks or competitors could result in a
decline in assets under management and in the incentive and
management fees we receive and might make it more difficult to
attract new investors.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant
losses in our market-making, proprietary trading and investing,
block trading, merchant banking, underwriting and lending
businesses. this risk may increase to the extent we expand our
proprietary trading and investing businesses or commit capital
to facilitate customer-driven business.
an increase in market volatility increases our measured risk,
which might cause us to reduce our proprietary positions or to
reduce certain of our business activities. in such
circumstances, we may not be able to reduce our positions or our
exposure in a timely, cost-effective way or in a manner
sufficient to offset the increase in measured risk.
the volume of transactions that we execute for our clients and
as a specialist or market maker may decline, which would reduce
the revenues we receive from commissions and spreads. in our
specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock exchange rules
to maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing shares in
a declining market. this may result in trading losses and an
increased need for liquidity. weakness in global equity markets
and the trading of securities in multiple markets and on
multiple exchanges could adversely impact our trading businesses
and impair the value of our goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets.
liquidity risk.liquidity is essential to our
businesses. our liquidity could be impaired by an inability to
access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an inability to
access funds from our subsidiaries, an inability to sell assets
or redeem our investments, or unforeseen outflows of cash or
collateral. this situation may arise due to circumstances that
we may be unable to control, such as a general market disruption
or an operational problem that affects third parties or us, or
even by the perception among market participants that we are
experiencing greater liquidity risk. the financial instruments
that we hold and the contracts to which we are a party are
increasingly complex, as we employ structured products to
benefit our clients and ourselves, and these complex structured
products often do not have readily available markets to access
in times of liquidity stress. growth of our proprietary
investing activities may lead to situations where the holdings
from these activities represent a significant portion of
specific markets, which could restrict liquidity for our
positions. further, our ability to sell assets may be impaired
if other market participants are seeking to sell similar assets
at the same time, as is likely to occur in a liquidity or other
market crisis. in addition, financial institutions with which we
interact may exercise set-off rights or the right to require
additional collateral, including in difficult market conditions,
which could further impair our access to liquidity.
our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a reduction
in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and
competitive position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our
access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under
certain bilateral provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions,
counterparties could be permitted to terminate contracts with
goldman sachs or require us to post additional collateral.
termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our
liquidity by requiring us to find other sources of financing or
to make significant cash payments or securities movements. for a
discussion of the potential impact on goldman sachs of a
reduction in our credit ratings, see liquidity
and funding risk credit ratings below.
credit risk.the amount and duration of our
credit exposures have been increasing over the past several
years, as has the breadth and size of the entities to which we
have credit exposures. we are exposed to the risk that third
parties that owe us money, securities or other assets will not
perform their obligations. these parties may default on their
obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity,
operational failure or other reasons. we are also subject to the
risk that our rights against
table of contents
third parties may not be enforceable in all circumstances. in
addition, deterioration in the credit quality of third parties
whose securities or obligations we hold could result in losses
and/or adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or
otherwise use those securities or obligations for liquidity
purposes. a significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our
counterparties could also have a negative impact on our results.
while in many cases we are permitted to require additional
collateral for counterparties that experience financial
difficulty, disputes may arise as to the amount of collateral we
are entitled to receive and the value of pledged assets.
in addition, as part of our clearing business, we finance our
client positions, and we could be held responsible for the
defaults or misconduct of our clients. although we regularly
review credit exposures to specific clients and counterparties
and to specific industries, countries and regions that we
believe may present credit concerns, default risk may arise from
events or circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee,
particularly as new business initiatives lead us to transact
with a broader array of clients and expose us to new asset
classes and new markets. in addition, concerns about, or a
default by, one institution could lead to significant liquidity
problems, losses or defaults by other institutions, which in
turn could adversely affect us.
we have experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure to
extend and price credit at levels that may not always fully
compensate us for the risks we take. in particular, corporate
clients sometimes seek to require credit commitments from us in
connection with investment banking and other assignments.
operational risk.shortcomings or failures in our
internal processes, people or systems, or external events could
lead to impairment of our liquidity, financial loss, disruption
of our businesses, liability to clients, regulatory intervention
or reputational damage. our businesses are highly dependent on
our ability to process and monitor, on a daily basis, a large
number of transactions, many of which are highly complex, across
numerous and diverse markets in many currencies. these
transactions, as well as information technology services we
provide to clients, often must adhere to client-specific
guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory standards. despite
the contingency plans and facilities we have in place, our
ability to conduct business may be adversely impacted by a
disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses
and the communities in which we are located. this may include a
disruption involving electrical, communications, transportation
or other services used by us or third parties with which we
conduct business.
legal and regulatory risk.we are subject to
extensive and evolving regulation in jurisdictions around the
world. several of our subsidiaries are subject to regulatory
capital requirements and, as a consolidated supervised entity
(cse), we are subject to minimum capital standards on a
consolidated basis. substantial legal liability or a significant
regulatory action against us could have material adverse
financial effects or cause significant reputational harm to us,
which in turn could seriously harm our business prospects. firms
in the financial services industry have been operating in a
difficult regulatory environment. we face significant legal
risks in our businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of
damages and penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory
proceedings against financial institutions remain high. for a
discussion of how we account for our legal and regulatory
exposures, see use of estimates below.
table of contents
critical
accounting policies
fair
value
the use of fair value to measure financial instruments, with
related unrealized gains or losses generally recognized in
trading and principal investments in our
consolidated statements of earnings, is fundamental to our
financial statements and our risk management processes and is
our most critical accounting policy. the fair value of a
financial instrument is the amount that would be received to
sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date
(the exit price). instruments that we own (long positions) are
marked to bid prices, and instruments that we have sold, but not
yet purchased (short positions) are marked to offer prices.
we adopted statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)
no.157, fair value measurements, as of the
beginning of 2007. see notes2 and 3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k
for further information on sfasno.157.
in determining fair value, we separate our financial
instruments, owned at fair value and financial
instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
into two categories: cash instruments and derivative contracts,
as set forth in the following table:
financial
instruments by category
(in
millions)
as of november
financial
financial
financial
instruments
financial
instruments
instruments
sold, but not yet
instruments
sold, but not yet
owned, at
purchased, at
owned, at
purchased, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
cash trading instruments
$
324,181
$
112,018
$
253,056
$
87,244
icbc
6,807
(2)
5,194
(2)
smfg(1)
4,060
3,627
(5)
4,505
3,065
(5)
other principal investments
11,933
(3)
4,263
(3)
principal investments
22,800
3,627
13,962
3,065
cash instruments
346,981
115,645
267,018
90,309
exchange-traded
13,541
12,280
14,407
13,851
over-the-counter
92,073
87,098
53,136
51,645
derivative contracts
105,614
(4)
99,378
(6)
67,543
(4)
65,496
(6)
total
$
452,595
$
215,023
$
334,561
$
155,805
(1)
the fair value of our japanese
yen-denominated investment in the convertible preferred stock of
sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg) includes the effect
of foreign exchange revaluation, for which we maintain an
economic currency hedge.
(2)
includes interests of
$4.30billion and $3.28billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively, held by investment funds
managed by goldman sachs. the fair value of our investment in
the ordinary shares of industrial and commercial bank of china
limited (icbc), which trade on the stock exchange of hong kong,
includes the effect of foreign exchange revaluation for which we
maintain an economic currency hedge.
table of contents
(3)
the following table sets forth the
principal investments (in addition to our investments in icbc
and smfg) included within the principal investments component of
our trading and principal investments segment:
as of november
corporate
real estate
total
corporate
real estate
total
(in millions)
private
$
7,297
$
2,361
$
9,658
$
2,741
$
$
3,296
public
2,208
2,275
total
$
9,505
$
2,428
$
11,933
$
3,675
$
$
4,263
(4)
net of cash received pursuant to
credit support agreements of $59.05billion and
$24.06billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively.
(5)
represents an economic hedge on the
shares of common stock underlying our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg.
(6)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit
support agreements of $27.76billion and
$16.00billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively.
cash instruments.cash instruments include cash
trading instruments, public principal investments and private
principal investments.
cash trading instruments.our cash trading
instruments are generally valued using quoted market prices in
active markets, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative
pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency.
the types of instruments valued based on quoted market prices in
active markets include most u.s. government and agency
securities, many other sovereign government obligations, active
listed equities and most money market securities.
the types of instruments valued based on quoted prices in
markets that are not active, broker or dealer quotations, or
alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price
transparency include most investment-grade and high-yield
corporate bonds, most mortgage products, certain corporate bank
and bridge loans, less liquid listed equities, state, municipal
and provincial obligations, most physical commodities and
certain loan commitments.
certain cash trading instruments trade infrequently and
therefore have little or no price transparency. such instruments
include private equity and real estate fund investments, certain
corporate bank and bridge loans, less liquid mortgage whole
loans, distressed debt instruments and certain loan commitments.
the transaction price is initially used as the best estimate of
fair value. accordingly, when a pricing model is used to value
such an instrument, the model is adjusted so that the model
value at inception equals the transaction price. this valuation
is adjusted only when changes to inputs and assumptions are
corroborated by evidence such as transactions in similar
instruments, completed or pending third-party transactions in
the underlying investment or comparable entities, subsequent
rounds of financing, recapitalizations and other transactions
across the capital structure, offerings in the equity or debt
capital markets, and changes in financial ratios or cash flows.
for positions that are not traded in active markets or are
subject to transfer restrictions, valuations are adjusted to
reflect illiquidity and/or non-transferability, and such
adjustments are generally based on available market evidence. in
the absence of such evidence, managements best estimate is
used.
public principal investments.our public principal
investments held within the principal investments component of
our trading and principal investments segment tend to be large,
concentrated holdings resulting from initial public offerings or
other corporate transactions, and are valued based on quoted
market prices. for positions that are not traded in active
markets or are subject to transfer restrictions, valuations are
adjusted to reflect illiquidity
and/or
non-transferability, and such adjustments are generally based on
available market evidence. in the absence of such evidence,
managements best estimate is used.
table of contents
our most significant public principal investment is our
investment in the ordinary shares of icbc. our investment in
icbc is valued using the quoted market prices adjusted for
transfer restrictions. the ordinary shares acquired from icbc
are subject to transfer restrictions that, among other things,
prohibit any sale, disposition or other transfer until
april28, 2009. from april28, 2009 to
october20, 2009, we may transfer up to 50% of the
aggregate ordinary shares of icbc that we owned as of
october20, 2006. we may transfer the remaining shares
after october20, 2009. a portion of our interest is held
by investment funds managed by goldman sachs.
we also have an investment in the convertible preferred stock of
smfg. this investment is valued using a model that is
principally based on smfgs common stock price. as of
november 2007, the conversion price of our smfg convertible
preferred stock into shares of smfg common stock was
318,800. this price is subject to downward adjustment if
the price of smfg common stock at the time of conversion is less
than the conversion price (subject to a floor of 105,100).
as a result of downside protection on the conversion stock
price, the relationship between changes in the fair value of our
investment and changes in smfgs common stock price would
be nonlinear for a significant decline in the smfg common stock
price. as of november 2007, we had hedged approximately 90% of
the common stock underlying our investment in smfg and there
were no restrictions on our ability to hedge the remainder.
private principal investments.our private principal
investments held within the principal investments component of
our trading and principal investments segment include
investments in private equity, debt and real estate, primarily
held through investment funds. by their nature, these
investments have little or no price transparency. we value such
instruments initially at transaction price and adjust valuations
when evidence is available to support such adjustments. such
evidence includes transactions in similar instruments, completed
or pending third-party transactions in the underlying investment
or comparable entities, subsequent rounds of financing,
recapitalizations and other transactions across the capital
structure, offerings in the equity or debt capital markets, and
changes in financial ratios or cash flows.
derivative contracts.derivative contracts can be
exchange-traded or over-the-counter (otc). we generally value
exchange-traded derivatives within portfolios using models which
calibrate to market clearing levels and eliminate timing
differences between the closing price of the
exchange-traded
derivatives and their underlying cash instruments.
otc derivatives are valued using market transactions and other
market evidence whenever possible, including market-based inputs
to models, model calibration to market clearing transactions,
broker or dealer quotations or alternative pricing sources with
reasonable levels of price transparency. where models are used,
the selection of a particular model to value an otc derivative
depends upon the contractual terms of, and specific risks
inherent in, the instrument as well as the availability of
pricing information in the market. we generally use similar
models to value similar instruments. valuation models require a
variety of inputs, including contractual terms, market prices,
yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility, prepayment
rates and correlations of such inputs. for otc derivatives that
trade in liquid markets, such as generic forwards, swaps and
options, model inputs can generally be verified and model
selection does not involve significant management judgment.
certain otc derivatives trade in less liquid markets with
limited pricing information, and the determination of fair value
for these derivatives is inherently more difficult. where we do
not have corroborating market evidence to support significant
model inputs and cannot verify the model to market transactions,
transaction price is initially used as the best estimate of fair
value. accordingly, when a pricing model is used to value such
an instrument, the model is adjusted so that the model value at
inception equals the transaction price. subsequent to initial
recognition, we only update valuation inputs when corroborated
by evidence such as similar market transactions, third-party
table of contents
pricing services and/or broker or dealer quotations, or other
empirical market data. in circumstances where we cannot verify
the model value to market transactions, it is possible that a
different valuation model could produce a materially different
estimate of fair value. see credit
risk derivatives below for further information
on our otc derivatives.
when appropriate, valuations are adjusted for various factors
such as liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations.
such adjustments are generally based on available market
evidence. in the absence of such evidence, managements
best estimate is used.
fair value hierarchy level3
assets.sfasno.157 establishes a fair value
hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques
used to measure fair value. the objective of a fair value
measurement is to determine the price that would be received to
sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date
(an exit price). the hierarchy gives the highest priority to
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
or liabilities (level1 measurements) and the lowest
priority to unobservable inputs (level3 measurements).
assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on
the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value
measurement. see notes2 and 3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k
for further information regarding sfasno.157.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the fair values of assets
classified as level3 within the fair value hierarchy,
along with a brief description of the valuation technique for
each type of asset:
level3
assets at fair value
(in
millions)
as of
valuation
description
november 2007
technique
private equity and real estate fund
investments(1)
$18,006
initially valued at transaction price. subsequently valued based
on third-party investments, pending transactions or changes in
financial ratios (e.g., earnings multiples) and discounted cash
flows.
bank
loans(2)
13,334
initially valued at transaction price. subsequently valued using
market data for similar instruments (e.g., recent transactions
or broker quotes), comparisons to benchmark derivative indices
or movements in underlying credit spreads.
corporate debt securities and other debt
obligations(3)
6,111
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities
loans and securities backed by commercial real
estate(4)
7,410
initially valued at transaction price. subsequently valued using
transactions for similar instruments and discounted cash flow
techniques (calibrated to trading activity, where applicable).
loans and securities backed by residential real
estate(5)
2,484
initially valued at transaction price. subsequently valued by
comparison to transactions in instruments with similar
collateral and risk profiles, discounted cash flow techniques,
option adjusted spread analyses, and hypothetical securitization
analyses.
loan
portfolios(6)
6,106
initially valued at transaction price. subsequently valued using
transactions for similar instruments and discounted cash flow
techniques.
cash instruments
53,451
derivative contracts
15,700
valuation models are calibrated to initial trade price.
subsequent valuations are based on observable inputs to the
valuation model (e.g., interest rates, credit spreads,
volatilities, etc.). model inputs are changed only when
corroborated by market data.
total level3 assets at fair value
69,151
level3 assets for which we do not
bear economic
exposure(7)
(14,437
)
level3 assets for which we bear economic exposure
$54,714
(1)
includes $7.06billion of
assets for which we do not bear economic exposure. also includes
$2.02billion of real estate fund investments.
(2)
includes mezzanine financing,
leveraged loans arising from capital market transactions and
other corporate bank debt.
(3)
includes $2.49billion of
collateralized debt obligations (cdos) backed by corporate
obligations.
(4)
loans and securities backed by
commercial real estate were $19.02billion, of which
$7.41billion were classified as level3.
(5)
includes subprime mortgage exposure
of $507million, including $316million of cdos backed
by subprime mortgages.
(6)
consists of acquired portfolios of
distressed loans. these loans are primarily backed by commercial
and residential real estate collateral.
(7)
we do not bear economic exposure to
these level3 assets as they are financed by nonrecourse
debt, attributable to minority investors or attributable to
employee interests in certain consolidated funds.
table of contents
subprime mortgage exposure.we securitize,
underwrite and make markets in subprime mortgages. as of
november 2007, the fair value of our long position in subprime
mortgage cash instruments was $2.11billion (of which
$507million was classified as level3 within the fair
value hierarchy), including $316million of collateralized
debt obligations (cdos) backed by subprime mortgages. at any
point in time, we may use cash instruments as well as
derivatives to manage our long or short risk position in the
subprime mortgage market.
other financial assets and financial
liabilities.in addition to financial
instruments owned, at fair value and financial
instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, we
have elected to account for certain of our other financial
assets and financial liabilities at fair value under
sfasno.155, accounting for certain hybrid
financial instruments an amendment of fasb
statements no.133 and 140, or
sfasno.159, the fair value option for
financial assets and financial liabilities. such financial
assets and financial liabilities include (i)certain
unsecured
short-term
borrowings, consisting of all promissory notes and commercial
paper and certain hybrid financial instruments;
(ii)certain other secured financings, primarily transfers
accounted for as financings rather than sales under
sfasno.140 and debt raised through our william
street program; (iii)certain unsecured long-term
borrowings, including prepaid physical commodity transactions;
(iv)resale and repurchase agreements; (v)securities
borrowed and loaned within trading and principal investments,
consisting of our matched book and certain firm financing
activities; (vi)corporate loans, loan commitments and
certificates of deposit issued by goldman sachs bank usa (gs
bank usa) as well as securities held by gs bank usa (previously
accounted for as available-for-sale); (vii)receivables
from customers and counterparties arising from transfers
accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases under
sfasno.140; and (viii)in general, investments
acquired after the adoption of sfasno.159 where we
have significant influence over the investee and would otherwise
apply the equity method of accounting. see
recent accounting developments below for
a discussion of the impact of adopting sfasno.159.
controls over valuation of financial
instruments.a control infrastructure,
independent of the trading and investing functions, is
fundamental to ensuring that our financial instruments are
appropriately valued and that fair value measurements are
reliable. this is particularly important where prices or
valuations that require inputs are less observable.
we employ an oversight structure that includes appropriate
segregation of duties. senior management, independent of the
trading and investing functions, is responsible for the
oversight of control and valuation policies and for reporting
the results of these policies to our audit committee. we seek to
maintain the necessary resources to ensure that control
functions are performed to the highest standards. we employ
procedures for the approval of new transaction types and
markets, price verification, review of daily profit and loss,
and review of valuation models by personnel with appropriate
technical knowledge of relevant products and markets. these
procedures are performed by personnel independent of the trading
and investing functions. for trading and principal investments
where prices or valuations that require inputs are less
observable, we employ, where possible, procedures that include
comparisons with similar observable positions, analysis of
actual to projected cash flows, comparisons with subsequent
sales and discussions with senior business leaders. see
market risk below for a further
discussion of how we manage the risks inherent in our trading
and principal investing businesses.
table of contents
goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets
as a result of our acquisitions, principally slk llc (slk) in
2000, the ayco company, l.p. (ayco) in 2003 and our variable
annuity and life insurance business in 2006, we have acquired
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. goodwill is the
cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of net
assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the
acquisition date.
goodwill.we test the goodwill in each of our
operating segments, which are components one level below our
three business segments, for impairment at least annually in
accordance with sfasno.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, by comparing the estimated fair value
of each operating segment with its estimated net book value. we
derive the fair value of each of our operating segments
primarily based on price-earnings and price-book multiples. we
derive the net book value of our operating segments by
estimating the amount of shareholders equity required to
support the activities of each operating segment. our last
annual impairment test was performed during our 2007 fourth
quarter and no impairment was identified.
the following table sets forth the carrying value of our
goodwill by operating segment:
goodwill by
operating segment
(in
millions)
as of november
investment banking
financial advisory
$
$
underwriting
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities(1)
2,381
2,381
principal investments
asset management and securities services
asset
management(2)
securities services
total
$
3,321
$
3,184
(1)
primarily related to slk.
(2)
primarily related to ayco. the
increase in goodwill from november 2006 relates to our
acquisition of macquarieimm investment
management.
identifiable intangible assets.we amortize our
identifiable intangible assets over their estimated useful lives
in accordance with sfasno.142, and test for
potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying
value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144, accounting for the impairment or
disposal of long-lived assets. an impairment loss,
calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value
and the carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized
if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to
the asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying
value.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the carrying value and range of
remaining useful lives of our identifiable intangible assets by
major asset class:
identifiable
intangible assets by asset class
($ in
millions)
as of november
range of estimated
remaining useful
carrying
lives
carrying
value
(in years)
value
customer
lists(1)
$
3  18
$
new york stock exchange (nyse) specialist rights
insurance-related
assets(2)
exchange-traded fund (etf) specialist rights
power
contracts(3)
1  18
other(4)
1  5
total
$
1,771
$
2,502
(1)
primarily includes our clearance
and execution and nasdaq customer lists related to slk and
financial counseling customer lists related to ayco.
(2)
consists of the value of business
acquired (voba) and deferred acquisition costs (dac). voba
represents the present value of estimated future gross profits
of the variable annuity and life insurance business. dac results
from commissions paid by goldman sachs to the primary insurer
(ceding company) on life and annuity reinsurance agreements as
compensation to place the business with us and to cover the
ceding companys acquisition expenses. voba and dac are
amortized over the estimated life of the underlying contracts
based on estimated gross profits, and amortization is adjusted
based on actual experience. the seven-year useful life
represents the weighted average remaining amortization period of
the underlying contracts (certain of which extend for
approximately 30years).
(3)
the reduction in power contracts
from november 2006 is due to the sale of the majority of our
ownership interests in 14 power generation facilities during
2007.
(4)
primarily includes marketing and
technology-related assets.
a prolonged period of weakness in global equity markets and the
trading of securities in multiple markets and on multiple
exchanges could adversely impact our businesses and impair the
value of our goodwill and/or identifiable intangible assets. in
addition, certain events could indicate a potential impairment
of our identifiable intangible assets, including
(i)changes in market structure that could adversely affect
our specialist businesses (see discussion below), (ii)an
adverse action or assessment by a regulator, or
(iii)adverse actual experience on the contracts in our
variable annuity and life insurance business.
during the fourth quarter of 2007, as a result of continuing
weak operating results in our nyse specialist business, we
tested our nyse specialist rights for impairment in accordance
with sfasno.144, accounting for the impairment
or disposal of long-lived assets. under
sfasno.144, an impairment loss is recognized if the
carrying amount of our nyse specialist rights exceeds the
projected undiscounted cash flows of the business over the
estimated remaining useful life of our nyse specialist rights.
projected undiscounted cash flows exceeded the carrying amount
of our nyse specialist rights, and accordingly, we did not
record an impairment loss.
table of contents
we expect that the nyse will enact numerous rule changes in 2008
that will further align its model with investor requirements for
speed and efficiency of execution and will establish specialists
as designated market makers (dmms). as dmms, specialists will
retain their obligation to commit capital but for the first
time, specialists will be able to trade on parity with other
market participants. in addition, we understand that the nyse
plans to introduce a reserve order system that will allow for
anonymous trade execution and is expected to increase liquidity
and market share. the new rules are expected to bolster the
nyses competitive position by simplifying trading and
advancing the nyses goal of increasing execution speeds.
in projecting the undiscounted cash flows of the business for
the purpose of performing our impairment test, we made several
important assumptions about the potential beneficial effects of
the expected rule and market structure changes described above.
specifically, we assumed that:
overall equity trading volumes will continue to grow at a rate
consistent with recent historical trends;
the nyse will be able to recapture approximately one-half of the
market share that it lost in 2007; and
we will increase the market share of our nyse specialist
business and, as a dmm, the profitability of each share traded.
there can be no assurance that the assumptions, rule or
structure changes described above will result in sufficient cash
flows to avoid future impairment of our nyse specialist rights.
as of november30, 2007, the carrying value of our nyse
specialist rights was $502million. to the extent that
there were to be an impairment in the future, it could result in
a significant writedown in the carrying value of these
specialist rights.
use of
estimates
the use of generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make certain estimates and assumptions. in
addition to the estimates we make in connection with fair value
measurements and the accounting for goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, the use of estimates and assumptions is also
important in determining provisions for potential losses that
may arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings and tax
audits.
we estimate and provide for potential losses that may arise out
of litigation and regulatory proceedings and tax audits to the
extent that such losses are probable and can be estimated, in
accordance with sfasno.5, accounting for
contingencies. significant judgment is required in making
these estimates and our final liabilities may ultimately be
materially different. our total estimated liability in respect
of litigation and regulatory proceedings is determined on a
case-by-case
basis and represents an estimate of probable losses after
considering, among other factors, the progress of each case or
proceeding, our experience and the experience of others in
similar cases or proceedings, and the opinions and views of
legal counsel. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the
outcome of our litigation and regulatory matters, particularly
in cases or proceedings in which substantial or indeterminate
damages or fines are sought, we cannot estimate losses or ranges
of losses for cases or proceedings where there is only a
reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred. see
legal proceedings in parti,
item3 of the annual report on
form10-k,
for information on our judicial, regulatory and arbitration
proceedings.
table of contents
results of
operations
the composition of our net revenues has varied over time as
financial markets and the scope of our operations have changed.
the composition of net revenues can also vary over the shorter
term due to fluctuations in u.s. and global economic and market
conditions. see certain risk factors that may
affect our business above, and risk factors in
parti, item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
financial
overview
the following table sets forth an overview of our financial
results:
financial
overview
($ in millions, except per share amounts)
year ended november
net revenues
$
45,987
$
37,665
$
25,238
pre-tax earnings
17,604
14,560
8,273
net earnings
11,599
9,537
5,626
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
11,407
9,398
5,609
diluted earnings per common share
24.73
19.69
11.21
return on average common shareholders equity
(1)
32.7
%
32.8
%
21.8
%
return on average tangible common shareholders equity
(2)
38.2
%
39.8
%
26.7
%
(1)
return on average common shareholders equity is computed
by dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by
average monthly common shareholders equity.
(2)
tangible common shareholders equity equals total
shareholders equity less preferred stock, goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, excluding power contracts.
identifiable intangible assets associated with power contracts
are not deducted from total shareholders equity because,
unlike other intangible assets, less than 50% of these assets
are supported by common shareholders equity.
management believes that return on average tangible common
shareholders equity (rote) is meaningful because it
measures the performance of businesses consistently, whether
they were acquired or developed internally. rote is computed by
dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by
average monthly tangible common shareholders equity.
the following table sets forth a reconciliation of average total
shareholders equity to average tangible common
shareholders equity:
average for the
year ended november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
37,959
$
31,048
$
26,264
preferred stock
(3,100
)
(2,400
)
(538
)
common shareholders equity
$
34,859
$
28,648
$
25,726
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(4,971
)
(5,013
)
(4,737
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$
29,888
$
23,635
$
20,989
table of contents
net
revenues
2007 versus 2006.our net revenues were
$45.99billion in 2007, an increase of 22% compared with
2006, reflecting significantly higher net revenues in trading
and principal investments and investment banking, and higher net
revenues in asset management and securities services. the
increase in trading and principal investments reflected higher
net revenues in equities, ficc and principal investments. net
revenues in equities increased 33% compared with 2006,
reflecting significantly higher net revenues in both our
customer franchise businesses and principal strategies. during
2007, equities operated in an environment characterized by
strong customer-driven activity, generally higher equity prices
and higher levels of volatility, particularly during the second
half of the year. the increase in ficc reflected significantly
higher net revenues in currencies and interest rate products. in
addition, net revenues in mortgages were higher despite a
significant deterioration in the mortgage market throughout the
year, while net revenues in credit products were strong, but
slightly lower compared with 2006. credit products included
substantial gains from equity investments, including a gain of
approximately $900million related to the disposition of
horizon wind energy l.l.c., as well as a loss of approximately
$1billion, net of hedges, related to non-investment-grade
credit origination activities. during 2007, ficc operated in an
environment generally characterized by strong customer-driven
activity and favorable market opportunities. however, during the
year, the mortgage market experienced significant deterioration
and, in the second half of the year, the broader credit markets
were characterized by wider spreads and reduced levels of
liquidity. the increase in principal investments reflected
strong results in both corporate and real estate investing.
the increase in investment banking reflected a 64% increase in
financial advisory net revenues and a strong performance in our
underwriting business. the increase in financial advisory
primarily reflected growth in industry-wide completed mergers
and acquisitions. the increase in underwriting reflected higher
net revenues in debt underwriting, as leveraged finance activity
was strong during the first half of our fiscal year, while net
revenues in equity underwriting were strong but essentially
unchanged from 2006.
net revenues in asset management and securities services also
increased. the increase in securities services primarily
reflected significant growth in global customer balances. the
increase in asset management reflected significantly higher
asset management fees, partially offset by significantly lower
incentive fees. during the year, assets under management
increased $192billion, or 28%, to a record
$868billion, including net inflows of $161billion.
2006 versus 2005.our net revenues were
$37.67billion in 2006, an increase of 49% compared with
2005, reflecting significantly higher net revenues in trading
and principal investments, investment banking, and asset
management and securities services. the increase in trading and
principal investments reflected significantly higher net
revenues in ficc, equities and principal investments. the
increase in ficc reflected particularly strong performances
across all major businesses. during 2006, ficc operated in an
environment characterized by strong customer-driven activity and
favorable market opportunities. in addition, corporate credit
spreads tightened, the yield curve flattened and volatility
levels were generally low in interest rate and currency markets.
the increase in equities primarily reflected significantly
higher net revenues in our customer franchise businesses. during
2006, equities operated in a favorable environment characterized
by strong customer-driven activity, generally higher equity
prices and favorable market opportunities, although volatility
levels were generally low. the increase in principal investments
reflected a significant gain related to our investment in the
ordinary shares of icbc and higher gains and overrides from
other principal investments, partially offset by a smaller, but
still significant, gain related to our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg.
the increase in investment banking was due to significantly
higher net revenues in underwriting and financial advisory, as
we benefited from strong client activity levels, reflecting
favorable equity and financing markets, strong ceo confidence
and growth in financial sponsor activity.
table of contents
the increase in asset management and securities services was
primarily due to higher assets under management and
significantly higher incentive fees, as well as significantly
higher global customer balances in securities services. assets
under management increased $144billion or 27% to a record
$676billion, including net asset inflows of
$94billion during 2006.
operating
expenses
our operating expenses are primarily influenced by compensation,
headcount and levels of business activity. a substantial portion
of our compensation expense represents discretionary bonuses
which are significantly impacted by, among other factors, the
level of net revenues, prevailing labor markets, business mix
and the structure of our share-based compensation programs. for
2007, our ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues was
43.9% compared with 43.7% for 2006.
the following table sets forth our operating expenses and number
of employees:
operating
expenses and employees
($ in
millions)
year ended november
compensation and benefits
(1)
$
20,190
$
16,457
$
11,758
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
2,758
1,985
1,416
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
cost of power generation
other expenses
1,326
1,132
total non-compensation expenses
8,193
6,648
5,207
total operating expenses
$
28,383
$
23,105
$
16,965
employees at year end
(2)
30,522
26,467
23,623
(1)
compensation and benefits includes
$168million, $259million and $137million for
the years ended november 2007, november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively, attributable to consolidated entities held for
investment purposes. consolidated entities held for investment
purposes are entities that are held strictly for capital
appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and are engaged in
activities that are not closely related to our principal
businesses.
(2)
excludes 4,572, 3,868 and 7,382
employees as of november 2007, november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively, of consolidated entities held for investment
purposes (see footnote 1 above).
table of contents
the following table sets forth non-compensation expenses of
consolidated entities held for investment purposes and our
remaining non-compensation expenses by line item:
non-compensation
expenses
(in
millions)
year ended november
non-compensation expenses of consolidated
investments(1)
$
$
$
non-compensation expenses excluding consolidated investments
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
2,758
1,985
1,416
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
cost of power generation
other expenses
1,099
subtotal
7,747
6,147
4,942
total non-compensation expenses, as reported
$
8,193
$
6,648
$
5,207
(1)
consolidated entities held for investment purposes are entities
that are held strictly for capital appreciation, have a defined
exit strategy and are engaged in activities that are not closely
related to our principal businesses. for example, these
investments include consolidated entities that hold real estate
assets, such as hotels, but exclude investments in entities that
primarily hold financial assets. we believe that it is
meaningful to review non-compensation expenses excluding
expenses related to these consolidated entities in order to
evaluate trends in non-compensation expenses related to our
principal business activities. revenues related to such entities
are included in trading and principal investments in
the consolidated statements of earnings.
2007 versus 2006.operating expenses were
$28.38billion for 2007, 23% higher than 2006. compensation
and benefits expenses of $20.19billion increased 23%
compared with 2006, reflecting increased discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels. the ratio of
compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2007 was 43.9%
compared with 43.7% for 2006. employment levels increased 15%
compared with november 2006.
non-compensation expenses of $8.19billion for 2007
increased 23% compared with 2006, primarily attributable to
higher levels of business activity and continued geographic
expansion.
one-half of
this increase was attributable to brokerage, clearing, exchange
and distribution fees, principally reflecting higher transaction
volumes in equities. other expenses, professional fees and
communications and technology expenses also increased, primarily
due to higher levels of business activity. occupancy and
depreciation and amortization expenses included exit costs of
$128million related to the firms office space.
2006 versus 2005.operating expenses were
$23.11billion for 2006, 36% higher than 2005. compensation
and benefits expenses of $16.46billion increased 40%
compared with 2005, primarily reflecting increased discretionary
compensation due to higher net revenues, and increased levels of
employment. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net
revenues for 2006 was 43.7% compared with 46.6% for 2005. this
lower ratio primarily reflected our strong net revenues in 2006.
employment levels increased 12% compared with november 2005.
table of contents
in the first quarter of 2006, we adopted
sfasno.123-r,
which requires that share-based awards granted to
retirement-eligible employees be expensed in the year of grant.
in addition to expensing current year awards, prior year awards
must continue to be amortized over the relevant service period.
therefore, our compensation and benefits in 2006 included both
amortization of prior year share-based awards held by employees
that were retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
and new awards granted to those employees.
compensation and benefits expenses in 2006 included
$637million in continued amortization of prior year awards
held by employees that were retirement-eligible on the date of
adoption of
sfasno.123-r.
this amount represents the majority of the expense to be
recognized with respect to these awards.
non-compensation expenses of $6.65billion for 2006
increased 28% compared with 2005. excluding non-compensation
expenses related to consolidated entities held for investment
purposes, non-compensation expenses were 24% higher than 2005,
primarily due to higher brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees in equities and ficc, and increased other
expenses, primarily due to costs related to our insurance
business, which was acquired in 2006. in addition, market
development costs and professional fees were higher, reflecting
increased levels of business activity, and occupancy expenses
increased, primarily reflecting new office space and higher
facility expenses.
provision for
taxes
the effective income tax rate was 34.1% for 2007, down from
34.5% for 2006, primarily due to changes in the geographic mix
of earnings. the effective income tax rate was 34.5% for 2006,
up from 32.0% for 2005. the increase in the effective income tax
rate for 2006 compared with 2005 was primarily related to a
reduction in the impact of permanent benefits due to higher
levels of earnings in 2006 and audit settlements in 2005.
our effective income tax rate can vary from period to period
depending on, among other factors, the geographic and business
mix of our earnings, the level of our pre-tax earnings, the
level of our tax credits and the effect of tax audits. certain
of these and other factors, including our history of pre-tax
earnings, are taken into account in assessing our ability to
realize our net deferred tax assets. see note14 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our provision for taxes.
table of contents
segment operating
results
the following table sets forth the net revenues, operating
expenses and pre-tax earnings of our segments:
segment operating
results
(in
millions)
year ended november
investment
net revenues
$
7,555
$
5,629
$
3,671
banking
operating expenses
4,985
4,062
3,258
pre-tax earnings
$
2,570
$
1,567
$
trading and principal
net revenues
$
31,226
$
25,562
$
16,818
investments
operating expenses
17,998
14,962
10,600
pre-tax earnings
$
13,228
$
10,600
$
6,218
asset management and
net revenues
$
7,206
$
6,474
$
4,749
securities services
operating expenses
5,363
4,036
3,070
pre-tax earnings
$
1,843
$
2,438
$
1,679
total
net revenues
$
45,987
$
37,665
$
25,238
operating expenses
(1)
28,383
23,105
16,965
pre-tax earnings
$
17,604
$
14,560
$
8,273
(1)
operating expenses include net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory proceedings
of $37million, $45million and $37million for
the years ended november 2007, november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively, that have not been allocated to our segments.
net revenues in our segments include allocations of interest
income and interest expense to specific securities, commodities
and other positions in relation to the cash generated by, or
funding requirements of, such underlying positions. see
note16 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our business segments.
the cost drivers of goldman sachs taken as a whole
compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of our business
segments. compensation and benefits expenses within our segments
reflect, among other factors, the overall performance of goldman
sachs as well as the performance of individual business units.
consequently, pre-tax margins in one segment of our business may
be significantly affected by the performance of our other
business segments. a discussion of segment operating results
follows.
table of contents
investment
banking
our investment banking segment is divided into two components:
financial advisory.financial advisory
includes advisory assignments with respect to mergers and
acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities,
restructurings and
spin-offs.
underwriting.underwriting includes public
offerings and private placements of a wide range of securities
and other financial instruments.
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
investment banking segment:
investment
banking operating results
(in
millions)
year ended november
financial advisory
$
4,222
$
2,580
$
1,905
equity underwriting
1,382
1,365
debt underwriting
1,951
1,684
1,062
total underwriting
3,333
3,049
1,766
total net revenues
7,555
5,629
3,671
operating expenses
4,985
4,062
3,258
pre-tax earnings
$
2,570
$
1,567
$
the following table sets forth our financial advisory and
underwriting transaction volumes:
goldman sachs
global investment banking volumes
(1)
(in
billions)
year ended november
announced mergers and acquisitions
$
1,494
$
1,104
$
completed mergers and acquisitions
1,424
equity and equity-related offerings
(2)
debt offerings
(3)
(1)
source: thomson financial.
announced and completed mergers and acquisitions volumes are
based on full credit to each of the advisors in a transaction.
equity and equity-related offerings and debt offerings are based
on full credit for single book managers and equal credit for
joint book managers. transaction volumes may not be indicative
of net revenues in a given period.
(2)
includes rule144a and public
common stock offerings, convertible offerings and rights
offerings.
(3)
includes non-convertible preferred
stock, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and
taxable municipal debt. includes publicly registered and
rule144a issues.
table of contents
2007 versus 2006.net revenues in investment
banking of $7.56billion for 2007 increased 34% compared
with 2006. net revenues in financial advisory of
$4.22billion increased 64% compared with 2006, primarily
reflecting growth in industry-wide completed mergers and
acquisitions. net revenues in our underwriting business of
$3.33billion increased 9% compared with 2006, due to
higher net revenues in debt underwriting, primarily reflecting
strength in leveraged finance during the first half of 2007. net
revenues in equity underwriting were also strong, but
essentially unchanged from 2006. our investment banking
transaction backlog at the end of 2007 was higher than at the
end of 2006.
(1)
operating expenses of $4.99billion for 2007 increased 23%
compared with 2006, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses resulting from higher discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels. pre-tax earnings
of $2.57billion in 2007 increased 64% compared with 2006.
2006 versus 2005.net revenues in investment
banking of $5.63billion for 2006 increased 53% compared
with 2005. net revenues in financial advisory of
$2.58billion increased 35% compared with 2005, primarily
reflecting strong growth in industry-wide completed mergers and
acquisitions. net revenues in our underwriting business of
$3.05billion increased 73% compared with 2005. net
revenues were significantly higher in equity underwriting,
reflecting increased client activity. net revenues were also
significantly higher in debt underwriting, primarily due to a
significant increase in leveraged finance activity and, to a
lesser extent, an increase in investment-grade activity. our
investment banking transaction backlog at the end of 2006 was at
its highest level since 2000.
(1)
operating expenses of $4.06billion for 2006 increased 25%
compared with 2005, substantially all of which was due to
increased compensation and benefits expenses resulting from
higher levels of discretionary compensation. pre-tax earnings
were $1.57billion in 2006 compared with $413million
in 2005.
trading and
principal investments
our trading and principal investments segment is divided into
three components:
ficc.we make markets in and trade interest
rate and credit products, mortgage-related securities and loan
products and other asset-backed instruments, currencies and
commodities, structure and enter into a wide variety of
derivative transactions, and engage in proprietary trading and
investing.
equities.we make markets in and trade
equities and equity-related products, structure and enter into
equity derivative transactions and engage in proprietary
trading. we generate commissions from executing and clearing
client transactions on major stock, options and futures
exchanges worldwide through our equities customer franchise and
clearing activities. we also engage in specialist and insurance
activities.
principal investments.we make real estate and
corporate principal investments, including our investments in
the ordinary shares of icbc and the convertible preferred stock
of smfg. we generate net revenues from returns on these
investments and from the increased share of the income and gains
derived from our merchant banking funds when the return on a
funds investments over the life of the fund exceeds
certain threshold returns (typically referred to as an override).
substantially all of our inventory is marked-to-market daily
and, therefore, its value and our net revenues are subject to
fluctuations based on market movements. in addition, net
revenues derived from our principal investments in privately
held concerns and in real estate may fluctuate significantly
depending on the revaluation of these investments in any given
period. we also regularly enter into large transactions as part
of our trading businesses. the number and size of such
transactions may affect our results of operations in a given
period.
net revenues from principal investments do not include
management fees generated from our merchant banking funds. these
management fees are included in the net revenues of the asset
management and securities services segment.
(1)our
investment banking transaction backlog represents an estimate of
our future net revenues from investment banking transactions
where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely
than not.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
trading and principal investments segment:
trading and
principal investments operating results
(in
millions)
year ended november
ficc
$
16,165
$
14,262
$
8,940
equities trading
6,725
4,965
2,675
equities commissions
4,579
3,518
2,975
total equities
11,304
8,483
5,650
icbc
smfg
(129
)
1,475
gross gains
3,728
1,534
gross losses
(814
)
(585
)
(198
)
net other corporate and real estate investments
2,914
overrides
total principal investments
3,757
2,817
2,228
total net revenues
31,226
25,562
16,818
operating expenses
17,998
14,962
10,600
pre-tax earnings
$
13,228
$
10,600
$
6,218
2007 versus 2006.net revenues in trading and
principal investments of $31.23billion for 2007 increased
22% compared with 2006.
net revenues in ficc of $16.17billion for 2007 increased
13% compared with 2006, reflecting significantly higher net
revenues in currencies and interest rate products. in addition,
net revenues in mortgages were higher despite a significant
deterioration in the mortgage market throughout 2007, while net
revenues in credit products were strong, but slightly lower
compared with 2006. credit products included substantial gains
from equity investments, including a gain of approximately
$900million related to the disposition of horizon wind
energy l.l.c., as well as a loss of approximately
$1billion, net of hedges, related to non-investment-grade
credit origination activities. net revenues in commodities were
also strong but lower compared with 2006. during 2007, ficc
operated in an environment generally characterized by strong
customer-driven activity and favorable market opportunities.
however, during 2007, the mortgage market experienced
significant deterioration and, in the second half of the year,
the broader credit markets were characterized by wider spreads
and reduced levels of liquidity.
net revenues in equities of $11.30billion for 2007
increased 33% compared with 2006, reflecting significantly
higher net revenues in both our customer franchise businesses
and principal strategies. the customer franchise businesses
benefited from significantly higher commission volumes. during
2007, equities operated in an environment characterized by
strong customer-driven activity, generally higher equity prices
and higher levels of volatility, particularly during the second
half of the year.
principal investments recorded net revenues of
$3.76billion for 2007, reflecting gains and overrides from
corporate and real estate principal investments. results in
principal investments included a $495million gain related
to our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc and a
$129million loss related to our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg.
table of contents
operating expenses of $18.00billion for 2007 increased 20%
compared with 2006, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses, resulting from higher discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels. non-compensation
expenses increased due to the impact of higher levels of
business activity and continued geographic expansion. the
majority of this increase was in brokerage, clearing, exchange
and distribution fees, which primarily reflected higher
transaction volumes in equities. other expenses and professional
fees also increased, reflecting increased business activity.
pre-tax earnings of $13.23billion in 2007 increased 25%
compared with 2006.
2006 versus 2005.net revenues in trading and
principal investments of $25.56billion for 2006 increased
52% compared with 2005.
net revenues in ficc of $14.26billion increased 60%
compared with 2005, primarily due to significantly higher net
revenues in credit products (which includes distressed
investing) and commodities. in addition, net revenues were
higher in interest rate products, currencies and mortgages.
during 2006, the business operated in an environment
characterized by strong customer-driven activity and favorable
market opportunities. in addition, corporate credit spreads
tightened, the yield curve flattened and volatility levels were
generally low in interest rate and currency markets.
net revenues in equities of $8.48billion increased 50%
compared with 2005, primarily reflecting significantly higher
net revenues in derivatives, across all regions, as well as
higher net revenues in shares. the increase also reflected the
contribution from our insurance business, which was acquired in
2006. in addition, principal strategies performed well, although
net revenues were lower than a particularly strong 2005. during
2006, equities operated in a favorable environment characterized
by strong customer-driven activity, generally higher equity
prices and favorable market opportunities, although volatility
levels were generally low.
principal investments recorded net revenues of
$2.82billion for 2006, reflecting a $937million gain
related to our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, a
$527million gain related to our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg and $1.35billion in
gains and overrides from other principal investments.
operating expenses of $14.96billion for 2006 increased 41%
compared with 2005, due to increased compensation and benefits
expenses, primarily resulting from higher levels of
discretionary compensation due to higher net revenues and
increased levels of employment, as well as higher
non-compensation expenses. excluding non-compensation expenses
related to consolidated entities held for investment purposes,
the increase in non-compensation expenses was primarily due to
higher brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees, in
equities and ficc, and increased other expenses, primarily due
to costs related to our insurance business, which was acquired
in 2006, and higher levels of business activity. in addition,
professional fees were higher, due to increased legal and
consulting fees. pre-tax earnings of $10.60billion in 2006
increased 70% compared with 2005.
asset
management and securities services
our asset management and securities services segment is divided
into two components:
asset management.asset management provides
investment advisory and financial planning services and offers
investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
primarily generates revenues in the form of management and
incentive fees.
securities services.securities services provides
prime brokerage services, financing services and securities
lending services to institutional clients, including hedge
funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide, and generates revenues primarily in the
form of interest rate spreads or fees.
table of contents
assets under management typically generate fees as a percentage
of asset value, which is affected by investment performance and
by inflows or redemptions. the fees that we charge vary by asset
class, as do our related expenses. in certain circumstances, we
are also entitled to receive incentive fees based on a
percentage of a funds return or when the return on assets
under management exceeds specified benchmark returns or other
performance targets. incentive fees are recognized when the
performance period ends and they are no longer subject to
adjustment. we have numerous incentive fee arrangements, many of
which have annual performance periods that end on
december31. for that reason, incentive fees have been
seasonally weighted to our first quarter.
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
asset management and securities services segment:
asset management
and securities services operating results
(in
millions)
year ended november
management and other fees
$
4,303
$
3,332
$
2,629
incentive fees
total asset management
4,490
4,294
2,956
securities services
2,716
2,180
1,793
total net revenues
7,206
6,474
4,749
operating expenses
5,363
4,036
3,070
pre-tax earnings
$
1,843
$
2,438
$
1,679
assets under management include our mutual funds, alternative
investment funds and separately managed accounts for
institutional and individual investors. substantially all assets
under management are valued as of calendar month end. assets
under management do not include assets in brokerage accounts
that generate commissions,
mark-ups and
spreads based on transactional activity, or our own investments
in funds that we manage.
the following table sets forth our assets under management by
asset class:
assets under
management by asset class
(in
billions)
as of november 30
alternative investments
(1)
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
(1)
primarily includes hedge funds,
private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset
allocation strategies.
table of contents
the following table sets forth a summary of the changes in our
assets under management:
changes in assets
under management
(in
billions)
year ended november 30
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
net inflows/(outflows)
alternative investments
equity
fixed income
total non-money market net inflows/(outflows)
(1)
money markets
(2)
total net inflows/(outflows)
(3)
net market appreciation/(depreciation)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
(1)
includes $7billion in net
asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of
macquarie imm investment management.
(2)
net of the transfer of
$8billion of money market assets under management to
interest-bearing deposits at gs bank usa, a wholly owned
subsidiary of goldman sachs. these deposits are not included in
assets under management.
(3)
includes $3billion of net
asset inflows in connection with the acquisition of our variable
annuity and life insurance business.
2007 versus 2006.net revenues in asset management
and securities services of $7.21billion for 2007 increased
11% compared with 2006.
asset management net revenues of $4.49billion for 2007
increased 5% compared with 2006, reflecting a 29% increase in
management and other fees, partially offset by significantly
lower incentive fees. incentive fees were $187million for
2007 compared with $962million for 2006. during 2007,
assets under management increased $192billion, or 28%, to
$868billion, reflecting non-money market net inflows of
$73billion
(1),
primarily in fixed income and equity assets, money market net
inflows of $88billion, and net market appreciation of
$31billion, reflecting appreciation in fixed income and
equity assets, partially offset by depreciation in alternative
investment assets.
securities services net revenues of $2.72billion for 2007
increased 25% compared with 2006, as our prime brokerage
business continued to generate strong results, primarily
reflecting significantly higher customer balances in securities
lending and margin lending.
operating expenses of $5.36billion for 2007 increased 33%
compared with 2006, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses resulting from higher discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels, and higher
distribution fees (included in brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees). pre-tax earnings of $1.84billion in
2007 decreased 24% compared with 2006.
(1)includes
$7billion in net asset inflows in connection with our
acquisition of macquarie imm investment management.
table of contents
2006 versus 2005.net revenues in asset
management and securities services of $6.47billion for
2006 increased 36% compared with 2005.
asset management net revenues of $4.29billion increased
45% compared with 2005, reflecting significantly higher
management and other fees, principally due to strong growth in
assets under management, and significantly higher incentive
fees. during the year, assets under management increased
$144billion or 27% to $676billion, reflecting
non-money market net inflows of $77billion, spread across
all asset classes, money market net inflows of $17billion
(1),
and market appreciation of $50billion, primarily in equity
and fixed income assets.
securities services net revenues of $2.18billion increased
22% compared with 2005, as our prime brokerage business
continued to generate strong results, primarily reflecting
significantly higher global customer balances in securities
lending and margin lending.
operating expenses of $4.04billion for 2006 increased 31%
compared with 2005, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses, resulting from higher levels of discretionary
compensation due to higher net revenues, and increased levels of
employment. non-compensation expenses also increased, primarily
due to higher distribution fees. in addition, market development
costs were higher, reflecting increased levels of business
activity. pre-tax earnings of $2.44billion in 2006
increased 45% compared with 2005.
geographic
data
for a summary of the net revenues and pre-tax earnings of
goldman sachs by geographic region, see note16 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on
form10-k.
(1)includes
the transfer of $8billion of money market assets under
management to interest-bearing deposits at gs bank usa. these
deposits are not included in assets under management.
table of contents
off-balance-sheet
arrangements
we have various types of off-balance-sheet arrangements that we
enter into in the ordinary course of business. our involvement
in these arrangements can take many different forms, including
purchasing or retaining residual and other interests in
mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securitization vehicles;
holding senior and subordinated debt, interests in limited and
general partnerships, and preferred and common stock in other
nonconsolidated vehicles; entering into interest rate, foreign
currency, equity, commodity and credit derivatives, including
total return swaps; entering into operating leases; and
providing guarantees, indemnifications, loan commitments,
letters of credit and representations and warranties.
we enter into these arrangements for a variety of business
purposes, including the securitization of commercial and
residential mortgages, home equity and auto loans, government
and corporate bonds, and other types of financial assets. other
reasons for entering into these arrangements include
underwriting client securitization transactions; providing
secondary market liquidity; making investments in performing and
nonperforming debt, equity, real estate and other assets;
providing investors with credit-linked and asset-repackaged
notes; and receiving or providing letters of credit to satisfy
margin requirements and to facilitate the clearance and
settlement process.
we engage in transactions with variable interest entities (vies)
and qualifying special-purpose entities (qspes). such vehicles
are critical to the functioning of several significant investor
markets, including the mortgage-backed and other asset-backed
securities markets, since they offer investors access to
specific cash flows and risks created through the securitization
process. our financial interests in, and derivative transactions
with, such nonconsolidated entities are accounted for at fair
value, in the same manner as our other financial instruments,
except in cases where we apply the equity method of accounting.
while we are routinely involved with vies and qspes in
connection with our securitization activities, we did not have
off-balance-sheet commitments to purchase or finance
collateralized debt obligations held by structured investment
vehicles as of november 2007.
the following table sets forth where a discussion of these and
other off-balance-sheet arrangements may be found in
partii, items7 and 8 of the annual report on
form10-k:
type of off-balance-sheet arrangement
disclosure in annual report on form 10-k
retained interests or contingent interests in assets transferred
by us to nonconsolidated entities
see note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii,
item 8 of the annual report on form 10-k.
leases, letters of credit, and loans and other commitments
see contractual obligations and
commitments below and note 6 to the consolidated financial
statements in part ii, item 8 of the annual report on form 10-k.
guarantees
see note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii,
item 8 of the annual report on form 10-k.
other obligations, including contingent obligations, arising out
of variable interests we have in nonconsolidated entities
see note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on form 10-k.
derivative contracts
see critical accounting policies above
and
risk management below and notes 3 and 5 to
the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item 8 of the
annual report on form10-k.
in addition, see note2 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of our consolidation policies.
table of contents
equity
capital
the level and composition of our equity capital are principally
determined by our consolidated regulatory capital requirements
but may also be influenced by rating agency guidelines,
subsidiary capital requirements, the business environment,
conditions in the financial markets and assessments of potential
future losses due to extreme and adverse changes in our business
and market environments. as of november 2007, our total
shareholders equity was $42.80billion (consisting of
common shareholders equity of $39.70billion and
preferred stock of $3.10billion) compared with total
shareholders equity of $35.79billion as of november
2006 (consisting of common shareholders equity of
$32.69billion and preferred stock of $3.10billion).
in addition to total shareholders equity, we consider the
$5.00billion of junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
(see discussion below) to be part of our equity capital, as it
qualifies as capital for regulatory and certain rating agency
purposes.
consolidated
regulatory capital requirements
goldman sachs is regulated by the securities and exchange
commission (sec) as a cse and, as such, is subject to group-wide
supervision and examination by the sec and to minimum capital
adequacy standards on a consolidated basis. minimum capital
adequacy standards are principally driven by the amount of our
market risk, credit risk and operational risk as calculated by
methodologies approved by the sec. eligible sources of
regulatory capital include common equity and certain types of
preferred stock, debt and hybrid capital instruments, including
our junior subordinated debt issued to trusts. the recognition
of preferred stock, debt and hybrid capital instruments as
regulatory capital is subject to limitations. goldman sachs was
in compliance with the cse capital adequacy standards as of
november 2007 and november 2006.
rating agency
guidelines
the credit rating agencies assign credit ratings to the
obligations of the goldman sachs group, inc., which directly
issues or guarantees substantially all of goldman sachs
senior unsecured obligations. the level and composition of our
equity capital are among the many factors considered in
determining our credit ratings. each agency has its own
definition of eligible capital and methodology for evaluating
capital adequacy, and assessments are generally based on a
combination of factors rather than a single calculation. see
liquidity and funding risk credit
ratings below for further information regarding our credit
ratings.
subsidiary
capital requirements
many of our principal subsidiaries are subject to separate
regulation and capital requirements in the united states and/or
elsewhere. goldman, sachs& co. and goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. are registered u.s.
broker-dealers and futures commissions merchants, and are
subject to regulatory capital requirements, including those
imposed by the sec, the commodity futures trading commission,
the chicago board of trade, the financial industry regulatory
authority (finra) and the national futures association. goldman
sachs international, our regulated u.k. broker-dealer, is
subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by the
u.k.s financial services authority. goldman sachs
japanco.,ltd., our regulated japanese broker-dealer,
is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by
japans financial services agency. several other
subsidiaries of goldman sachs are regulated by securities,
investment advisory, banking, insurance, and other regulators
and authorities around the world. as of november 2007 and
november 2006, these subsidiaries were in compliance with their
local capital requirements.
table of contents
as discussed above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to
regulatory capital requirements in jurisdictions throughout the
world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold
capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency
requirements (for entities with assigned credit ratings) or
internal policies, including policies concerning the minimum
amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based on its
underlying level of risk. see liquidity and
funding risk conservative liability structure
below for a discussion of our potential inability to access
funds from our subsidiaries.
equity investments in subsidiaries are generally funded with
parent company equity capital. as of november 2007, group
inc.s equity investment in subsidiaries was
$40.00billion compared with its total shareholders
equity of $42.80billion.
our capital invested in
non-u.s.
subsidiaries is generally exposed to foreign exchange risk,
substantially all of which is managed through a combination of
derivative contracts and
non-u.s.
denominated debt. in addition, we generally manage the
non-trading exposure to foreign exchange risk that arises from
transactions denominated in currencies other than the
transacting entitys functional currency.
see note15 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our regulated subsidiaries.
equity capital
management
our objective is to maintain a sufficient level and optimal
composition of equity capital. we manage our capital through
repurchases of our common stock and issuances of preferred
stock, junior subordinated debt issued to trusts and other
subordinated debt. we manage our capital requirements
principally by setting limits on balance sheet assets and/or
limits on risk, in each case at both the consolidated and
business unit levels. we attribute capital usage to each of our
business units based upon the cse regulatory capital framework
and manage the levels of usage based upon the balance sheet and
risk limits established.
share repurchase program.we use our share
repurchase program to help maintain the appropriate level of
common equity and to substantially offset increases in share
count over time resulting from employee share-based
compensation. the repurchase program is effected primarily
through regular open-market purchases, the amounts and timing of
which are determined primarily by our current and projected
capital positions (i.e., comparisons of our desired level of
capital to our actual level of capital) but which may also be
influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price
and trading volumes of our common stock.
the following table sets forth the level of share repurchases
for the years ended november 2007 and november 2006:
as of november
(in millions, except per share amounts)
number of shares repurchased
41.22
50.23
total cost
$
8,956
$
7,817
average cost per share
$
217.29
$
155.64
the repurchase program was increased by 60.0million shares
on december17, 2007. taking into account this increased
authorization, the total remaining authorization under the
repurchase program was 65.4million shares as of
january18, 2008. for additional information on our
repurchase program, see market for registrants
common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases
of equity securities in part ll, item5 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
table of contents
preferred stock.as of november 2007, goldman sachs
had 124,000shares of perpetual non-cumulative preferred
stock issued and outstanding in four series as set forth in the
following table:
preferred stock
by series
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
issued
authorized
dividend rate
redemption date
(in millions)
a
30,000
50,000
3month libor + 0.75%, with
floor of 3.75% per annum
april 25, 2010
$
b
32,000
50,000
6.20% per annum
october 31, 2010
c
8,000
25,000
3month libor + 0.75%, with
floor of 4% per annum
october 31, 2010
d
54,000
60,000
3month libor + 0.67%, with
floor of 4% per annum
may 24, 2011
1,350
124,000
185,000
$
3,100
each share of preferred stock issued and outstanding has a par
value of $0.01, has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is
represented by 1,000 depositary shares and is redeemable at our
option at a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus declared and
unpaid dividends. dividends on each series of preferred stock,
if declared, are payable quarterly in arrears. our ability to
declare or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise
acquire, our common stock is subject to certain restrictions in
the event that we fail to pay or set aside full dividends on our
preferred stock for the latest completed dividend period. all
series of preferred stock are pari passu and have a preference
over our common stock upon liquidation.
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts in connection with
normal automatic preferred enhanced capital
securities.in the second quarter of 2007, we issued
$1.75billion of fixed rate junior subordinated debt to
goldman sachs capital ii and $500million of floating rate
junior subordinated debt to goldman sachs capital iii, delaware
statutory trusts that, in turn, issued $2.25billion of
guaranteed perpetual automatic preferred enhanced capital
securities (apex) to third parties and a de minimis amount of
common securities to goldman sachs. the junior subordinated debt
is included in unsecured long-term borrowings in the
consolidated statements of financial condition. in connection
with the apex issuance, we entered into stock purchase contracts
with goldman sachs capital ii and iii under which we will be
obligated to sell and these entities will be obligated to
purchase $2.25billion of perpetual non-cumulative
preferred stock that we will issue in the future. goldman sachs
capital ii and iii are required to remarket the junior
subordinated debt in order to fund their purchase of the
preferred stock, but in the event that a remarketing is
unsuccessful, they will relinquish the subordinated debt to us
in exchange for the preferred stock. because of certain
characteristics of the junior subordinated debt (and the
associated apex), including its long-term nature, the future
issuance of perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock under the
stock purchase contracts, our ability to defer payments due on
the debt and the subordinated nature of the debt in our capital
structure, it qualifies as regulatory capital for cse purposes
and is included as part of our equity capital.
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust in connection with
trustpreferred securities.we issued
$2.84billion of junior subordinated debentures in the
first quarter of 2004 to goldman sachs capital i, a delaware
statutory trust that, in turn, issued $2.75billion of
guaranteed preferred beneficial interests to third parties and
$85million of common beneficial interests to goldman
sachs. the junior subordinated debentures are included in
unsecured long-term borrowings in the consolidated
statements of financial condition. because of certain
characteristics of the junior subordinated debt (and the
associated trust preferred securities), including its long-term
nature, our ability to defer coupon interest for up to ten
consecutive semiannual periods and the subordinated nature of
the debt in our capital structure, it qualifies as regulatory
capital for cse purposes and is included as part of our equity
capital.
table of contents
subordinated debt.in addition to junior
subordinated debt issued to trusts, we had other outstanding
subordinated debt of $11.23billion as of november 2007.
although not part of our shareholders equity, subordinated
debt may be used to meet a portion of our consolidated capital
requirements as a cse.
capital ratios
and metrics
the following table sets forth information on our assets,
shareholders equity, leverage ratios and book value per
common share:
as of november
($ in millions, except per
share amounts)
total assets
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
adjusted
assets
(1)
747,300
541,033
total shareholders equity
42,800
35,786
tangible equity
capital
(2)
42,728
33,517
leverage
ratio
(3)
26.2
x
23.4
x
adjusted leverage
ratio
(4)
17.5
x
16.1
x
debt to equity
ratio
(5)
3.8
x
3.4
x
common shareholders equity
39,700
32,686
tangible common shareholders
equity
(6)
34,628
27,667
book value per common
share
(7)
$
90.43
$
72.62
tangible book value per common
share
(8)
78.88
61.47
(1)
adjusted assets excludes
(i)low-risk collateralized assets generally associated
with our matched book and securities lending businesses (which
we calculate by adding our securities borrowed and financial
instruments purchased under agreements to resell, at fair value,
and then subtracting our nonderivative short positions),
(ii)cash and securities we segregate for regulatory and
other purposes and (iii)goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts. we do not deduct
identifiable intangible assets associated with power contracts
from total assets in order to be consistent with the calculation
of tangible equity capital and the adjusted leverage ratio (see
footnote 2 below).
the following table sets forth a
reconciliation of total assets to adjusted assets:
as of november
(in millions)
total assets
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
deduct:
securities borrowed
(277,413
)
(219,342
)
financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell, at
fair value
(85,717
)
(82,126
)
add:
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
215,023
155,805
less derivative liabilities
(99,378
)
(65,496
)
subtotal
115,645
90,309
deduct:
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(119,939
)
(80,990
)
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(5,072
)
(5,019
)
adjusted assets
$
747,300
$
541,033
table of contents
(2)
tangible equity capital equals
total shareholders equity and junior subordinated debt
issued to trusts less goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets, excluding power contracts. we do not deduct identifiable
intangible assets associated with power contracts from total
shareholders equity because, unlike other intangible
assets, less than 50% of these assets are supported by common
shareholders equity. we consider junior subordinated debt
issued to trusts to be a component of our tangible equity
capital base due to certain characteristics of the debt,
including its long-term nature, our ability to defer payments
due on the debt and the subordinated nature of the debt in our
capital structure.
the following table sets forth the
reconciliation of total shareholders equity to tangible
equity capital:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
42,800
$
35,786
add:
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
5,000
2,750
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(5,072
)
(5,019
)
tangible equity capital
$
42,728
$
33,517
(3)
leverage ratio equals total assets
divided by total shareholders equity.
(4)
adjusted leverage ratio equals
adjusted assets divided by tangible equity capital. we believe
that the adjusted leverage ratio is a more meaningful measure of
our capital adequacy than the leverage ratio because it excludes
certain low-risk collateralized assets that are generally
supported with little or no capital and reflects the tangible
equity capital deployed in our businesses.
(5)
debt to equity ratio equals
unsecured long-term borrowings divided by total
shareholders equity.
(6)
tangible common shareholders
equity equals total shareholders equity less preferred
stock, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding
power contracts. we do not deduct identifiable intangible assets
associated with power contracts from total shareholders
equity because, unlike other intangible assets, less than 50% of
these assets are supported by common shareholders equity.
the following table sets forth a
reconciliation of total shareholders equity to tangible
common shareholders equity:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
42,800
$
35,786
deduct:
preferred stock
(3,100
)
(3,100
)
common shareholders equity
39,700
32,686
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(5,072
)
(5,019
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$
34,628
$
27,667
(7)
book value per common share is
based on common shares outstanding, including restricted stock
units granted to employees with no future service requirements,
of 439.0million and 450.1million as of november 2007
and november2006, respectively.
(8)
tangible book value per common
share is computed by dividing tangible common shareholders
equity by the number of common shares outstanding, including
restricted stock units granted to employees with no future
service requirements.
table of contents
contractual
obligations and commitments
goldman sachs has contractual obligations to make future
payments related to our unsecured long-term borrowings, secured
long-term financings, long-term noncancelable lease agreements
and purchase obligations and has commitments under a variety of
commercial arrangements.
the following table sets forth our contractual obligations by
fiscal maturity date as of november2007:
contractual
obligations
(in
millions)
2009 -
2011 -
2013 -
thereafter
total
unsecured long-term
borrowings(1)(2)(3)
$
$
36,885
$
29,295
$
97,994
$
164,174
secured long-term
financings(1)(2)(4)
5,204
7,400
20,696
33,300
minimum rental payments
2,022
3,890
purchase
obligations(5)
2,176
2,533
(1)
obligations maturing within one year of our financial statement
date or redeemable within one year of our financial statement
date at the option of the holder are excluded from this table
and are treated as short-term obligations. see note3 to
the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on form
10-k for
further information regarding our secured financings.
(2)
obligations that are repayable prior to maturity at the option
of goldman sachs are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates. obligations that are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the holder are reflected at the dates such options
become exercisable.
(3)
includes $15.93billion accounted for at fair value under
sfasno. 155 or sfasno.159 as of november 2007,
primarily consisting of hybrid financial instruments.
(4)
these obligations are reported within other secured
financings in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and include $18.53billion accounted for at fair
value under sfasno.159 as of november 2007.
(5)
primarily includes amounts related to the acquisition of litton
loan servicing lp (litton) and construction-related obligations.
as of november 2007, our unsecured long-term borrowings were
$164.17billion, with maturities extending to 2043, and
consisted principally of senior borrowings. see note5 to
the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our unsecured long-term
borrowings.
as of november 2007, our future minimum rental payments, net of
minimum sublease rentals, under noncancelable leases were
$3.89billion. these lease commitments, principally for
office space, expire on various dates through 2069. certain
agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for
increases in real estate taxes and other charges. see
note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our leases.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office
space held in excess of our current requirements. this excess
space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is
being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied
space that we may exit in the future. we regularly evaluate our
current and future space capacity in relation to current and
projected staffing levels. in 2007, we incurred exit costs of
$128million (included in occupancy and
depreciation and amortization expenses in the
consolidated statements of earnings). we may incur additional
exit costs in 2008 and thereafter to the extent we
(i)reduce our space capacity or (ii)commit to, or
occupy, new properties in the locations in which we operate and,
consequently, dispose of existing space that had been held for
potential growth. these exit costs may be material to our
results of operations in a given period.
table of contents
as of november 2007 and november 2006, we had
construction-related obligations of $769million and
$1.63billion, respectively, including outstanding
commitments of $642million and $500million as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively, related to our
new world headquarters in new york city, which is expected to
cost between $2.3billion and $2.5billion. we are
partially financing this construction project with tax-exempt
liberty bonds. we borrowed approximately $1.40billion and
approximately $250million in 2005 and 2007, respectively,
through the issuance of liberty bonds.
in addition, we entered into an agreement in 2007 to acquire
litton, the mortgage servicing unit of
credit-based
asset servicing and securitization llc (c-bass). the transaction
closed in december 2007 at a purchase price of
$428million, plus repayment of $916million of
outstanding litton debt obligations.
the following table sets forth our commitments as of november
2007:
commitments
(in
millions)
commitment amount by fiscal period of expiration
2009 -
2011 -
2013 -
thereafter
total
commitments to extend credit
commercial lending:
investment-grade
$
4,456
$
3,108
$
3,248
$
$
11,719
non-investment-grade
2,956
2,969
6,845
29,160
41,930
william street program
2,571
4,046
16,929
24,488
warehouse financing
3,386
1,224
4,610
total commitments to extend credit
13,369
11,347
27,022
31,009
82,747
forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements
24,269
3,867
28,136
forward starting repurchase and securities lending agreements
15,392
15,392
commitments under letters of credit issued by banks to
counterparties
8,281
8,747
investment commitments
6,180
7,827
1,594
2,157
17,758
underwriting commitments
total
$
67,579
$
23,312
$
28,799
$
33,178
$
152,868
our commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to
counterparties that have fixed termination dates and are
contingent on the satisfaction of all conditions to borrowing
set forth in the contract. in connection with our lending
activities, we had outstanding commitments to extend credit of
$82.75billion as of november 2007 compared with
$100.48billion as of november 2006. since these
commitments may expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the
counterpartys request, the total commitment amount does
not necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow
requirements. our commercial lending commitments are generally
extended in connection with contingent acquisition financing and
other types of corporate lending as well as commercial real
estate financing. we may seek to reduce our credit risk on these
commitments by syndicating all or substantial portions of
commitments to other investors. in addition, commitments that
are extended for contingent acquisition financing are often
intended to be short-term in nature, as borrowers often seek to
replace them with other funding sources.
table of contents
substantially all of the commitments provided under the william
street credit extension program are to investment-grade
corporate borrowers. commitments under the program are extended
by william street commitment corporation (commitment corp.), a
consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of group inc. whose assets
and liabilities are legally separated from other assets and
liabilities of goldman sachs, william street credit corporation,
gs bank usa, goldman sachs credit partners l.p. or other
consolidated wholly owned subsidiaries of group inc. the
commitments extended by commitment corp. are supported, in part,
by funding raised by william street funding corporation (funding
corp.), another consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of group
inc. whose assets and liabilities are also legally separated
from other assets and liabilities of goldman sachs. with respect
to most of the william street commitments, smfg provides us with
credit loss protection that is generally limited to 95% of the
first loss we realize on approved loan commitments, up to a
maximum of $1.00billion. in addition, subject to the
satisfaction of certain conditions, upon our request, smfg will
provide protection for 70% of the second loss on such
commitments, up to a maximum of $1.13billion. we also use
other financial instruments to mitigate credit risks related to
certain william street commitments not covered by smfg.
our commitments to extend credit also include financing for the
warehousing of financial assets to be securitized. these
financings are expected to be repaid from the proceeds of the
related securitizations for which we may or may not act as
underwriter. these arrangements are secured by the warehoused
assets, primarily consisting of corporate bank loans and
commercial mortgages as of november 2007 and residential
mortgages and mortgage-backed securities, corporate bank loans
and commercial mortgages as of november 2006.
see note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our commitments, contingencies
and guarantees.
risk
management
management believes that effective risk management is of primary
importance to the success of goldman sachs. accordingly, we have
a comprehensive risk management process to monitor, evaluate and
manage the principal risks we assume in conducting our
activities. these risks include market, credit, liquidity,
operational, legal and reputational exposures.
risk management
structure
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a
variety of separate but complementary financial, credit,
operational, compliance and legal reporting systems. in
addition, a number of committees are responsible for monitoring
risk exposures and for general oversight of our risk management
process, as described further below. these committees (including
their subcommittees), meet regularly and consist of senior
members of both our revenue-producing units and departments that
are independent of our revenue-producing units.
segregation of duties and management oversight are fundamental
elements of our risk management process. in addition to the
committees described below, functions that are independent of
the
revenue-producing
units, such as compliance, finance, legal, management controls
(internal audit) and operations, perform risk management
functions, which include monitoring, analyzing and evaluating
risk.
management committee.all risk control
functions ultimately report to our management committee. through
both direct and delegated authority, the management committee
approves all of our operating activities and trading risk
parameters.
risk committees.the firmwide risk committee
reviews the activities of existing trading businesses, approves
new businesses and products, approves firmwide market risk
limits, reviews business unit market risk limits, approves
market risk limits for selected sovereign markets and
table of contents
business units, approves sovereign credit risk limits and credit
risk limits by ratings group, and reviews scenario analyses
based on abnormal or catastrophic market movements.
the divisional risk committee sets market risk limits for our
trading activities subject to overall firmwide risk limits,
based on a number of measures, including var, stress tests and
scenario analyses. several other committees oversee various
risk, valuation, operational, credit and business practice
issues related to our asset management business.
business unit risk limits are established by the various risk
committees and may be further allocated by the business unit
managers to individual trading desks. trading desk managers have
the first line of responsibility for managing risk within
prescribed limits. these managers have in-depth knowledge of the
primary sources of risk in their respective markets and the
instruments available to hedge their exposures.
market risk limits are monitored by the finance division and are
reviewed regularly by the appropriate risk committee. limit
violations are reported to the appropriate risk committee and
business unit managers and addressed, as necessary. credit risk
limits are also monitored by the finance division and reviewed
by the appropriate risk committee.
business practices committee.the business
practices committee assists senior management in its oversight
of compliance and operational risks and related reputational
concerns, seeks to ensure the consistency of our policies,
practices and procedures with our business principles, and makes
recommendations on ways to mitigate potential risks.
firmwide capital committee.the firmwide
capital committee reviews and approves transactions involving
commitments of our capital. such capital commitments include,
but are not limited to, extensions of credit, alternative
liquidity commitments, certain bond underwritings and certain
distressed debt and principal finance activities. the firmwide
capital committee is also responsible for establishing business
and reputational standards for capital commitments and seeking
to ensure that they are maintained on a global basis.
commitments committee.the commitments
committee reviews and approves underwriting and distribution
activities, primarily with respect to offerings of equity and
equity-related securities, and sets and maintains policies and
procedures designed to ensure that legal, reputational,
regulatory and business standards are maintained in conjunction
with these activities. in addition to reviewing specific
transactions, the commitments committee periodically conducts
strategic reviews of industry sectors and products and
establishes policies in connection with transaction practices.
credit policy committee.the credit policy
committee establishes and reviews broad credit policies and
parameters that are implemented by the credit department.
finance committee.the finance committee
establishes and oversees our liquidity policies, sets certain
inventory position limits and has oversight responsibility for
liquidity risk, the size and composition of our balance sheet
and capital base, and our credit ratings. the finance committee
regularly reviews our funding position and capitalization and
makes adjustments in light of current events, risks and
exposures.
new products committee.the new products
committee, under the oversight of the firmwide risk committee,
is responsible for reviewing and approving new products and
businesses globally.
operational risk committee.the operational
risk committee provides oversight of the ongoing development and
implementation of our operational risk policies, framework and
methodologies, and monitors the effectiveness of operational
risk management.
structured products committee.the structured
products committee reviews and approves structured product
transactions entered into with our clients that raise legal,
regulatory, tax or accounting issues or present reputational
risk to goldman sachs.
table of contents
market
risk
the potential for changes in the market value of our trading and
investing positions is referred to as market risk. such
positions result from market-making, proprietary trading,
underwriting, specialist and investing activities. substantially
all of our inventory positions are marked-to-market on a daily
basis and changes are recorded in net revenues.
categories of market risk include exposures to interest rates,
equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. a
description of each market risk category is set forth below:
interest rate risks primarily result from exposures to changes
in the level, slope and curvature of the yield curve, the
volatility of interest rates, mortgage prepayment speeds and
credit spreads.
equity price risks result from exposures to changes in prices
and volatilities of individual equities, equity baskets and
equity indices.
currency rate risks result from exposures to changes in spot
prices, forward prices and volatilities of currency rates.
commodity price risks result from exposures to changes in spot
prices, forward prices and volatilities of commodities, such as
electricity, natural gas, crude oil, petroleum products, and
precious and base metals.
we seek to manage these risks by diversifying exposures,
controlling position sizes and establishing economic hedges in
related securities or derivatives. for example, we may hedge a
portfolio of common stocks by taking an offsetting position in a
related equity-index futures contract. the ability to manage an
exposure may, however, be limited by adverse changes in the
liquidity of the security or the related hedge instrument and in
the correlation of price movements between the security and
related hedge instrument.
in addition to applying business judgment, senior management
uses a number of quantitative tools to manage our exposure to
market risk for financial instruments owned, at fair
value and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value in the consolidated statements of
financial condition. these tools include:
risk limits based on a summary measure of market risk exposure
referred to as var;
scenario analyses, stress tests and other analytical tools that
measure the potential effects on our trading net revenues of
various market events, including, but not limited to, a large
widening of credit spreads, a substantial decline in equity
markets and significant moves in selected emerging markets; and
inventory position limits for selected business units.
table of contents
var
var is the potential loss in value of trading positions due to
adverse market movements over a defined time horizon with a
specified confidence level.
for the var numbers reported below, a
one-day time
horizon and a 95% confidence level were used. this means that
there is a 1 in 20 chance that daily trading net revenues will
fall below the expected daily trading net revenues by an amount
at least as large as the reported var. thus, shortfalls from
expected trading net revenues on a single trading day greater
than the reported var would be anticipated to occur, on average,
about once a month. shortfalls on a single day can exceed
reported var by significant amounts. shortfalls can also
accumulate over a longer time horizon such as a number of
consecutive trading days.
the modeling of the risk characteristics of our trading
positions involves a number of assumptions and approximations.
while management believes that these assumptions and
approximations are reasonable, there is no standard methodology
for estimating var, and different assumptions and/or
approximations could produce materially different var estimates.
we use historical data to estimate our var and, to better
reflect current asset volatilities, we generally weight
historical data to give greater importance to more recent
observations. given its reliance on historical data, var is most
effective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which there
are no sudden fundamental changes or shifts in market
conditions. an inherent limitation of var is that the
distribution of past changes in market risk factors may not
produce accurate predictions of future market risk. different
var methodologies and distributional assumptions could produce a
materially different var. moreover, var calculated for a
one-day time
horizon does not fully capture the market risk of positions that
cannot be liquidated or offset with hedges within one day.
the following tables set forth the daily var:
average daily var
(1)
(in
millions)
year ended november
risk categories
interest rates
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect
(2)
(96
)
(71
)
(44
)
total
$
$
$
(1)
certain portfolios and individual positions are not included in
var, where var is not the most appropriate measure of risk
(e.g., due to transfer restrictions and/or illiquidity). see
other market risk measures below.
(2)
equals the difference between total var and the sum of the vars
for the four risk categories. this effect arises because the
four market risk categories are not perfectly correlated.
our average daily var increased to $138million in 2007
from $101million in 2006. the increase was primarily due
to higher levels of exposure and volatility in interest rates
and equity prices.
our average daily var increased to $101million in 2006
from $70million in 2005. we increased our level of
exposure across all risk categories, particularly equity prices
and interest rates.
table of contents
daily var
(in
millions)
year ended
as of november
november 2007
risk categories
high
low
interest rates
$
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect
(1)
(121
)
(52
)
total
$
$
$
$
(1)
equals the difference between total var and the sum of the vars
for the four risk categories. this effect arises because the
four market risk categories are not perfectly correlated.
our daily var increased to $134million as of november 2007
from $119million as of november2006. the increase
primarily reflected higher levels of exposure to interest rates,
currency rates and commodity prices, as well as increased levels
of volatility in interest rates, partially offset by the benefit
of increased diversification effects among different risk
categories.
the following chart presents our daily var during 2007:
daily var
($ in
millions)
table of contents
trading net
revenues distribution
the following chart sets forth the frequency distribution of our
daily trading net revenues for substantially all inventory
positions included in var for the year ended november 2007:
daily trading net
revenues
($ in
millions)
as part of our overall risk control process, daily trading net
revenues are compared with var calculated as of the end of the
prior business day. trading losses incurred on a single day
exceeded our 95%
one-day var
on ten occasions during 2007.
other market
risk measures
certain portfolios and individual positions are not included in
var, where var is not the most appropriate measure of risk
(e.g., due to transfer restrictions and/or illiquidity). the
market risk related to our investments in the ordinary shares of
icbc and the convertible preferred stock of smfg is measured by
estimating the potential reduction in net revenues associated
with a 10% decline in the icbc ordinary share price and a 10%
decline in the smfg common stock price, respectively. the market
risk related to the remaining positions is measured by
estimating the potential reduction in net revenues associated
with a 10% decline in asset values.
the sensitivity analyses for equity and debt positions in our
trading portfolio and equity, debt (primarily mezzanine
instruments) and real estate positions in our non-trading
portfolio are measured by the impact of a decline in the asset
values (including the impact of leverage in the underlying
investments for real estate positions in our non-trading
portfolio) of such positions. the fair value of the underlying
positions may be impacted by factors such as transactions in
similar instruments, completed or pending third-party
transactions in the underlying investment or comparable
entities, subsequent rounds of financing, recapitalizations and
other transactions across the capital structure, offerings in
the equity or debt capital markets, and changes in financial
ratios or cash flows.
the sensitivity analysis of our investment in the ordinary
shares of icbc excludes interests held by investment funds
managed by goldman sachs.
the sensitivity analysis of our investment in the convertible
preferred stock of smfg, net of the economic hedge on a
substantial portion of the common stock underlying our
investment, is
table of contents
measured by the impact of a decline in the smfg common stock
price. this sensitivity should not be extrapolated to a
significant decline in the smfg common stock price, as the
relationship between the fair value of our investment and the
smfg common stock price would be nonlinear due to downside
protection on the conversion stock price.
the following table sets forth market risk for positions not
included in var. these measures do not reflect diversification
benefits across asset categories and, given the differing
likelihood of the potential declines in asset categories, these
measures have not been aggregated:
10% sensitivity
amount as of november
asset categories
10% sensitivity
measure
(in millions)
trading risk
(1)
equity
underlying asset value
$
1,325
$
debt
underlying asset value
1,020
non-trading risk
icbc
icbc ordinary share price
smfg
smfg common stock price
other equity
underlying asset value
1,013
debt
underlying asset value
real estate
(2)
underlying asset value
1,108
(1)
in addition to the positions in these portfolios, which are
accounted for at fair value, we make investments accounted for
under the equity method and we also make direct investments in
real estate, both of which are included in other
assets in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. direct investments in real estate are accounted for
at cost less accumulated depreciation. see note10 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on
form10-k
for information on other assets.
(2)
relates to interests in our real estate investment funds.
the increase in our 10% sensitivity measures during 2007 in our
trading and non-trading portfolios (excluding icbc and smfg) was
primarily due to new investments.
in addition, as of november 2007 and november 2006, in our bank
and insurance subsidiaries we held approximately
$10.58billion and $9.95billion of securities,
respectively, primarily consisting of mortgage-backed, federal
agency and investment-grade corporate bonds.
credit
risk
credit risk represents the loss that we would incur if a
counterparty or an issuer of securities or other instruments we
hold fails to perform under its contractual obligations to us,
or upon a deterioration in the credit quality of third parties
whose securities or other instruments, including otc
derivatives, we hold. our exposure to credit risk principally
arises through our trading, investing and financing activities.
to reduce our credit exposures, we seek to enter into netting
agreements with counterparties that permit us to offset
receivables and payables with such counterparties. in addition,
we attempt to further reduce credit risk with certain
counterparties by (i)entering into agreements that enable
us to obtain collateral from a counterparty on an upfront or
contingent basis, (ii)seeking
third-party
guarantees of the counterpartys obligations, and/or
(iii)transferring our credit risk to third parties using
credit derivatives and/or other structures and techniques.
to measure and manage our credit exposures, we use a variety of
tools, including credit limits referenced to both current
exposure and potential exposure. potential exposure is generally
based on projected worst-case market movements over the life of
a transaction. in addition, as part of our market risk
management process, for positions measured by changes in credit
spreads, we use var
table of contents
and other sensitivity measures. to supplement our primary credit
exposure measures, we also use scenario analyses, such as credit
spread widening scenarios, stress tests and other quantitative
tools.
our global credit management systems monitor credit exposure to
individual counterparties and on an aggregate basis to
counterparties and their affiliates. these systems also provide
management, including the firmwide risk and credit policy
committees, with information regarding credit risk by product,
industry sector, country and region.
while our activities expose us to many different industries and
counterparties, we routinely execute a high volume of
transactions with counterparties in the financial services
industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial banks,
investment funds and other institutional clients, resulting in
significant credit concentration with respect to this industry.
in the ordinary course of business, we may also be subject to a
concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty,
borrower or issuer.
as of november 2007 and november 2006, we held
$45.75billion (4% of total assets) and $46.20billion
(6% of total assets), respectively, of u.s. government and
federal agency obligations (including securities guaranteed by
the federal national mortgage association and the federal home
loan mortgage corporation) included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value and cash and
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes in
the consolidated statements of financial condition. as of
november 2007 and november 2006, we held $31.65billion (3%
of total assets) and $23.64billion (3% of total assets),
respectively, of other sovereign obligations, principally
consisting of securities issued by the governments of japan and
the united kingdom. in addition, as of november2007 and
november 2006, $144.92billion and $104.76billion of
our financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell
and securities borrowed, respectively, were collateralized by
u.s. government and federal agency obligations. as of november
2007 and 2006, $41.26billion and $38.22billion of
our financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell
and securities borrowed, respectively, were collateralized by
other sovereign obligations. as of november 2007 and november
2006, we did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty
that exceeded 2% of our total assets. however, over the past
several years, the amount and duration of our credit exposures
have been increasing, due to, among other factors, the growth of
our lending and otc derivative activities and market evolution
toward longer dated transactions. a further discussion of our
derivative activities follows below.
derivatives
derivative contracts are instruments, such as futures, forwards,
swaps or option contracts, that derive their value from
underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a combination of
these factors. derivative instruments may be privately
negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
substantially all of our derivative transactions are entered
into to facilitate client transactions, to take proprietary
positions or as a means of risk management. in addition to
derivative transactions entered into for trading purposes, we
enter into derivative contracts to manage currency exposure on
our net investment in
non-u.s.
operations and to manage the interest rate and currency exposure
on our long-term borrowings and certain short-term borrowings.
derivatives are used in many of our businesses, and we believe
that the associated market risk can only be understood relative
to all of the underlying assets or risks being hedged, or as
part of a broader trading strategy. accordingly, the market risk
of derivative positions is managed together with our
nonderivative positions.
the fair value of our derivative contracts is reflected net of
cash paid or received pursuant to credit support agreements and
is reported on a
net-by-counterparty
basis in our consolidated statements of financial condition when
management believes a legal right of setoff exists under an
enforceable netting agreement. for an otc derivative, our credit
exposure is directly with our counterparty and continues until
the maturity or termination of such contract.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the fair values of our otc
derivative assets and liabilities by product and by remaining
contractual maturity:
otc
derivatives
(in
millions)
as of november 2007
assets
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10 years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates
(1)
$
5,970
$
4,301
$
10,417
$
7,402
$
20,614
$
48,704
currencies
10,614
2,342
3,623
17,885
commodities
3,335
1,538
8,464
1,299
15,293
equities
4,616
1,329
1,560
2,114
10,191
total
$
24,535
$
9,510
$
24,064
$
11,716
$
22,248
$
92,073
liabilities
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10 years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates
(1)
$
6,980
$
1,212
$
11,675
$
6,614
$
11,579
$
38,060
currencies
9,662
1,977
3,641
16,617
commodities
3,912
2,082
5,827
1,304
13,463
equities
7,526
3,804
3,823
3,393
18,958
total
$
28,080
$
9,075
$
24,966
$
11,991
$
12,986
$
87,098
as of november 2006
assets
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10 years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates
(1)
$
2,432
$
1,706
$
5,617
$
5,217
$
6,201
$
21,173
currencies
5,578
3,103
1,669
12,259
commodities
3,892
1,215
5,836
1,258
12,432
equities
1,430
1,134
1,329
2,144
1,235
7,272
total
$
13,332
$
4,998
$
15,885
$
10,288
$
8,633
$
53,136
liabilities
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10 years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest
rates
(1)
$
2,807
$
1,242
$
6,064
$
3,582
$
5,138
$
18,833
currencies
6,859
1,290
2,582
11,859
commodities
3,078
4,253
1,643
9,905
equities
3,235
1,682
2,615
3,239
11,048
total
$
15,979
$
4,872
$
15,514
$
8,958
$
6,322
$
51,645
(1)
includes credit derivatives.
we enter into certain otc option transactions that provide us or
our counterparties with the right to extend the maturity of the
underlying contract. the fair value of these option contracts is
not material to the aggregate fair value of our otc derivative
portfolio. in the tables above, for option contracts that
require settlement by delivery of an underlying derivative
instrument, the remaining contractual maturity is generally
classified based upon the maturity date of the underlying
derivative instrument. in those instances where the underlying
instrument does not have a maturity date or either counterparty
has the right to settle in cash, the remaining contractual
maturity is generally based upon the option expiration date.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the distribution, by credit
rating, of substantially all of our exposure with respect to otc
derivatives as of november 2007, after taking into consideration
the effect of netting agreements. the categories shown reflect
our internally determined public rating agency equivalents:
otc derivative
credit exposure
($ in
millions)
as of
as of november 2007
november 2006
exposure
percentage of
percentage of
collateral
net of
total exposure
total exposure
credit rating equivalent
exposure
(1)
held
collateral
net of collateral
net of collateral
aaa/aaa
$
16,683
$
2,087
$
14,596
%
%
aa/aa2
28,562
4,143
24,419
a/a2
20,742
4,553
16,189
bbb/baa2
9,896
3,338
6,558
bb/ba2 or lower
13,696
6,218
7,478
unrated
2,494
1,325
1,169
total
$
92,073
$
21,664
$
70,409
%
%
(1)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support agreements of
$59.05billion.
the following tables set forth our otc derivative credit
exposure, net of collateral, by remaining contractual maturity:
exposure net of
collateral
(in
millions)
as of november 2007
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10 years
credit rating equivalent
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
(1)
aaa/aaa
$
3,669
$
1,132
$
2,453
$
1,904
$
5,438
$
14,596
aa/aa2
5,569
3,024
4,815
2,683
8,328
24,419
a/a2
5,913
1,242
4,288
1,544
3,202
16,189
bbb/baa2
2,087
2,236
1,021
6,558
bb/ba2 or lower
2,159
2,626
1,257
7,478
unrated
1,169
total
$
19,668
$
7,039
$
16,840
$
8,042
$
18,820
$
70,409
0 - 6
6 - 12
1 - 5
5 - 10
10 years
contract type
months
months
years
years
or greater
total
(1)
interest
rates(2)
$
5,454
$
3,291
$
7,255
$
5,788
$
17,341
$
39,129
currencies
8,266
1,735
3,037
13,979
commodities
2,757
1,352
5,619
11,092
equities
3,191
6,209
total
$
19,668
$
7,039
$
16,840
$
8,042
$
18,820
$
70,409
(1)
where we have obtained collateral from a counterparty under a
master trading agreement that covers multiple products and
transactions, we have allocated the collateral ratably based on
exposure before giving effect to such collateral.
(2)
includes credit derivatives.
table of contents
derivative transactions may also involve legal risks including
the risk that they are not authorized or appropriate for a
counterparty, that documentation has not been properly executed
or that executed agreements may not be enforceable against the
counterparty. we attempt to minimize these risks by obtaining
advice of counsel on the enforceability of agreements as well as
on the authority of a counterparty to effect the derivative
transaction. in addition, certain derivative transactions (e.g.,
credit derivative contracts) involve the risk that we may have
difficulty obtaining, or be unable to obtain, the underlying
security or obligation in order to satisfy any physical
settlement requirement.
liquidity and
funding risk
liquidity is of critical importance to companies in the
financial services sector. most failures of financial
institutions have occurred in large part due to insufficient
liquidity resulting from adverse circumstances. accordingly,
goldman sachs has in place a comprehensive set of liquidity and
funding policies that are intended to maintain significant
flexibility to address both goldman sachs-specific and broader
industry or market liquidity events. our principal objective is
to be able to fundgoldman sachs and to enable our core
businesses to continue to generate revenues, even under adverse
circumstances.
management has implemented a number of policies according to the
following liquidity risk management framework:
excess liquidity we maintain substantial excess
liquidity to meet a broad range of potential cash outflows in a
stressed environment including financing obligations.
asset-liability management we seek to maintain
funding sources that are sufficiently long-term in order to
withstand a prolonged or severe liquidity-stressed environment
without having to rely on asset sales.
conservative liability structure we access funding
across a diverse range of markets, products and counterparties,
emphasize less credit-sensitive sources of funding and
conservatively manage the distribution of funding across our
entity structure.
crisis planning we base our liquidity and funding
management on stress-scenario planning and maintain a crisis
plan detailing our response to a liquidity-threatening event.
excess
liquidity
our most important liquidity policy is to pre-fund what we
estimate will be our likely cash needs during a liquidity crisis
and hold such excess liquidity in the form of unencumbered,
highly liquid securities that may be sold or pledged to provide
same-day
liquidity. this global core excess liquidity is
intended to allow us to meet immediate obligations without
needing to sell other assets or depend on additional funding
from credit-sensitive markets. we believe that this pool of
excess liquidity provides us with a resilient source of funds
and gives us significant flexibility in managing through a
difficult funding environment. our global core excess reflects
the following principles:
the first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most
critical to a companys survival.
focus must be maintained on all potential cash and collateral
outflows, not just disruptions to financing flows. goldman
sachs businesses are diverse, and its cash needs are
driven by many factors, including market movements, collateral
requirements and client commitments, all of which can change
dramatically in a difficult funding environment.
during a liquidity crisis, credit-sensitive funding, including
unsecured debt and some types of secured financing agreements,
may be unavailable and the terms or availability of other types
of secured financing may change.
as a result of our policy to pre-fund liquidity that we estimate
may be needed in a crisis, we hold more unencumbered securities
and have larger unsecured debt balances than our businesses
would otherwise require. we believe that our liquidity is
stronger with greater
table of contents
balances of highly liquid unencumbered securities, even though
it increases our unsecured liabilities.
the size of our global core excess is based on an internal
liquidity model together with a qualitative assessment of the
condition of the financial markets and of goldman sachs. our
liquidity model identifies and estimates cash and collateral
outflows over a short-term horizon in a liquidity crisis,
including, but not limited to:
upcoming maturities of unsecured debt and letters of credit;
potential buybacks of a portion of our outstanding negotiable
unsecured debt;
adverse changes in the terms or availability of secured funding;
derivatives and other margin and collateral outflows, including
those due to market moves;
potential cash outflows associated with our prime brokerage
business;
additional collateral that could be called in the event of a
two-notch downgrade in our credit ratings;
draws on our unfunded commitments not supported by william
street funding corporation
(1);
and
upcoming cash outflows, such as tax and other large payments.
the following table sets forth the average loan value (the
estimated amount of cash that would be advanced by
counterparties against these securities) of our global core
excess:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s. dollar-denominated
$
48,635
$
40,862
non-u.s.
dollar-denominated
11,928
10,202
total global core excess
$
60,563
$
51,064
the u.s. dollar-denominated excess is comprised of only
unencumbered u.s. government securities, u.s. agency securities
and highly liquid u.s. agency mortgage-backed securities, all of
which are federal reserve repo-eligible, as well as overnight
cash deposits. our
non-u.s.
dollar-denominated excess is comprised of only unencumbered
french, german, united kingdom and japanese government bonds and
euro, british pound and japanese yen overnight cash deposits. we
strictly limit our global core excess to this narrowly defined
list of securities and cash because we believe they are highly
liquid, even in a difficult funding environment. we do not
believe other potential sources of excess liquidity, such as
lower-quality unencumbered securities or committed credit
facilities, are as reliable in a liquidity crisis.
the majority of our global core excess is structured such that
it is available to meet the liquidity requirements of our parent
company, group inc., and all of its subsidiaries. the remainder
is held in our principal
non-u.s.
operating entities, primarily to better match the currency and
timing requirements for those entities potential liquidity
obligations.
in addition to our global core excess, we have a significant
amount of other unencumbered securities as a result of our
business activities. these assets, which are located in the
united states, europe and asia, include other government bonds,
high-grade money market securities, corporate bonds and
marginable equities. we do not include these securities in our
global core excess.
(1)the
global core excess excludes liquid assets of $6.17billion
held separately by william street funding corporation. see
contractual obligations and commitments
above for a further discussion of the william street credit
extension program.
table of contents
we maintain global core excess and other unencumbered assets in
an amount that, if pledged or sold, would provide the funds
necessary to replace at least 110% of our unsecured obligations
that are scheduled to mature (or where holders have the option
to redeem) within the next 12months. we assume
conservative loan values that are based on stress-scenario
borrowing capacity and we regularly review these assumptions
asset class by asset class. the estimated aggregate loan value
of our global core excess and our other unencumbered assets
averaged $156.74billion and $134.38billion for the
fiscal years ended 2007 and 2006, respectively.
asset-liability
management
we seek to maintain a highly liquid balance sheet and
substantially all of our inventory is
marked-to-market
daily. we utilize aged inventory limits for certain financial
instruments as a disincentive to our businesses to hold
inventory over longer periods of time. we believe that these
limits provide a complementary mechanism for ensuring
appropriate balance sheet liquidity in addition to our standard
position limits. although our balance sheet fluctuates due to
seasonal activity, market conventions and periodic market
opportunities in certain of our businesses, our total assets and
adjusted assets at financial statement dates are not materially
different from those occurring within our reporting periods.
we seek to manage the maturity profile of our funding base such
that we should be able to liquidate our assets prior to our
liabilities coming due, even in times of prolonged or severe
liquidity stress. we do not rely on immediate sales of assets
(other than our global core excess) to maintain liquidity in a
distressed environment, although we recognize orderly asset
sales may be prudent and necessary in a persistent liquidity
crisis.
in order to avoid reliance on asset sales, our goal is to ensure
that we have sufficient total capital (unsecured long-term
borrowings plus total shareholders equity) to fund our
balance sheet for at least one year. the amount of our total
capital is based on an internal liquidity model, which
incorporates, among other things, the following long-term
financing requirements:
the portion of financial instruments owned that we believe could
not be funded on a secured basis in periods of market stress,
assuming conservative loan values;
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, property, leasehold
improvements and equipment, and other illiquid assets;
derivative and other margin and collateral requirements;
anticipated draws on our unfunded loan commitments; and
capital or other forms of financing in our regulated
subsidiaries that is in excess of their
long-term
financing requirements. see conservative
liability structure below for a further discussion of how
we fund our subsidiaries.
table of contents
certain financial instruments may be more difficult to fund on a
secured basis during times of market stress. accordingly, we
generally hold higher levels of total capital for these assets
than more liquid types of financial instruments. the table below
sets forth our aggregate holdings in these categories of
financial instruments:
as of november
(in millions)
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities
(1)
$
46,436
$
41,017
bank loans
(2)
49,154
28,196
high-yield securities
12,807
9,403
emerging market debt securities
3,343
2,291
private equity and real estate fund investments
(3)
16,244
5,968
emerging market equity securities
8,014
3,046
icbc ordinary shares
(4)
6,807
5,194
smfg convertible preferred stock
4,060
4,505
other restricted public equity securities
3,455
1,730
other investments in funds
(5)
3,437
(1)
excludes $7.64billion of
mortgage whole loans that were transferred to securitization
vehicles where such transfers were accounted for as secured
financings rather than sales under sfasno.140. we
distributed to investors the securities that were issued by the
securitization vehicles and therefore do not bear economic
exposure to the underlying mortgage whole loans.
(2)
includes funded commitments and
inventory held in connection with our origination and secondary
trading activities.
(3)
includes interests in our merchant
banking funds. such amounts exclude assets related to
consolidated investment funds of $8.13billion and
$6.03billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively, for which goldman sachs does not bear economic
exposure.
(4)
includes interests of
$4.30billion and $3.28billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively, held by investment funds
managed by goldman sachs.
(5)
includes interests in other
investment funds that we manage.
a large portion of these assets are funded through secured
funding markets or nonrecourse financing. we focus on
demonstrating a consistent ability to fund these assets on a
secured basis for extended periods of time to reduce refinancing
risk and to help ensure that they have an established amount of
loan value in order that they can be funded in periods of market
stress.
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding the financial instruments we
hold.
table of contents
conservative
liability structure
we seek to structure our liabilities conservatively to reduce
refinancing risk and the risk that we may redeem or repurchase
certain of our borrowings prior to their contractual maturity.
our conservative liability structure reflects the following
policies:
we fund a substantial portion of our inventory on a secured
basis. we believe secured financing provides goldman sachs with
a more stable source of liquidity than unsecured financing, as
it is less sensitive to changes in our credit due to the
underlying collateral.
our liquidity depends to an important degree on the stability of
our short-term unsecured financing base. accordingly, we prefer
the use of promissory notes (in which goldman sachs does not
make a market) over commercial paper, which we may repurchase
prior to maturity through the ordinary course of business as a
market maker. as of november 2007 and november 2006, our
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion
of unsecured long-term borrowings, were $71.56billion and
$47.90billion, respectively. see note4 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our unsecured short-term
borrowings.
we recognize that secured funding transactions have greater
refinancing risk when the underlying collateral is more
difficult to fund. consequently, we seek longer maturities for
secured funding transactions collateralized by these assets. in
some cases, we use extendible maturity features to obtain a
rolling minimum term to the funding.
we issue substantially all of our unsecured debt without
provisions that would, based solely upon an adverse change in
our credit ratings, financial ratios, earnings, cash flows or
stock price, trigger a requirement for an early payment,
collateral support, change in terms, acceleration of maturity or
the creation of an additional financial obligation.
we seek to maintain broad and diversified funding sources
globally for both secured and unsecured funding. we make
extensive use of the repurchase agreement and securities lending
markets, as well as other secured funding markets. in addition,
we issue debt through syndicated u.s. registered offerings, u.s.
registered and 144a medium-term note programs, offshore
medium-term note offerings and other bond offerings, u.s. and
non-u.s.
commercial paper and promissory note issuances, and other
methods. we also arrange for letters of credit to be issued on
our behalf.
we benefit from distributing our debt issuances through our own
sales force to a large, diverse global creditor base and we
believe that our relationships with our creditors are critical
to our liquidity. our creditors include banks, governments,
securities lenders, pension funds, insurance companies and
mutual funds. we access funding in a variety of markets in the
americas, europe and asia. we have imposed various internal
guidelines on investor concentration, including the amount of
our commercial paper that can be owned and letters of credit
that can be issued by any single investor or group of investors.
table of contents
to mitigate refinancing risk, we have created internal
guidelines on the principal amount of debt maturing on any one
day or during any week or year. the following table sets forth
our quarterly unsecured long-term borrowings maturity profile
through 2013:
unsecured
long-term borrowings maturity profile
($
in millions)
the weighted average maturity of our unsecured long-term
borrowings as of november 2007 was approximately seven years. we
swap a substantial portion of our long-term borrowings into u.s.
dollar obligations with short-term floating interest rates in
order to minimize our exposure to interest rates and foreign
exchange movements.
for a discussion of factors that could impair our ability to
access the capital markets, see certain risk
factors that may affect our business above as well as
risk factors in parti, item1a of the
annual report on
form10-k.
subsidiary funding policies.substantially all of
our unsecured funding is raised by our parent company, group
inc. the parent company then lends the necessary funds to its
subsidiaries, some of which are regulated, to meet their asset
financing and capital requirements. in addition, the parent
company provides its regulated subsidiaries with the necessary
capital to meet their regulatory requirements. the benefits of
this approach to subsidiary funding include enhanced control and
greater flexibility to meet the funding requirements of our
subsidiaries.
our intercompany funding policies are predicated on an
assumption that, unless legally provided for, funds or
securities are not freely available from a subsidiary to its
parent company or other subsidiaries. in particular, many of our
subsidiaries are subject to laws that authorize regulatory
bodies to block or limit the flow of funds from those
subsidiaries to group inc. regulatory action of that kind could
impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on
obligations, including debt obligations. as such, we assume that
capital or other financing provided to our regulated
subsidiaries is not available to our parent company or other
subsidiaries. in addition, we assume that the global core excess
held in our principal
non-u.s.
operating entities will not be available to our parent company
or other subsidiaries and therefore is available only to meet
the potential liquidity requirements of those entities.
table of contents
we also manage our liquidity risk by requiring senior and
subordinated intercompany loans to have maturities equal to or
shorter than the maturities of the aggregate borrowings of the
parent company. this policy ensures that the subsidiaries
obligations to the parent company will generally mature in
advance of the parent companys third-party borrowings. in
addition, many of our subsidiaries and affiliates maintain
unencumbered assets to cover their intercompany borrowings
(other than subordinated debt) in order to mitigate parent
company liquidity risk.
group inc. has provided substantial amounts of equity and
subordinated indebtedness, directly or indirectly, to its
regulated subsidiaries; for example, as of november2007,
group inc. had $24.49billion of such equity and
subordinated indebtedness invested in goldman, sachs&
co., its principal u.s. registered
broker-dealer;
$27.51billion invested in goldman sachs international, a
regulated u.k.
broker-dealer;
$2.40billion invested in goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p., a u.s. registered
broker-dealer; and $3.15billion invested in goldman sachs
japan co., ltd., a regulated japanese
broker-dealer.
group inc. also had $44.99billion of unsubordinated loans
to these entities as of november2007, as well as
significant amounts of capital invested in and loans to its
other regulated subsidiaries.
crisis
planning
in order to be prepared for a liquidity event, or a period of
market stress, we base our liquidity risk management framework
and our resulting funding and liquidity policies on conservative
stress-scenario
assumptions. our planning incorporates several market-based and
operational stress scenarios. we also periodically conduct
liquidity crisis drills to test our lines of communication and
backup funding procedures.
in addition, we maintain a liquidity crisis plan that specifies
an approach for analyzing and responding to a
liquidity-threatening event. the plan provides the framework to
estimate the likely impact of a liquidity event on goldman sachs
based on some of the risks identified above and outlines which
and to what extent liquidity maintenance activities should be
implemented based on the severity of the event. it also lists
the crisis management team and internal and external parties to
be contacted to ensure effective distribution of information.
credit
ratings
we rely upon the short-term and long-term debt capital markets
to fund a significant portion of our day-to-day operations. the
cost and availability of debt financing is influenced by our
credit ratings. credit ratings are important when we are
competing in certain markets and when we seek to engage in
longer term transactions, including otc derivatives. we believe
our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit rating
agencies assessment of our liquidity, market, credit and
operational risk management practices, the level and variability
of our earnings, our capital base, our franchise, reputation and
management, our corporate governance and the external operating
environment. see certain risk factors that may
affect our business above for a discussion of the risks
associated with a reduction in our credit ratings.
the following table sets forth our unsecured credit ratings as
of november 2007:
short-term debt
long-term debt
subordinated debt
preferred stock
dominion bond rating servicelimited
r-1(middle)
aa (low)
a (high)
a
fitch, inc.
f1+
aa
a+
a+
moodys investors service
p-1
aa3
a1
a2
standard& poors
a-1+
aa
a+
a
rating and investment information, inc.
a-1+
aa
not applicable
not applicable
table of contents
as of november 2007, collateral or termination payments pursuant
to bilateral agreements with certain counterparties of
approximately $728million would have been required in the
event of a
one-notch
reduction in our long-term credit ratings. in evaluating our
liquidity requirements, we consider additional collateral or
termination payments that would be required in the event of a
two-notch
downgrade in our long-term credit ratings, as well as collateral
that has not been called by counterparties, but is available to
them.
cash
flows
as a global financial institution, our cash flows are complex
and interrelated and bear little relation to our net earnings
and net assets and, consequently, we believe that traditional
cash flow analysis is less meaningful in evaluating our
liquidity position than the excess liquidity and
asset-liability
management policies described above. cash flow analysis may,
however, be helpful in highlighting certain macro trends and
strategic initiatives in our business.
year ended november 2007.our cash and cash
equivalents increased by $5.59billion to
$11.88billion at the end of 2007. we raised
$73.79billion in net cash from financing and investing
activities, primarily through the issuance of unsecured
borrowings, partially offset by common stock repurchases. we
used net cash of $68.20billion in our operating
activities, primarily to capitalize on trading and investing
opportunities for our clients and ourselves.
year ended november 2006.our cash and cash
equivalents decreased by $3.97billion to
$6.29billion at the end of 2006. we raised
$64.09billion in net cash from financing activities,
primarily in long-term borrowings as well as through secured
financings, partially offset by common stock repurchases. we
used net cash of $68.06billion in our operating and
investing activities, primarily to capitalize on trading and
investing opportunities for our clients and ourselves.
operational
risk
operational risk relates to the risk of loss arising from
shortcomings or failures in internal processes, people or
systems, or from external events. operational risk can arise
from many factors ranging from routine processing errors to
potentially costly incidents related to, for example, major
systems failures. operational risk may also cause reputational
harm. thus, efforts to identify, manage and mitigate operational
risk must be equally sensitive to the risk of reputational
damage as well as the risk of financial loss.
we manage operational risk through the application of
long-standing, but continuously evolving, firmwide control
standards which are supported by the training, supervision and
development of our people; the active participation and
commitment of senior management in a continuous process of
identifying and mitigating key operational risks across goldman
sachs; and a framework of strong and independent control
departments that monitor operational risk on a daily basis.
together, these elements form a strong firmwide control culture
that serves as the foundation of our efforts to minimize
operational risk exposure.
the operational risk department, an independent risk management
function, is responsible for developing and implementing a
standardized framework to identify, measure, monitor, and report
operational risks to support active risk management across
goldman sachs. this framework, which evolves with the changing
needs of our businesses and regulatory guidance, incorporates
analysis of internal and external operational risk events,
business environment and internal control factors, and scenario
analysis. the framework also provides regular reporting of our
operational risk exposures to our board, risk committees and
senior management. for a further discussion of operational risk
see risk factors in parti,
item1a of the annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
recent accounting
developments
finno.48.in june 2006, the fasb issued
finno.48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxes an interpretation of fasb statement
no.109. finno.48 requires that we
determine whether a tax position is more likely than not to be
sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related
appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits
of the position. once it is determined that a position meets
this recognition threshold, the position is measured to
determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in the
financial statements. we will adopt the provisions of
finno.48 in the first quarter of 2008. adoption of
finno.48 will not have a material effect on our
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
sfasno.157.in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.157, fair value
measurements. sfasno.157 clarifies that fair
value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants. under
sfasno.157, fair value measurements are not adjusted
for transaction costs.
sfasno.157 nullifies the guidance included in
emerging issues task force (eitf) issue
no.02-3,
issues involved in accounting for derivative contracts
held for trading purposes and contracts involved in energy
trading and risk management activities, that prohibited
the recognition of a day one gain or loss on derivative
contracts (and hybrid financial instruments measured at fair
value under sfasno.155)where we were unable to
verify all of the significant model inputs to observable market
data and/or verify the model to market transactions. however,
sfasno.157 requires that a fair value measurement
reflect the assumptions market participants would use in pricing
an asset or liability based on the best information available.
assumptions include the risks inherent in a particular valuation
technique (such as a pricing model) and/or the risks inherent in
the inputs to the model.
in addition, sfasno.157 prohibits the recognition of
block discounts for large holdings of unrestricted
financial instruments where quoted prices are readily and
regularly available for an identical asset or liability in an
active market.
the provisions of sfasno.157 are to be applied
prospectively, except changes in fair value measurements that
result from the initial application of sfasno.157 to
existing derivative financial instruments measured under eitf
issue
no.02-3,
existing hybrid financial instruments measured at fair value and
block discounts, all of which are to be recorded as an
adjustment to beginning retained earnings in the year of
adoption.
we adopted sfasno.157 as of the beginning of 2007.
the transition adjustment to beginning retained earnings was a
gain of $51million, net of tax. for the first quarter of
2007, the effect of the nullification of eitf issue
no.02-3
and the removal of liquidity discounts for actively traded
positions was not material. in addition, under
sfasno.157, gains on principal investments are
recorded in the absence of substantial third-party transactions
if market evidence is sufficient. in the first quarter of 2007,
we recorded approximately $500million of such gains as a
result of adopting sfasno.157.
sfasno.158.in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.158, employers accounting
for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and
132-r. sfasno.158 requires an entity to
recognize in its statement of financial condition the funded
status of its defined benefit pension and postretirement plans,
measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan
assets and the benefit obligation. sfasno.158 also
requires an entity to recognize changes in the funded status of
a defined benefit pension and postretirement plan within
accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, to the
extent such changes are not recognized in earnings as components
of periodic net benefit cost. sfasno.158 is
effective as of the end of the fiscal year ending after
december15, 2006. we adopted sfasno.158 as of
the end of 2007. the adjustment to accumulated other
comprehensive loss for the initial application of
sfasno.158 was $194million, net of tax.
table of contents
sfasno.159.in february 2007, the fasb
issued sfasno.159, the fair value option for
financial assets and financial liabilities, which gives
entities the option to measure eligible financial assets,
financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair value (i.e.,
the fair value option), on an
instrument-by-instrument
basis, that are otherwise not accounted for at fair value under
other accounting standards. the election to use the fair value
option is available at specified election dates, such as when an
entity first recognizes a financial asset or financial liability
or upon entering into a firm commitment. subsequent changes in
fair value must be recorded in earnings. additionally,
sfasno.159 allows for a one-time election for
existing positions upon adoption, with the transition adjustment
recorded to beginning retained earnings.
we adopted sfasno.159 as of the beginning of 2007
and elected to apply the fair value option to the following
financial assets and liabilities existing at the time of
adoption:
certain unsecured short-term borrowings, consisting of all
promissory notes and commercial paper;
certain other secured financings, primarily transfers accounted
for as financings rather than sales under sfasno.140
and debt raised through our william street program;
certain unsecured long-term borrowings, including prepaid
physical commodity transactions;
resale and repurchase agreements;
securities borrowed and loaned within trading and principal
investments, consisting of our matched book and certain firm
financing activities;
securities held by gs bank usa, which were previously accounted
for as available-for-sale; and
receivables from customers and counterparties arising from
transfers accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases
under sfasno.140.
the transition adjustment to beginning retained earnings related
to the adoption of sfasno.159 was a loss of
$45million, net of tax, substantially all of which related
to applying the fair value option to prepaid physical commodity
transactions.
subsequent to the adoption of sfasno.159, we have
elected to apply the fair value option (i)to new positions
within the above categories, (ii)to corporate loans,
corporate loan commitments and certificates of deposit issued by
gs bank usa and (iii)generally to investments where we
would otherwise apply the equity method of accounting. in
certain cases, we may continue to apply the equity method of
accounting to those investments which are strategic in nature or
closely related to our principal business activities, where we
have a significant degree of involvement in the cash flows or
operations of the investee, and/or where cost-benefit
considerations are less significant.
the primary reasons for electing the fair value option are
mitigating volatility in earnings from using different
measurement attributes, simplification and cost-benefit
considerations.
sopno.07-1
and fsp
finno.46-r-7.in
june 2007, the american institute of certified public
accountants (aicpa) issued statement of position (sop)
no.07-1,
clarification of the scope of the audit and accounting
guide audits of investment companies and accounting
by parent companies and equity method investors for investments
in investment companies.
sopno.07-1
clarifies when an entity may apply the provisions of the audit
and accounting guide for investment companies (the guide). in
may 2007, the fasb issued fsp
finno.46-r-7,
application of
fin46-r
to investment companies, which amends
finno.46-r
to make permanent the temporary deferral of the application of
finno.46-r
to entities within the scope of the revised guide under
sopno.07-1.
fsp
finno.46-r-7
is effective upon adoption of
sopno.07-1.
in november 2007, the fasb issued proposed fsp
sopno.07-1-a,
the effective date of aicpa statement of position
07-1,
which proposes to indefinitely defer the effective date for
sopno.07-01
and, consequently,
fspfinno.46-r-7.
table of contents
eitf issue
no.06-11.in
june 2007, the eitf reached consensus on issue
no.06-11,
accounting for income tax benefits of dividends on
share-based payment awards. eitf issue
no.06-11
requires that the tax benefit related to dividend equivalents
paid on restricted stock units, which are expected to vest, be
recorded as an increase to additional paid-in capital. we
currently account for this tax benefit as a reduction to income
tax expense. eitf issue
no.06-11
is to be applied prospectively for tax benefits on dividends
declared in fiscal years beginning after december15, 2007,
and we expect to adopt the provisions of eitf issue
no.06-11
beginning in the first quarter of 2009. we are currently
evaluating the impact of adopting eitf issue
no.06-11
on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
item7a.quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk is set
forth under managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations risk
management in partii, item7 of the annual
report on
form10-k.
table of contents
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
index
page
no.
managements report on internal control over
financial reporting
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive
income
notes to consolidated financial statements
note 1description of
business
note 2significant accounting
policies
note 3financial instruments
note 4unsecured short-term
borrowings
note 5unsecured long-term
borrowings
note 6commitments,
contingencies and guarantees
note 7shareholders
equity
note 8earnings per common
share
note 9goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets
note 10other assets and other
liabilities
note 11employee benefit
plans
note 12employee incentive
plans
note 13transactions with
affiliated funds
note 14income taxes
note 15regulation
note 16business segments
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
selected financial data
financial statement schedule
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
schedule icondensed
nonconsolidated financial information of registrant
(parent company only)
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of
earnings
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial
condition
f-3
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash
flows
f-4
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
f-5
table of contents
managements
report on internal control over
financial reporting
management of the goldman sachs group, inc., together with its
consolidated subsidiaries (thefirm), is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting. the firms internal control over
financial reporting is a process designed under the supervision
of the firms principal executive and principal financial
officers to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the
firms financial statements for external reporting purposes
in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles.
as of the end of the firms 2007 fiscal year, management
conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of the firms
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework
established in internal controlintegrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this
assessment, management has determined that the firms
internal control over financial reporting as of
november30, 2007 was effective.
our internal control over financial reporting includes policies
and procedures that pertain to the maintenance of records that,
in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect transactions
and dispositions of assets; provide reasonable assurances that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management
and the directors of the firm; and provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use or disposition of the firms assets that
could have a material effect on our financial statements.
the firms internal control over financial reporting as of
november30, 2007 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing on
page108, which expresses an unqualified opinion on the
effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial
reporting as of november30, 2007.
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and the shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in
the accompanying index present fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of the goldman sachs group, inc. and its
subsidiaries (the company) at november30, 2007 and
november24, 2006, and the results of its operations and
its cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the period
ended november30, 2007 in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united states of america.
in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement schedule
listed in the accompanying index presents fairly, in all
material respects, the information set forth therein when read
in conjunction with the related consolidated financial
statements. also in our opinion, the company maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of november30, 2007, based on criteria
established in internal controlintegrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the
companys management is responsible for these financial
statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining
effective internal control over financial reporting and for its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting, included in managements report on
internal control over financial reporting appearing on
page107. our responsibility is to express opinions on
these financial statements, on the financial statement schedule,
and on the companys internal control over financial
reporting based on our integrated audits. we conducted our
audits in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement and whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. our audits of the financial statements included
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. our audit of internal control over financial
reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a
material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design
and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the
assessed risk. our audits also included performing such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we
believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our
opinions.
as discussed in note2 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company has adopted sfasno.157,
fair value measurements and sfasno.159,
the fair value option for financial assets and financial
liabilities.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/pricewaterhousecoopers
llp
new york, new york
january24, 2008
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
revenues
investment banking
$
7,555
$
5,613
$
3,599
trading and principal investments
29,714
24,027
15,452
asset management and securities services
4,731
4,527
3,090
interest income
45,968
35,186
21,250
total revenues
87,968
69,353
43,391
interest expense
41,981
31,688
18,153
revenues, net of interest expense
45,987
37,665
25,238
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
20,190
16,457
11,758
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
2,758
1,985
1,416
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
cost of power generation
other expenses
1,326
1,132
total non-compensation expenses
8,193
6,648
5,207
total operating expenses
28,383
23,105
16,965
pre-tax earnings
17,604
14,560
8,273
provision for taxes
6,005
5,023
2,647
net earnings
11,599
9,537
5,626
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
11,407
$
9,398
$
5,609
earnings per common share
basic
$
26.34
$
20.93
$
11.73
diluted
24.73
19.69
11.21
average common shares outstanding
basic
433.0
449.0
478.1
diluted
461.2
477.4
500.2
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of financial condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
11,882
$
6,293
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(includes $94,018 and $20,723 at fair value as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively)
119,939
80,990
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
19,078
13,223
receivables from customers and counterparties (includes $1,950
at fair value as of november 2007)
129,105
79,790
collateralized agreements:
securities borrowed (includes $83,277 at fair value as of
november 2007)
277,413
219,342
financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell
(includes $85,717 at fair value as of november 2007)
85,717
82,126
financial instruments owned, at fair value
406,457
298,563
financial instruments owned and pledged as collateral, at fair
value
46,138
35,998
total financial instruments owned, at fair value
452,595
334,561
other assets
24,067
21,876
total assets
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
liabilities and shareholders equity
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion
of unsecured long-term borrowings (includes $48,331 and $10,220
at fair value as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively)
$
71,557
$
47,904
bank deposits (includes $463 at fair value as of november 2007)
15,370
10,697
payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
8,335
6,293
payables to customers and counterparties
310,118
206,884
collateralized financings:
securities loaned (includes $5,449 at fair value as of november
2007)
28,624
22,208
financial instruments sold under agreements to repurchase
(includes $159,178 at fair value as of november 2007)
159,178
147,492
other secured financings (includes $33,581 and $3,300 at fair
value as of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively)
65,710
50,424
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
215,023
155,805
other liabilities and accrued expenses
38,907
31,866
unsecured long-term borrowings (includes $15,928 and $7,250 at
fair value as of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively)
164,174
122,842
total liabilities
1,076,996
802,415
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share;
150,000,000shares authorized, 124,000shares issued
and outstanding as of both november 2007 and november 2006, with
liquidation preference of $25,000 per share
3,100
3,100
common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
4,000,000,000shares authorized, 618,707,032 and
599,697,200shares issued as of november 2007 and november
2006, respectively, and 390,682,013 and 412,666,084shares
outstanding as of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
9,302
6,290
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
200,000,000shares authorized, no shares issued and
outstanding
additional paid-in capital
22,027
19,731
retained earnings
38,642
27,868
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(118
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost, par value $0.01 per
share; 228,025,019 and 187,031,116shares as of november
2007 and november 2006, respectively
(30,159
)
(21,230
)
total shareholders equity
42,800
35,786
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders
equity
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
preferred stock
balance, beginning of year
$
3,100
$
1,750
$
issued
1,350
1,750
balance, end of year
3,100
3,100
1,750
common stock, par value $0.01 per share
balance, beginning of year
issued
balance, end of year
restricted stock units and employee stock options
balance, beginning of year
6,290
3,415
2,013
issuance and amortization of restricted stock units and employee
stock options
4,684
3,787
1,871
delivery of common stock underlying restricted stock units
(1,548
)
(781
)
(423
)
forfeiture of restricted stock units and employee stock options
(113
)
(129
)
(37
)
exercise of employee stock options
(11
)
(2
)
(9
)
balance, end of year
9,302
6,290
3,415
additional paid-in capital
balance, beginning of year
19,731
17,159
15,501
issuance of common stock, including the delivery of common stock
underlying restricted  stock units and proceeds from the
exercise of employee stock options
2,338
2,432
1,580
cancellation of restricted stock units in satisfaction of
withholding tax requirements
(929
)
(375
)
(163
)
stock purchase contract fee related to automatic preferred
enhanced capital securities
(20
)
preferred stock issuance costs
(1
)
(31
)
excess net tax benefit related to share-based compensation
cash settlement of share-based compensation
(1
)
(137
)
balance, end of year
22,027
19,731
17,159
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year, as previously reported
27,868
19,085
13,970
cumulative effect of adjustment from adoption of
sfasno.157, net of tax
cumulative effect of adjustment from adoption of
sfasno.159, net of tax
(45
)
balance, beginning of year, after cumulative effect of
adjustments
27,874
19,085
13,970
net earnings
11,599
9,537
5,626
dividends and dividend equivalents declared on common stock and
restricted stock units
(639
)
(615
)
(494
)
dividends declared on preferred stock
(192
)
(139
)
(17
)
balance, end of year
38,642
27,868
19,085
unearned compensation
balance, beginning of year
(117
)
amortization of restricted stock units
balance, end of year
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
balance, beginning of year
adjustment from adoption of sfasno.158, net of tax
(194
)
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
(11
)
net gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges, net of tax
(2
)
(7
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale securities,
net of tax
(12
)
reclassification to retained earnings from adoption of
sfasno.159, net of tax
(8
)
balance, end of year
(118
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost
balance, beginning of year
(21,230
)
(13,413
)
(6,305
)
repurchased
(8,956
)
(7,817
)
(7,108
)
reissued
balance, end of year
(30,159
)
(21,230
)
(13,413
)
total shareholders equity
$
42,800
$
35,786
$
28,002
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
11,599
$
9,537
$
5,626
non-cash items included in net earnings
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
deferred income taxes
(1,505
)
(450
)
share-based compensation
4,465
3,654
1,756
changes in operating assets and liabilities
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(39,079
)
(21,044
)
(3,226
)
net receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
(3,811
)
(1,794
)
1,322
net payables to customers and counterparties
53,857
9,823
2,953
securities borrowed, net of securities loaned
(51,655
)
(28,666
)
(32,777
)
financial instruments sold under agreements to repurchase, net
of financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell
8,095
(42
)
62,269
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(118,864
)
(48,479
)
(66,899
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
57,938
6,384
16,974
other, net
7,962
12,823
(815
)
net cash used for operating activities
(68,197
)
(58,314
)
(12,413
)
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(2,130
)
(1,744
)
(1,421
)
proceeds from sales of property, leasehold improvements and
equipment
business acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(1,900
)
(1,661
)
(556
)
proceeds from sales of investments
4,294
2,114
purchase of available-for-sale securities
(872
)
(12,922
)
proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities
4,396
net cash provided by/(used for) investing activities
(9,748
)
(1,064
)
cash flows from financing activities
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
12,262
(4,031
)
(5
)
other secured financings (short-term), net
2,780
16,856
2,238
proceeds from issuance of other secured financings (long-term)
21,703
14,451
7,279
repayment of other secured financings (long-term), including the
current portion
(7,355
)
(7,420
)
(5,941
)
proceeds from issuance of unsecured long-term borrowings
57,516
48,839
35,898
repayment of unsecured long-term borrowings, including the
current portion
(14,823
)
(13,510
)
(16,399
)
derivative contracts with a financing element, net
4,814
3,494
1,060
bank deposits, net
4,673
10,697
common stock repurchased
(8,956
)
(7,817
)
(7,108
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock,
preferred stock and restricted stock units
(831
)
(754
)
(511
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
1,613
1,143
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
1,349
1,719
excess tax benefit related to share-based compensation
cash settlement of share-based compensation
(1
)
(137
)
net cash provided by financing activities
73,390
64,094
19,373
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
5,589
(3,968
)
5,896
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
6,293
10,261
4,365
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
11,882
$
6,293
$
10,261
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were
$40.74billion, $30.98billion and $17.49billion
for the years ended november 2007, november 2006 and november
2005, respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were
$5.78billion, $4.56billion and $2.47billion
for the years ended november2007, november 2006 and
november 2005, respectively.
non-cash activities:
the firm assumed $409million, $498million and
$1.15billion of debt in connection with business
acquisitions for the years ended november 2007, november 2006
and november 2005, respectively. for the year ended november
2007, the firm issued $17million of common stock in
connection with business acquisitions.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
year ended november
(in millions)
net earnings
$
11,599
$
9,537
$
5,626
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
(11
)
net gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges, net of tax
(2
)
(7
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale securities,
net of tax
(12
)
comprehensive income
$
11,662
$
9,558
$
5,615
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
note1.
description
of business
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc.), a delaware
corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries
(collectively, the firm), is a leading global investment
banking, securities and investment management firm that provides
a wide range of services worldwide to a substantial and
diversified client base that includes corporations, financial
institutions, governments and
high-net-worth
individuals.
the firms activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking.the firm provides a broad range
of investment banking services to a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals.
trading and principal investments.the firm
facilitates client transactions with a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals and takes proprietary positions
through market making in, trading of and investing in fixed
income and equity products, currencies, commodities and
derivatives on these products. in addition, the firm engages in
market-making and specialist activities on equities and options
exchanges and clears client transactions on major stock, options
and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection with the
firms merchant banking and other investing activities, the
firm makes principal investments directly and through funds that
the firm raises and manages.
asset management and securities services.the firm
provides investment advisory and financial planning services and
offers investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
provides prime brokerage services, financing services and
securities lending services to institutional clients, including
hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
note2.
significant
accounting policies
basis of
presentation
these consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
group inc. and all other entities in which the firm has a
controlling financial interest. all material intercompany
transactions and balances have been eliminated.
the firm determines whether it has a controlling financial
interest in an entity by first evaluating whether the entity is
a voting interest entity, a variable interest entity (vie) or a
qualifying
special-purpose
entity (qspe) under generally accepted accounting principles.
voting interest entities.voting interest entities
are entities in which (i)the total equity investment at
risk is sufficient to enable the entity to finance its
activities independently and (ii)the equity holders have
the obligation to absorb losses, the right to receive residual
returns and the right to make decisions about the entitys
activities. voting interest entities are consolidated in
accordance with accounting research bulletin (arb) no.51,
consolidated financial statements, as amended. arb
no.51states that the usual condition for a
controlling financial interest in an entity is ownership of a
majority voting interest. accordingly, the firm consolidates
voting interest entities in which it has a majority voting
interest.
variable interest entities.vies are entities that
lack one or more of the characteristics of a voting interest
entity. a controlling financial interest in a vie is present
when an enterprise has a variable interest, or a combination of
variable interests, that will absorb a majority of the
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
vies expected losses, receive a majority of the vies
expected residual returns, or both. the enterprise with a
controlling financial interest, known as the primary
beneficiary, consolidates the vie. in accordance with financial
accounting standards board (fasb) interpretation (fin)
no.46-r,
consolidation of variable interest entities, the
firm consolidates vies for which it is the primary beneficiary.
the firm determines whether it is the primary beneficiary of a
vie by first performing a qualitative analysis of the vie that
includes a review of, among other factors, its capital
structure, contractual terms, which interests create or absorb
variability, related party relationships and the design of the
vie. where qualitative analysis is not conclusive, the firm
performs a quantitative analysis. for purposes of allocating a
vies expected losses and expected residual returns to its
variable interest holders, the firm utilizes the top
down method. under that method, the firm calculates its
share of the vies expected losses and expected residual
returns using the specific cash flows that would be allocated to
it, based on contractual arrangements
and/or the
firms position in the capital structure of the vie, under
various probability-weighted scenarios.
qspes.qspes are passive entities that are commonly
used in mortgage and other securitization transactions.
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.140,
accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets
and extinguishments of liabilities, sets forth the
criteria an entity must satisfy to be a qspe. these criteria
include the types of assets a qspe may hold, limits on asset
sales, the use of derivatives and financial guarantees, and the
level of discretion a servicer may exercise in attempting to
collect receivables. these criteria may require management to
make judgments about complex matters, including whether a
derivative is considered passive and the degree of discretion a
servicer may exercise. in accordance with sfasno.140
and
finno.46-r,
the firm does not consolidate qspes.
equity-method investments.when the firm does not
have a controlling financial interest in an entity but exerts
significant influence over the entitys operating and
financial policies (generally defined as owning a voting
interest of 20% to 50%) and has an investment in common stock or
in-substance
common stock, the firm accounts for its investment in accordance
with the equity method of accounting prescribed by accounting
principles board (apb) opinion no.18, the equity
method of accounting for investments in common stock. for
investments acquired subsequent to the adoption of
sfasno.159, the fair value option for
financial assets and financial liabilities, the firm
generally has elected to apply the fair value option in
accounting for such investments. see recent
accounting developments for a discussion of the
firms adoption of sfasno.159.
other.if the firm does not consolidate an entity or
apply the equity method of accounting, the firm accounts for its
investment at fair value. the firm also has formed numerous
nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party investors that
are typically organized as limited partnerships. the firm acts
as general partner for these funds and generally does not hold a
majority of the economic interests in these funds. the firm has
generally provided the third-party investors with rights to
terminate the funds or to remove the firm as the general
partner. these fund investments are included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
unless otherwise stated herein, all references to november 2007,
november 2006 and november 2005 refer to the firms fiscal
years ended, or the dates, as the context requires,
november30, 2007, november24, 2006 and
november25, 2005, respectively. certain reclassifications
have been made to previously reported amounts to conform to the
current presentation.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
use of
estimates
these consolidated financial statements have been prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that
require management to make certain estimates and assumptions.
the most important of these estimates and assumptions relate to
fair value measurements, the accounting for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets and the provision for potential
losses that may arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings
and tax audits. although these and other estimates and
assumptions are based on the best available information, actual
results could be materially different from these estimates.
revenue
recognition
investment banking.underwriting revenues and fees
from mergers and acquisitions and other financial advisory
assignments are recognized in the consolidated statements of
earnings when the services related to the underlying transaction
are completed under the terms of the engagement. expenses
associated with such transactions are deferred until the related
revenue is recognized or the engagement is otherwise concluded.
underwriting revenues are presented net of related expenses.
expenses associated with financial advisory transactions are
recorded as
non-compensation
expenses, net of client reimbursements.
financial instruments.total financial
instruments owned, at fair value and financial
instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value are
reflected in the consolidated statements of financial condition
on a trade-date basis. related unrealized gains or losses are
generally recognized in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings.
the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that
would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants
at the measurement date (the exit price). instruments that the
firm owns (long positions) are marked to bid prices, and
instruments that the firm has sold, but not yet purchased (short
positions), are marked to offer prices. fair value measurements
are not adjusted for transaction costs.
the firm adopted sfasno.157, fair value
measurements, as of the beginning of 2007.
sfasno.157 establishes a fair value hierarchy that
prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure
fair value. the hierarchy gives the highest priority to
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
or liabilities (level1 measurements) and the lowest
priority to unobservable inputs (level3 measurements). the
three levels of the fair value hierarchy under
sfasno.157 are described below:
basis of fair value
measurement
level1
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible
at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or
liabilities;
level2
quoted prices in markets that are not active or financial
instruments for which all significant inputs are observable,
either directly or indirectly;
level3
prices or valuations that require inputs that are both
significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
a financial instruments level within the fair value
hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is
significant to the fair value measurement. see
recent accounting developments for a
discussion of the impact of adopting sfasno.157.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
in determining fair value, the firm separates its
financial instruments owned, at fair value and its
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair
value into two categories: cash instruments and derivative
contracts.
cash instruments.the firms cash instruments
are generally classified within level1 or level2 of
the fair value hierarchy because they are valued using quoted
market prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative
pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency.
the types of instruments valued based on quoted market prices in
active markets include most u.s.government and agency
securities, many other sovereign government obligations, active
listed equities and most money market securities. such
instruments are generally classified within level1 of the
fair value hierarchy. the firm does not adjust the quoted price
for such instruments, even in situations where the firm holds a
large position and a sale could reasonably impact the quoted
price.
the types of instruments valued based on quoted prices in
markets that are not active, broker or dealer quotations, or
alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price
transparency include most investment-grade and high-yield
corporate bonds, most mortgage products, certain corporate bank
and bridge loans, less liquid listed equities, state, municipal
and provincial obligations, most physical commodities and
certain loan commitments. such instruments are generally
classified within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
certain cash instruments are classified within level3 of
the fair value hierarchy because they trade infrequently and
therefore have little or no price transparency. such instruments
include private equity and real estate fund investments, certain
corporate bank and bridge loans, less liquid mortgage whole
loans, distressed debt instruments and certain loan commitments.
the transaction price is initially used as the best estimate of
fair value. accordingly, when a pricing model is used to value
such an instrument, the model is adjusted so that the model
value at inception equals the transaction price. this valuation
is adjusted only when changes to inputs and assumptions are
corroborated by evidence such as transactions in similar
instruments, completed or pending
third-party
transactions in the underlying investment or comparable
entities, subsequent rounds of financing, recapitalizations and
other transactions across the capital structure, offerings in
the equity or debt capital markets, and changes in financial
ratios or cash flows.
for positions that are not traded in active markets or are
subject to transfer restrictions, valuations are adjusted to
reflect illiquidity
and/or
non-transferability, and such adjustments are generally based on
available market evidence. in the absence of such evidence,
managements best estimate is used.
derivative contracts.derivative contracts can be
exchange-traded or over-the-counter (otc). exchange-traded
derivatives typically fall within level1 or level2
of the fair value hierarchy depending on whether they are deemed
to be actively traded or not. the firm generally values
exchange-traded derivatives within portfolios using models which
calibrate to market clearing levels and eliminate timing
differences between the closing price of the exchange-traded
derivatives and their underlying cash instruments. in such
cases,
exchange-traded
derivatives are classified within level2 of the fair value
hierarchy.
otc derivatives are valued using market transactions and other
market evidence whenever possible, including market-based inputs
to models, model calibration to market clearing transactions,
broker or dealer quotations or alternative pricing sources with
reasonable levels of price transparency. where models are used,
the selection of a particular model to value an otc derivative
depends upon the contractual terms of, and specific risks
inherent in, the instrument as well as the availability of
pricing information in the market. the firm generally
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
uses similar models to value similar instruments. valuation
models require a variety of inputs, including contractual terms,
market prices, yield curves, credit curves, measures of
volatility, prepayment rates and correlations of such inputs.
for otc derivatives that trade in liquid markets, such as
generic forwards, swaps and options, model inputs can generally
be verified and model selection does not involve significant
management judgment. such instruments are typically classified
within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
certain otc derivatives trade in less liquid markets with
limited pricing information, and the determination of fair value
for these derivatives is inherently more difficult. such
instruments are classified within level3 of the fair value
hierarchy. where the firm does not have corroborating market
evidence to support significant model inputs and cannot verify
the model to market transactions, transaction price is initially
used as the best estimate of fair value. accordingly, when a
pricing model is used to value such an instrument, the model is
adjusted so that the model value at inception equals the
transaction price. the valuations of these less liquid otc
derivatives are typically based on level1
and/or
level2 inputs that can be observed in the market, as well
as unobservable level3 inputs. subsequent to initial
recognition, the firm updates the level1 and level2
inputs to reflect observable market changes, with resulting
gains and losses reflected within level3. level3
inputs are only changed when corroborated by evidence such as
similar market transactions, third-party pricing services
and/or
broker or dealer quotations, or other empirical market data. in
circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model value to
market transactions, it is possible that a different valuation
model could produce a materially different estimate of fair
value.
when appropriate, valuations are adjusted for various factors
such as liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations.
such adjustments are generally based on available market
evidence. in the absence of such evidence, managements
best estimate is used.
collateralized agreements and
financings.collateralized agreements consist of resale
agreements and securities borrowed. collateralized financings
consist of repurchase agreements, securities loaned and other
secured financings. interest on collateralized agreements and
collateralized financings is recognized in interest
income or interest expense, respectively, over
the life of the transaction.
resale and repurchase agreements.financial
instruments purchased under agreements to resell and financial
instruments sold under agreements to repurchase, principally
u.s.government, federal agency and investment-grade
sovereign obligations, represent collateralized financing
transactions. the firm receives financial instruments purchased
under agreements to resell, makes delivery of financial
instruments sold under agreements to repurchase, monitors the
market value of these financial instruments on a daily basis and
delivers or obtains additional collateral as appropriate. resale
and repurchase agreements are carried in the consolidated
statements of financial condition at fair value as allowed by
sfasno.159. prior to the adoption of
sfasno.159, these transactions were recorded at
contractual amounts plus accrued interest. resale and repurchase
agreements are generally valued based on inputs with reasonable
levels of price transparency and are classified within
level2 of the fair value hierarchy. resale and repurchase
agreements are presented on a
net-by-counterparty
basis when the requirements of finno.41,
offsetting of amounts related to certain repurchase and
reverse repurchase agreements, or finno.39,
offsetting of amounts related to certain contracts,
are satisfied.
securities borrowed and loaned.securities borrowed
and loaned are generally collateralized by cash, securities or
letters of credit. the firm receives securities borrowed, makes
delivery of securities loaned, monitors the market value of
securities borrowed and
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
loaned, and delivers or obtains additional collateral as
appropriate. securities borrowed and loaned within securities
services, relating to both customer activities and, to a lesser
extent, certain firm financing activities, are recorded based on
the amount of cash collateral advanced or received plus accrued
interest. as these arrangements are generally transacted
on-demand, they exhibit little, if any, sensitivity to changes
in interest rates. securities borrowed and loaned within trading
and principal investments, which are related to the firms
matched book and certain firm financing activities, are recorded
at fair value as allowed by sfasno.159. prior to the
adoption of sfasno.159, these transactions were
recorded based on the amount of cash collateral advanced or
received plus accrued interest. these securities borrowed and
loaned transactions are generally valued based on inputs with
reasonable levels of price transparency and are classified
within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
other secured financings.in addition to repurchase
agreements and securities loaned, the firm funds assets through
the use of other secured financing arrangements and pledges
financial instruments and other assets as collateral in these
transactions. sfasno.159 has been adopted for those
financings for which the use of fair value would eliminate
non-economic
volatility in earnings from using different measurement
attributes (i.e., assets recorded at fair value with related
nonrecourse financings recorded based on the amount of cash
received plus accrued interest), primarily transfers accounted
for as financings rather than sales under sfasno.140
and debt raised through the firms william street program.
these other secured financing transactions are generally valued
based on inputs with reasonable levels of price transparency and
are classified within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
other secured financings that are not recorded at fair value are
recorded based on the amount of cash received plus accrued
interest. see note3 for further information regarding
other secured financings.
hybrid financial instruments.hybrid financial
instruments are instruments that contain bifurcatable embedded
derivatives under sfasno.133, accounting for
derivative instruments and hedging activities, and do not
require settlement by physical delivery of non-financial assets
(e.g., physical commodities). if the firm elects to bifurcate
the embedded derivative, it is accounted for at fair value and
the host contract is accounted for at amortized cost, adjusted
for the effective portion of any fair value hedge accounting
relationships. if the firm does not elect to bifurcate, the
entire hybrid financial instrument is accounted for at fair
value under sfasno.155, accounting for certain
hybrid financial
instrumentsan amendment of fasb statements
no.133 and 140. the primary reasons for electing the
fair value option for hybrid financial instruments are
mitigating volatility in earnings from using different
measurement attributes, simplification and cost-benefit
considerations. see notes3 and 4 for additional
information about hybrid financial instruments.
transfers of financial assets.in general, transfers
of financial assets are accounted for as sales under
sfasno.140 when the firm has relinquished control
over the transferred assets. for transfers accounted for as
sales, any related gains or losses are recognized in net
revenues. transfers that are not accounted for as sales are
accounted for as collateralized financings, with the related
interest expense recognized in net revenues over the life of the
transaction.
power generation.power generation revenues
associated with the firms consolidated power generation
facilities are included in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings
when power is delivered. these revenues were $421million,
$553million and $496million for the years ended
november 2007, november 2006 and november 2005, respectively.
direct employee costs associated with the firms
consolidated power generation facilities of $97million,
$78million and $70million for the years ended
november 2007, november 2006 and november2005,
respectively, are included in compensation and
benefits. the other direct costs associated with
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
these power generation facilities and related contractual assets
are included in cost of power generation.
commissions.commission revenues from executing and
clearing client transactions on stock, options and futures
markets worldwide are recognized in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings on
a trade-date basis.
insurance activities.revenues from variable annuity
and life insurance contracts, and from providing reinsurance of
such contracts, generally consist of fees assessed on contract
holder account balances for mortality charges, policy
administration and surrender charges. these fees are recognized
within trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings in the period that services
are provided.
interest credited to variable annuity and life insurance account
balances and changes in reserves are recognized in other
expenses in the consolidated statements of earnings.
premiums earned for providing property catastrophe reinsurance
are recognized within trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings
over the coverage period, net of premiums ceded for the cost of
reinsurance. expenses for liabilities related to property
catastrophe reinsurance claims, including estimates of claims
that have been incurred but not reported, are recognized within
other expenses in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
merchant banking overrides.the firm is entitled to
receive merchant banking overrides (i.e., an increased share of
a funds income and gains) when the return on the
funds investments exceeds certain threshold returns.
overrides are based on investment performance over the life of
each merchant banking fund, and future investment
underperformance may require amounts of override previously
distributed to the firm to be returned to the funds.
accordingly, overrides are recognized in the consolidated
statements of earnings only when all material contingencies have
been resolved. overrides are included in trading and
principal investments in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
asset management.management fees are recognized
over the period that the related service is provided based upon
average net asset values. in certain circumstances, the firm is
also entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of
a funds return or when the return on assets under
management exceeds specified benchmark returns or other
performance targets. incentive fees are generally based on
investment performance over a
12-month
period and are subject to adjustment prior to the end of the
measurement period. accordingly, incentive fees are recognized
in the consolidated statements of earnings when the measurement
period ends. asset management fees and incentive fees are
included in asset management and securities services
in the consolidated statements of earnings.
share-based
compensation
in the first quarter of 2006, the firm adopted
sfasno.123-r,
share-based payment, which is a revision to
sfasno.123, accounting for stock-based
compensation.
sfasno.123-r
focuses primarily on accounting for transactions in which an
entity obtains employee services in exchange for share-based
payments. under
sfasno.123-r,
the cost of employee services received in exchange for a
share-based award is generally measured based on the grant-date
fair value of the award. under
sfasno.123-r,
share-based awards that do not require future service (i.e.,
vested awards, including awards granted to retirement-eligible
employees) are expensed immediately. share-based employee awards
that require future service are amortized over the relevant
service period. the firm adopted
sfasno.123-r
under the modified prospective adoption method. under that
method of adoption, the provisions of
sfasno.123-r
are generally applied only to share-based awards granted
subsequent
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
to adoption. share-based awards held by employees that were
retirement-eligible on the date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
must continue to be amortized over the stated service period of
the award (and accelerated if the employee actually retires).
sfasno.123-r
requires expected forfeitures to be included in determining
share-based employee compensation expense.
the firm pays cash dividend equivalents on outstanding
restricted stock units. dividend equivalents paid on restricted
stock units accounted for under sfasno.123 and
sfasno.123-r
are charged to retained earnings.
sfasno.123-r
requires dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units
expected to be forfeited to be included in compensation expense.
prior to the adoption of
sfasno.123-r,
dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units that were
later forfeited by employees were reclassified to compensation
expense from retained earnings. the tax benefit related to
dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units is accounted
for as a reduction of income tax expense (see
recent accounting developments for a
discussion of emerging issues task force (eitf) issue
no.06-11,
accounting for income tax benefits of dividends on
share-based payment awards).
in certain cases, primarily related to the death of an employee
or conflicted employment (as outlined in the applicable award
agreements), the firm may cash settle share-based compensation
awards. for awards accounted for as equity instruments,
additional paid-in capital is adjusted to the extent
of the difference between the current value of the award and the
grant-date value of the award.
goodwill
goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair
value of identifiable net assets at acquisition date. in
accordance with sfasno.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, goodwill is tested at least annually
for impairment. an impairment loss is triggered if the estimated
fair value of an operating segment, which is a component one
level below the firms three business segments, is less
than its estimated net book value. such loss is calculated as
the difference between the estimated fair value of goodwill and
its carrying value.
identifiable
intangible assets
identifiable intangible assets, which consist primarily of
customer lists, specialist rights and the value of business
acquired (voba) and deferred acquisition costs (dac) in the
firms insurance subsidiaries, are amortized over their
estimated useful lives in accordance with
sfasno.142. identifiable intangible assets are
tested for potential impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups
carrying value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144, accounting for the impairment or
disposal of long-lived assets. an impairment loss,
calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value
and the carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized
if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to
the asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying
value.
property,
leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and equipment, net of
accumulated depreciation and amortization, are included in
other assets in the consolidated statements of
financial condition.
substantially all property and equipment are depreciated on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset. leasehold
improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
useful life of the improvement or the term of the lease,
whichever is shorter. certain costs of software developed or
obtained for internal use are capitalized and amortized on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the software.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
property, leasehold improvements and equipment are tested for
potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying
value may not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144. an impairment loss, calculated as the
difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying
value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the sum of
the expected undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or
asset group is less than the corresponding carrying value.
the firms operating leases include space held in excess of
current requirements. rent expense relating to space held for
growth is included in occupancy in the consolidated
statements of earnings. in accordance with
sfasno.146, accounting for costs associated
with exit or disposal activities, the firm records a
liability, based on the fair value of the remaining lease
rentals reduced by any potential or existing sublease rentals,
for leases where the firm has ceased using the space and
management has concluded that the firm will not derive any
future economic benefits. costs to terminate a lease before the
end of its term are recognized and measured at fair value upon
termination.
foreign
currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
non-u.s.currencies
are translated at rates of exchange prevailing on the date of
the consolidated statement of financial condition, and revenues
and expenses are translated at average rates of exchange for the
year. gains or losses on translation of the financial statements
of a
non-u.s.operation,
when the functional currency is other than the u.s.dollar,
are included, net of hedges and taxes, in the consolidated
statements of comprehensive income. the firm seeks to reduce its
net investment exposure to fluctuations in foreign exchange
rates through the use of foreign currency forward contracts and
foreign currency-denominated debt. for foreign currency forward
contracts, hedge effectiveness is assessed based on changes in
forward exchange rates; accordingly, forward points are
reflected as a component of the currency translation adjustment
in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income. for
foreign
currency-denominated
debt, hedge effectiveness is assessed based on changes in spot
rates. foreign currency remeasurement gains or losses on
transactions in nonfunctional currencies are included in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
income
taxes
deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of the
firms assets and liabilities. valuation allowances are
established to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that
more likely than not will be realized. the firms tax
assets and liabilities are presented as a component of
other assets and other liabilities and accrued
expenses, respectively, in the consolidated statements of
financial condition. tax provisions are computed in accordance
with sfasno.109, accounting for income
taxes. contingent liabilities related to income taxes are
recorded when the criteria for loss recognition under
sfasno.5, accounting for contingencies,
as amended, have been met (see recent
accounting developments below for a discussion of the
impact of finno.48, accounting for uncertainty
in income taxesan interpretation of fasb
statement no.109, on sfasno.109).
earnings per
common share (eps)
basic eps is calculated by dividing net earnings applicable to
common shareholders by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding. common shares outstanding includes common
stock and restricted stock units for which no future service is
required as a condition to the delivery of the underlying common
stock. diluted eps includes the determinants of basic eps and,
in addition, reflects the dilutive effect of the common stock
deliverable pursuant to stock options and to
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
restricted stock units for which future service is required as a
condition to the delivery of the underlying common stock.
cash and cash
equivalents
the firm defines cash equivalents as highly liquid overnight
deposits held in the ordinary course of business.
recent
accounting developments
finno.48.in june 2006, the fasb issued
finno.48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxesan interpretation of fasb statement
no.109. finno.48 requires that the firm
determine whether a tax position is more likely than not to be
sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related
appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits
of the position. once it is determined that a position meets
this recognition threshold, the position is measured to
determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in the
financial statements. the firm will adopt the provisions of
finno.48 in the first quarter of 2008. adoption of
finno.48 will not have a material effect on the
firms financial condition, results of operations or cash
flows.
sfasno.157.in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.157, fair value
measurements. sfasno.157 clarifies that fair
value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants. under
sfasno.157, fair value measurements are not adjusted
for transaction costs.
sfasno.157 nullifies the guidance included in eitf
issue
no.02-3,
issues involved in accounting for derivative contracts
held for trading purposes and contracts involved in energy
trading and risk management activities, that prohibited
the recognition of a day one gain or loss on derivative
contracts (and hybrid financial instruments measured at fair
value under sfasno.155) where the firm was unable to
verify all of the significant model inputs to observable market
data and/or
verify the model to market transactions. however,
sfasno.157 requires that a fair value measurement
reflect the assumptions market participants would use in pricing
an asset or liability based on the best information available.
assumptions include the risks inherent in a particular valuation
technique (such as a pricing model)
and/or the
risks inherent in the inputs to the model.
in addition, sfasno.157 prohibits the recognition of
block discounts for large holdings of unrestricted
financial instruments where quoted prices are readily and
regularly available for an identical asset or liability in an
active market.
the provisions of sfasno.157 are to be applied
prospectively, except changes in fair value measurements that
result from the initial application of sfasno.157 to
existing derivative financial instruments measured under eitf
issue
no.02-3,
existing hybrid financial instruments measured at fair value and
block discounts, all of which are to be recorded as an
adjustment to beginning retained earnings in the year of
adoption.
the firm adopted sfasno.157 as of the beginning of
2007. the transition adjustment to beginning retained earnings
was a gain of $51million, net of tax. for the first
quarter of 2007, the effect of the nullification of eitf issue
no.02-3
and the removal of liquidity discounts for actively traded
positions was not material. in addition, under
sfasno.157, gains on principal investments are
recorded in the absence of substantial third-party transactions
if market evidence is sufficient. in the first quarter of 2007,
the firm recorded approximately $500million of such gains
as a result of adopting sfasno.157.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
sfasno.158.in september 2006, the fasb
issued sfasno.158, employers accounting
for defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and
132-r. sfasno.158 requires an entity to
recognize in its statement of financial condition the funded
status of its defined benefit pension and postretirement plans,
measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan
assets and the benefit obligation. sfasno.158 also
requires an entity to recognize changes in the funded status of
a defined benefit pension and postretirement plan within
accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, to the
extent such changes are not recognized in earnings as components
of periodic net benefit cost. sfasno.158 is
effective as of the end of the fiscal year ending after
december15, 2006. the firm adopted sfasno.158
as of the end of 2007. the adjustment to accumulated other
comprehensive loss for the initial application of
sfasno.158 was $194million, net of tax.
sfasno.159.in february 2007, the fasb
issued sfasno.159, the fair value option for
financial assets and financial liabilities, which gives
entities the option to measure eligible financial assets,
financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair value (i.e.,
the fair value option), on an
instrument-by-instrument
basis, that are otherwise not accounted for at fair value under
other accounting standards. the election to use the fair value
option is available at specified election dates, such as when an
entity first recognizes a financial asset or financial liability
or upon entering into a firm commitment. subsequent changes in
fair value must be recorded in earnings. additionally,
sfasno.159 allows for a one-time election for
existing positions upon adoption, with the transition adjustment
recorded to beginning retained earnings.
the firm adopted sfasno.159 as of the beginning of
2007 and elected to apply the fair value option to the following
financial assets and liabilities existing at the time of
adoption:
certain unsecured short-term borrowings, consisting of all
promissory notes and commercial paper;
certain other secured financings, primarily transfers accounted
for as financings rather than sales under sfasno.140
and debt raised through the firms william street program;
certain unsecured long-term borrowings, including prepaid
physical commodity transactions;
resale and repurchase agreements;
securities borrowed and loaned within trading and principal
investments, consisting of the firms matched book and
certain firm financing activities;
securities held by goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank usa), which
were previously accounted for as available-for-sale;and
receivables from customers and counterparties arising from
transfers accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases
under sfasno.140.
the transition adjustment to beginning retained earnings related
to the adoption of sfasno.159 was a loss of
$45million, net of tax, substantially all of which related
to applying the fair value option to prepaid physical commodity
transactions.
subsequent to the adoption of sfasno.159, the firm
has elected to apply the fair value option (i)to new
positions within the above categories, (ii)to corporate
loans, corporate loan commitments and certificates of deposit
issued by gs bank usa and (iii)generally to investments
where the firm would otherwise apply the equity method of
accounting. in certain cases, the firm may continue to apply the
equity method of accounting to those investments which are
strategic in nature or closely related to the firms
principal business activities, where the firm has a significant
degree of involvement in the cash flows or operations of the
investee,
and/or where
cost-benefit considerations are less significant.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the primary reasons for electing the fair value option are
mitigating volatility in earnings from using different
measurement attributes, simplification and cost-benefit
considerations.
sopno.07-1
and fsp
finno.46-r-7.in
june 2007, the american institute of certified public
accountants (aicpa) issued statement of position (sop)
no.07-1,
clarification of the scope of the audit and accounting
guide audits of investment companies and accounting
by parent companies and equity method investors for investments
in investment companies.
sopno.07-1
clarifies when an entity may apply the provisions of the audit
and accounting guide for investment companies (the guide). in
may 2007, the fasb issued fsp
finno.46-r-7,
application of
fin46-r
to investment companies, which amends
finno.46-r
to make permanent the temporary deferral of the application of
finno.46-r
to entities within the scope of the revised guide under
sopno.07-1.
fsp
finno.46-r-7
is effective upon adoption of
sopno.07-1.
in november 2007, the fasb issued proposed fsp
sopno.07-1-a,
the effective date of aicpa statement of position
07-1,
which proposes to indefinitely defer the effective date for
sopno.07-01
and, consequently, fsp
finno.46-r-7.
eitf issue
no.06-11.in
june 2007, the eitf reached consensus on issue
no.06-11,
accounting for income tax benefits of dividends on
share-based payment awards. eitf issue
no.06-11
requires that the tax benefit related to dividend equivalents
paid on restricted stock units, which are expected to vest, be
recorded as an increase to additional paid-in capital. the firm
currently accounts for this tax benefit as a reduction to income
tax expense. eitf issue
no.06-11
is to be applied prospectively for tax benefits on dividends
declared in fiscal years beginning after december15, 2007,
and the firm expects to adopt the provisions of eitf issue
no.06-11
beginning in the first quarter of 2009. the firm is currently
evaluating the impact of adopting eitf issue
no.06-11
on its financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note3.financial
instruments
fair value of
financial instruments
the following table sets forth the firms financial
instruments owned, at fair value, including those pledged as
collateral, and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value. at any point in time, the firm may use
cash instruments as well as derivatives to manage a long or
short risk position.
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of
deposit, time deposits and other
money market instruments
$
8,985
(1)
$
$
14,723
(1)
$
u.s. government, federal agency
and sovereign obligations
70,774
58,637
68,071
51,200
mortgage and other asset-backed
loans and securities
54,073
(2)
41,017
bank loans
49,154
3,563
28,196
1,154
corporate debt securities and
other debt obligations
39,219
8,280
29,806
7,050
equities and convertible debentures
122,205
45,130
83,282
30,441
physical commodities
2,571
1,923
derivative contracts
105,614
(3)
99,378
(5)
67,543
(3)
65,496
(5)
total
$
452,595
(4)
$
215,023
$
334,561
(4)
$
155,805
(1)
includes $6.17billion and
$6.93billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively, of money market instruments held by william street
funding corporation to support the william street credit
extension program (see note6 for further information
regarding the william street program).
(2)
includes $7.64billion of
mortgage whole loans that were transferred to securitization
vehicles where such transfers were accounted for as secured
financings rather than sales under sfasno.140. the
firm distributed to investors the securities that were issued by
the securitization vehicles and therefore does not bear economic
exposure to the underlying mortgage whole loans.
(3)
net of cash received pursuant to
credit support agreements of $59.05billion and
$24.06billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively.
(4)
includes $1.17billion of
securities held within the firms insurance subsidiaries
which are accounted for as
available-for-sale
under sfasno. 115, accounting for certain
investments in debt and equity securities as of november
2007. includes $9.95billion of securities held within gs
bank usa and the firms insurance subsidiaries which were
accounted for as available-for-sale as of november 2006.
(5)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit
support agreements of $27.76billion and
$16.00billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively.
fair value
hierarchy
the following tables set forth by level within the fair value
hierarchy financial instruments owned, at fair
value, financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value and financial assets and
liabilities accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.155 and sfasno.159 as of november
2007 (see note2 for further information on the fair value
hierarchy). as required by sfasno.157, assets and
liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest
level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
total financial assets at fair value classified within
level3 were $69.15billion or 6% of total
assets on the consolidated statement of financial
condition as of november 2007. this includes $14.44billion
of financial assets at fair value classified within level3
for which the firm does not bear
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
economic exposure. excluding assets for which the firm does not
bear economic exposure, level3 assets were 5% of
total assets as of november 2007.
assets at fair value as of november 2007
netting and
level 1
level 2
level 3
collateral
total
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and
other money market instruments
$
6,237
$
2,748
$
$
$
8,985
u.s. government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
37,966
32,808
70,774
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities
38,073
16,000
54,073
bank loans
35,820
13,334
49,154
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
32,193
6,111
39,219
equities and convertible debentures
68,727
35,472
18,006
(6)
122,205
physical commodities
2,571
2,571
cash instruments
113,845
179,685
53,451
346,981
derivative contracts
153,065
15,700
(63,437
)(7)
105,614
financial instruments owned, at fair value
114,131
332,750
69,151
(63,437
)
452,595
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
24,078
(4)
69,940
(5)
94,018
receivables from customers and
counterparties(1)
1,950
1,950
securities
borrowed(2)
83,277
83,277
financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell, at
fair value
85,717
85,717
total assets at fair value
$
138,209
$
573,634
$
69,151
$
(63,437
)
$
717,557
level3 assets for which the firm does not bear economic
exposure(3)
(14,437
)
level3 assets for which the firm bears economic exposure
$
54,714
(1)
consists of transfers accounted for
as secured loans rather than purchases under
sfasno.140 and prepaid variable share forwards.
(2)
reflects securities borrowed within
trading and principal investments. excludes securities borrowed
within securities services, which are accounted for based on the
amount of cash collateral advanced plus accrued interest.
(3)
consists of level3 assets
which are financed by nonrecourse debt, attributable to minority
investors or attributable to employee interests in certain
consolidated funds.
(4)
consists of u.s. treasury
securities and money market instruments as well as insurance
separate account assets measured at fair value under aicpa
sop03-1,
accounting and reporting by insurance enterprises for
certain nontraditional long-duration contracts and for separate
accounts.
(5)
principally consists of securities
borrowed and resale agreements. the underlying securities have
been segregated to satisfy certain regulatory requirements.
(6)
consists of private equity and real
estate fund investments.
(7)
represents cash collateral and the
impact of netting across the levels of the fair value hierarchy.
netting among positions classified within the same level is
included in that level.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
liabilities at fair value as of november 2007
netting and
level 1
level 2
level 3
collateral
total
(in millions)
u.s. government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
$
57,714
$
$
$
$
58,637
bank loans
3,525
3,563
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
7,764
8,280
equities and convertible debentures
44,076
1,054
45,130
physical commodities
cash instruments
101,790
13,301
115,645
derivative contracts
117,794
13,644
(32,272
)(6)
99,378
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
102,002
131,095
14,198
(32,272
)
215,023
unsecured short-term
borrowings(1)
44,060
4,271
48,331
bank
deposits(2)
securities
loaned(3)
5,449
5,449
financial instruments sold under agreements to repurchase, at
fair value
159,178
159,178
other secured
financings(4)
33,581
33,581
unsecured long-term
borrowings(5)
15,161
15,928
total liabilities at fair value
$
102,002
$
388,987
$
19,236
$
(32,272
)
$
477,953
(1)
consists of promissory notes, commercial paper and hybrid
financial instruments.
(2)
consists of certificates of deposit issued by gs bank usa.
(3)
reflects securities loaned within trading and principal
investments. excludes securities loaned within securities
services, which are accounted for based on the amount of cash
collateral received plus accrued interest.
(4)
primarily includes transfers accounted for as financings rather
than sales under sfasno.140 and debt raised through
the firms william street program.
(5)
primarily includes hybrid financial instruments and prepaid
physical commodity transactions.
(6)
represents cash collateral and the impact of netting across the
levels of the fair value hierarchy. netting among positions
classified within the same level is included in that level.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
level3
gains and losses
the table below sets forth a summary of changes in the fair
value of the firms level3 financial assets and
liabilities for the year ended november 2007. the table reflects
gains and losses for the full year for all financial assets and
liabilities categorized as level3 as of november 2007. the
table does not include gains or losses that were reported in
level3 in prior periods for financial assets and
liabilities that were transferred out of level3 prior to
november 2007. as reflected in the table below, the net
unrealized gain on level3 financial assets and liabilities
was $1.31billion for the year ended november 2007. this
net unrealized gain should be considered in the context of the
factors discussed below.
cash
instruments
the net unrealized loss on level3 cash instruments was
$2.59billion for the year ended november 2007 (which
included $2.29billion of unrealized losses on assets and
$294million of unrealized losses on liabilities),
primarily consisting of unrealized losses on subprime
residential mortgage loans and securities as well as
non-investment-grade loan commitments, partially offset by
unrealized gains on principal investments. level3 cash
instruments are frequently hedged with instruments classified in
level1 and level2, and accordingly, gains or losses
that have been reported in level3 are frequently offset by
gains or losses attributable to instruments classified in
level1 or level2 or by gains or losses on derivative
contracts classified in level3 of the fair value hierarchy.
derivative
contracts
the net unrealized gain on level3 derivative contracts was
$4.54billion for the year ended november 2007.
level3 gains and losses on derivative contracts should be
considered in the context of the following factors:
a derivative contract with level1 and/or level2
inputs is classified as a level3 financial instrument in
its entirety if it has at least one significant level3
input.
if there is one significant level3 input, the entire gain
or loss from adjusting only observable inputs (i.e.,
level1 and level 2)is still classified as
level3.
gains or losses that have been reported in level3
resulting from changes in level1 or level2 inputs
are frequently offset by gains or losses attributable to
instruments classified in level1 or level2 or by
cash instruments reported in level3 of the fair value
hierarchy.
the unrealized gains referenced above principally resulted from
changes in level2 inputs, as opposed to changes in
level3 inputs.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
level 3 financial assets and
liabilities
year ended november 2007
cash
cash
derivative
unsecured
unsecured
instruments-
instruments-
contracts-
short-term
long-term
total
assets
liabilities
net
borrowings
borrowings
gains
(in millions)
balance, beginning of year
$
29,905
$
(223
)
$
$
(3,253
)
$
(135
)
n/a
realized gains/(losses)
2,232
(1)
(9
)(2)
1,713
(2)
(2)
(7
)(2)
$
4,096
unrealized gains/(losses) relating to instruments still held at
the reporting date
(2,292
)(1)
(294
)(2)
4,543
(2)(3)
(666
)(2)
(2)
$
1,313
purchases, issuances and settlements
22,561
(30
)
(1,365
)
(1,559
)
(567
)
n/a
transfers in and/or out of level3
1,045
(3,415
)
1,040
(80
)
n/a
balance, end of period
$
53,451
$
(554
)
$
2,056
$
(4,271
)
$
(767
)
n/a
(1)
the aggregate amounts include
approximately $(1.77)billion and $1.71billion
reported in trading and principal investments and
interest income, respectively, in the consolidated
statements of earnings.
(2)
substantially all is reported in
trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
(3)
principally resulted from changes
in level2 inputs.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
as of november 2007, the changes in the fair value of
receivables (including securities borrowed and resale
agreements) for which the fair value option was elected that
were attributable to changes in instrument-specific credit
spreads were not material. during 2007, the firm recognized
gains of $216million attributable to the observable impact
of the markets widening of the firms own credit
spread on liabilities for which the fair value option was
elected. the firm calculates the impact of its own credit spread
on liabilities carried at fair value by discounting future cash
flows at a rate which incorporates the firms observable
credit spreads. as of november 2007, the difference between the
fair value and the aggregate contractual principal amount of
both long-term receivables and long-term debt instruments
(principal and non-principal protected) for which the fair value
option was elected was not material.
the following table sets forth the gains and (losses) included
in earnings for the year ended november 2007 related to
financial assets and liabilities for which the firm has elected
to apply the fair value option under sfasno.155 and
sfasno.159. the table does not reflect the impact to
the firms earnings of adopting sfasno.159
because a significant amount of these gains and losses would
have also been recognized under previously issued generally
accepted accounting principles. in addition, instruments for
which the firm has elected the fair value option are
economically hedged with instruments accounted for at fair value
under other generally accepted accounting principles that are
not reflected in the table below.
year ended
november
(in millions)
unsecured long-term borrowings
$
(1,979
)
other secured
financings(1)
1,896
unsecured short-term borrowings
(1,064
)
financial instruments owned, at fair
value(2)
(43
)
other(3)
total(4)
$
(1,172
)
(1)
includes gains of $2.08billion related to financings
recorded as a result of certain mortgage securitizations that
are accounted for as secured financings rather than sales under
sfasno.140. changes in the fair value of the secured
financings are equally offset by changes in the fair value of
the related mortgage whole loans, which are included within the
firms financial instruments owned, at fair
value in the consolidated statement of financial condition.
(2)
consists of investments where the firm would otherwise have
applied the equity method of accounting as well as securities
held in gs bank usa (previously accounted for as
available-for-sale).
(3)
consists of resale and repurchase agreements and securities
borrowed and loaned within trading and principal investments and
certificates of deposit issued by gs bank usa.
(4)
reported within trading and principal investments
within the consolidated statements of earnings. the amounts
exclude contractual interest, which is included in
interest income and interest expense,
for all instruments other than hybrid financial instruments.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
credit
concentrations
credit concentrations may arise from trading, investing,
underwriting and securities borrowing activities and may be
impacted by changes in economic, industry or political factors.
the firm seeks to mitigate credit risk by actively monitoring
exposures and obtaining collateral as deemed appropriate. while
the firms activities expose it to many different
industries and counterparties, the firm routinely executes a
high volume of transactions with counterparties in the financial
services industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial
banks, investment funds and other institutional clients,
resulting in significant credit concentration with respect to
this industry. in the ordinary course of business, the firm may
also be subject to a concentration of credit risk to a
particular counterparty, borrower or issuer.
as of november 2007 and november 2006, the firm held
$45.75billion (4% of total assets) and $46.20billion
(6% of total assets), respectively, of u.s. government and
federal agency obligations (including securities guaranteed by
the federal national mortgage association and the federal home
loan mortgage corporation) included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value and cash and
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes in
the consolidated statements of financial condition. as of
november 2007 and november 2006, the firm held
$31.65billion (3% of total assets) and $23.64billion
(3% of total assets), respectively, of other sovereign
obligations, principally consisting of securities issued by the
governments of japan and the united kingdom. in addition, as of
november 2007 and november 2006, $144.92billion and
$104.76billion of the firms financial instruments
purchased under agreements to resell and securities borrowed,
respectively, were collateralized by u.s. government and federal
agency obligations. as of november 2007 and 2006,
$41.26billion and $38.22billion of the firms
financial instruments purchased under agreements to resell and
securities borrowed, respectively, were collateralized by other
sovereign obligations. as of november 2007 and november 2006,
the firm did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty
that exceeded 2% of the firms total assets.
derivative
activities
derivative contracts are instruments, such as futures, forwards,
swaps or option contracts, that derive their value from
underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a combination of
these factors. derivative instruments may be privately
negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
derivatives may involve future commitments to purchase or sell
financial instruments or commodities, or to exchange currency or
interest payment streams. the amounts exchanged are based on the
specific terms of the contract with reference to specified
rates, securities, commodities, currencies or indices.
certain cash instruments, such as mortgage-backed securities,
interest-only and principal-only obligations, and indexed debt
instruments, are not considered derivatives even though their
values or contractually required cash flows are derived from the
price of some other security or index. however, certain
commodity-related contracts are included in the firms
derivatives disclosure, as these contracts may be settled in
cash or the assets to be delivered under the contract are
readily convertible into cash.
the firm enters into derivative transactions to facilitate
client transactions, to take proprietary positions and as a
means of risk management. risk exposures are managed through
diversification, by controlling position sizes and by entering
into offsetting positions. for example, the firm may manage the
risk related to a portfolio of common stock by entering into an
offsetting position in a related equity-index futures contract.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the firm applies hedge accounting under sfasno.133
to certain derivative contracts. the firm uses these derivatives
to manage certain interest rate and currency exposures,
including the firms net investment in
non-u.s.
operations. the firm designates certain interest rate swap
contracts as fair value hedges. these interest rate swap
contracts hedge changes in the relevant benchmark interest rate
(e.g., london interbank offered rate (libor)), effectively
converting a substantial portion of the firms unsecured
long-term and certain unsecured short-term borrowings into
floating rate obligations. see note2 for information
regarding the firms accounting policy for foreign currency
forward contracts used to hedge its net investment in
non-u.s.
operations.
the firm applies a long-haul method to substantially all of its
hedge accounting relationships to perform an ongoing assessment
of the effectiveness of these relationships in achieving
offsetting changes in fair value or offsetting cash flows
attributable to the risk being hedged. the firm utilizes a
dollar-offset method, which compares the change in the fair
value of the hedging instrument to the change in the fair value
of the hedged item, excluding the effect of the passage of time,
to prospectively and retrospectively assess hedge effectiveness.
the firms prospective dollar-offset assessment utilizes
scenario analyses to test hedge effectiveness via simulations of
numerous parallel and slope shifts of the relevant yield curve.
parallel shifts change the interest rate of all maturities by
identical amounts. slope shifts change the curvature of the
yield curve. for both the prospective assessment, in response to
each of the simulated yield curve shifts, and the retrospective
assessment, a hedging relationship is deemed to be effective if
the fair value of the hedging instrument and the hedged item
change inversely within a range of 80% to 125%.
for fair value hedges, gains or losses on derivative
transactions are recognized in interest expense in
the consolidated statements of earnings. the change in fair
value of the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged
is reported as an adjustment to its carrying value and is
subsequently amortized into interest expense over its remaining
life. gains or losses related to hedge ineffectiveness for all
hedges are generally included in interest expense.
these gains or losses and the component of gains or losses on
derivative transactions excluded from the assessment of hedge
effectiveness (e.g., the effect of the passage of time on fair
value hedges of the firms borrowings) were not material to
the firms results of operations for the years ended
november2007, november2006 and november2005.
gains and losses on derivatives used for trading purposes are
included in trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
the fair value of the firms derivative contracts is
reflected net of cash paid or received pursuant to credit
support agreements and is reported on a
net-by-counterparty
basis in the firms consolidated statements of financial
condition when management believes a legal right of setoff
exists under an enforceable netting agreement. the fair value of
derivative financial instruments, computed in accordance with
the firms netting policy, is set forth below:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
forward settlement contracts
$
17,447
$
20,799
$
11,751
$
14,335
swap agreements
54,428
39,271
28,012
22,471
option contracts
33,739
39,308
27,780
28,690
total
$
105,614
$
99,378
$
67,543
$
65,496
the fair value of derivatives accounted for as qualifying hedges
under sfasno.133 consisted of $5.12billion and
$2.66billion in assets as of november 2007 and november
2006, respectively, and $354million and $551million
in liabilities as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the firm also has embedded derivatives that have been bifurcated
from related borrowings under sfasno.133. such
derivatives, which are classified in unsecured short-term and
unsecured long-term borrowings, had a carrying value of
$463million and $1.13billion (excluding the debt
host contract) as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively. see notes4 and 5 for further information
regarding the firms unsecured borrowings.
securitization
activities
the firm securitizes commercial and residential mortgages, home
equity and auto loans, government and corporate bonds and other
types of financial assets. the firm acts as underwriter of the
beneficial interests that are sold to investors. the firm
derecognizes financial assets transferred in securitizations
provided it has relinquished control over such assets.
transferred assets are accounted for at fair value prior to
securitization. net revenues related to these underwriting
activities are recognized in connection with the sales of the
underlying beneficial interests to investors.
the firm may retain interests in securitized financial assets,
primarily in the form of senior or subordinated securities,
including residual interests. retained interests are accounted
for at fair value and are included in total financial
instruments owned, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
during the year ended november 2007, the firm securitized
$81.40billion of financial assets ($24.95billion of
residential mortgages, $19.50billion of commercial
mortgages and $36.95billion of other financial assets,
primarily in connection with collateralized debt and loan
obligations (cdos and clos)). during the year ended november
2006, the firm securitized $103.92billion of financial
assets ($67.73billion of residential mortgages,
$12.78billion of commercial mortgages and
$23.41billion of other financial assets, primarily in
connection with cdos and clos). cash flows received on retained
interests were approximately $705million and
$801million for the years ended november 2007 and november
2006, respectively.
as of november 2007 and november 2006, the firm held
$4.57billion and $7.08billion of retained interests,
respectively, from these securitization activities, including
$2.72billion and $5.18billion, respectively, held in
qspes.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table sets forth the weighted average key economic
assumptions used in measuring the fair value of the firms
retained interests and the sensitivity of this fair value to
immediate adverse changes of 10% and 20% in those assumptions:
as of november 2007
as of november 2006
type of retained interests
type of retained interests
mortgage-
cdos and
corporate
mortgage-
cdos and
corporate
backed
clos
(3)
debt
backed
clos
(3)
debt
(4)
($ in millions)
fair value of retained interests
$
3,378
$
1,188
$
$
4,013
$
1,973
$
1,097
weighted average life (years)
6.6
2.7
6.0
7.0
2.2
constant prepayment rate
15.1
%
11.9
%
n/a
21.2
%
24.5
%
n/a
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(50
)
$
(43
)
$
$
(121
)
$
(2
)
$
impact of 20% adverse change
(91
)
(98
)
(221
)
(6
)
anticipated credit
losses(1)
4.3
%
n/a
n/a
2.0
%
n/a
n/a
impact of 10% adverse
change(2)
$
(45
)
$
$
$
(81
)
$
$
impact of 20% adverse
change(2)
(72
)
(155
)
discount rate
8.4
%
23.1
%
n/a
9.4
%
6.9
%
3.9
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(89
)
$
(46
)
$
$
(136
)
$
(38
)
$
(9
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(170
)
(92
)
(266
)
(74
)
(17
)
(1)
anticipated credit losses are computed only on positions for
which expected credit loss is a key assumption in the
determination of fair value or positions for which expected
credit loss is not reflected within the discount rate.
(2)
the impacts of adverse change take into account credit mitigants
incorporated in the retained interests, including
over-collateralization and subordination provisions.
(3)
includes $905million and $1.26billion as of november
2007 and november 2006, respectively, of retained interests
related to transfers of securitized assets that were accounted
for as secured financings rather than sales under
sfasno.140.
(4)
includes retained interests in bonds and other types of
financial assets that are not subject to prepayment risk.
the preceding table does not give effect to the offsetting
benefit of other financial instruments that are held to mitigate
risks inherent in these retained interests. changes in fair
value based on an adverse variation in assumptions generally
cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in
assumptions to the change in fair value is not usually linear.
in addition, the impact of a change in a particular assumption
is calculated independently of changes in any other assumption.
in practice, simultaneous changes in assumptions might magnify
or counteract the sensitivities disclosed above.
in addition to the retained interests described above, the firm
also held interests in residential mortgage qspes purchased in
connection with secondary market-making activities. these
purchased interests approximated $6billion and
$8billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
as of november 2007 and november 2006, the firm held mortgage
servicing rights with a fair value of $93million and
$62million, respectively, substantially all of which were
retained in connection with residential mortgage
securitizations. these servicing assets represent the
firms right to receive a future stream of cash flows
associated with the firms obligation to service
residential mortgages. the fair value of mortgage servicing
rights will fluctuate in response to changes in certain economic
variables, such as interest rates, loan prepayment assumptions
and default rates. the firm determines the fair value of
mortgage servicing rights by using valuation models that
incorporate these variables in quantifying anticipated cash
flows related to servicing activities.
variable
interest entities (vies)
the firm, in the ordinary course of business, retains interests
in vies in connection with its securitization activities. the
firm also purchases and sells variable interests in vies, which
primarily issue mortgage-backed and other asset-backed
securities, cdos and clos, in connection with its market-making
activities and makes investments in and loans to vies that hold
performing and nonperforming debt, equity, real estate,
power-related and other assets. in addition, the firm utilizes
vies to provide investors with principal-protected notes,
credit-linked notes and asset-repackaged notes designed to meet
their objectives.
vies generally purchase assets by issuing debt and equity
instruments. in certain instances, the firm provides guarantees
to vies or holders of variable interests in vies. in such cases,
the maximum exposure to loss included in the tables set forth
below is the notional amount of such guarantees. such amounts do
not represent anticipated losses in connection with these
guarantees.
the firms variable interests in vies include senior and
subordinated debt; loan commitments; limited and general
partnership interests; preferred and common stock; interest
rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit
derivatives; guarantees; and residual interests in
mortgage-backed and asset-backed securitization vehicles, cdos
and clos. the firms exposure to the obligations of vies is
generally limited to its interests in these entities.
the following tables set forth total assets in nonconsolidated
vies in which the firm holds significant variable interests and
the firms maximum exposure to loss associated with these
variable interests. the firm has aggregated nonconsolidated vies
based on principal business activity, as reflected in the first
column. the nature of the firms variable interests can
take different forms, as described in the columns under maximum
exposure to loss.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
these tables do not give effect to the benefit of any offsetting
financial instruments that are held to mitigate risks related to
the firms interests in nonconsolidated vies.
as of november 2007
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated
vies(1)
purchased
commitments
vie
and retained
and
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
mortgage
cdos(2)
$
18,914
$
1,011
$
$
10,089
$
$
11,100
corporate cdos and
clos(3)
10,750
2,218
2,629
real estate, credit-related and other
investing(4)
17,272
3,141
3,260
municipal bond securitizations
1,413
1,413
1,413
other mortgage-backed
3,881
other asset-backed
3,771
1,579
1,579
power-related
principal-protected
notes(5)
5,698
5,186
5,186
total
$
62,137
$
2,143
$
1,557
$
19,084
$
3,157
$
25,941
as of november 2006
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated
vies(1)
purchased
commitments
vie
and retained
and
loans and
assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
mortgage
cdos(2)
$
26,225
$
2,172
$
$
7,119
$
$
9,291
corporate cdos and
clos(3)
11,385
2,663
2,897
real estate, credit-related and other
investing(4)
16,300
2,088
2,209
municipal bond securitizations
1,182
1,182
1,182
other mortgage-backed
8,143
other asset-backed
power-related
3,422
principal-protected
notes(5)
4,363
3,437
3,437
total
$
71,116
$
2,893
$
1,368
$
13,293
$
2,685
$
20,239
(1)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated losses in
connection with these transactions.
(2)
derivatives related to mortgage cdos primarily consist of
written protection on investment-grade, short-term collateral
held by vies that have issued cdos.
(3)
derivatives related to corporate cdos and clos primarily consist
of total return swaps on cdos and clos. the firm has generally
transferred the risks related to the underlying securities
through derivatives with non-vies.
(4)
the firm obtains interests in these vies in connection with
making proprietary investments in real estate, distressed loans
and other types of debt, mezzanine instruments and equities.
(5)
derivatives related to principal-protected notes consist of
out-of-the-money written put options that provide principal
protection to clients invested in various fund products, with
risk to the firm mitigated through portfolio rebalancing.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table sets forth the firms total assets and
maximum exposure to loss associated with its significant
variable interests in consolidated vies where the firm does not
hold a majority voting interest. the firm has aggregated
consolidated vies based on principal business activity, as
reflected in the first column.
the table does not give effect to the benefit of any offsetting
financial instruments that are held to mitigate risks related to
the firms interests in consolidated vies.
as of november 2007
as of november 2006
maximum
maximum
exposure
exposure
vie
assets(1)
to
loss(2)
vie
assets(1)
to
loss(2)
(in millions)
real estate, credit-related and other investing
$
2,118
$
$
3,077
$
1,368
municipal bond securitizations
1,959
1,959
2,715
2,715
cdos, mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed
1,537
foreign exchange and commodities
principal-protected notes
1,119
1,118
total
$
6,100
$
4,040
$
8,656
$
5,217
(1)
consolidated vie assets include assets financed on a nonrecourse
basis.
(2)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated losses in
connection with these transactions.
collateralized
transactions
the firm receives financial instruments as collateral, primarily
in connection with resale agreements, securities borrowed,
derivative transactions and customer margin loans. such
financial instruments may include obligations of the u.s.
government, federal agencies, sovereigns and corporations, as
well as equities and convertibles.
in many cases, the firm is permitted to deliver or repledge
these financial instruments in connection with entering into
repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements and other
secured financings, collateralizing derivative transactions and
meeting firm or customer settlement requirements. as of november
2007 and november 2006, the fair value of financial instruments
received as collateral by the firm that it was permitted to
deliver or repledge was $891.05billion and
$746.08billion, respectively, of which the firm delivered
or repledged $785.62billion and $639.87billion,
respectively.
the firm also pledges assets that it owns to counterparties who
may or may not have the right to deliver or repledge them.
financial instruments owned and pledged to counterparties that
have the right to deliver or repledge are reported as
financial instruments owned and pledged as collateral, at
fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and were $46.14billion and $36.00billion
as of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively. financial
instruments owned and pledged in connection with repurchase
agreements, securities lending agreements and other secured
financings to counterparties that did not have the right to sell
or repledge are included in financial instruments owned,
at fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and were $156.92billion and $134.31billion
as of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively. other
assets (primarily real estate and cash) owned and pledged in
connection with other secured financings to counterparties that
did not have the right to sell or repledge were
$5.86billion and $5.34billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
in addition to repurchase agreements and securities lending
agreements, the firm obtains secured funding through the use of
other arrangements. other secured financings include
arrangements that are nonrecourse, that is, only the subsidiary
that executed the arrangement or a subsidiary guaranteeing the
arrangement is obligated to repay the financing. other secured
financings consist of liabilities related to the firms
william street program, consolidated variable interest entities,
collateralized central bank financings, transfers of financial
assets that are accounted for as financings rather than sales
under sfasno.140 (primarily pledged bank loans and
mortgage whole loans) and other structured financing
arrangements.
other secured financings are set forth in the table below:
as of november
(in millions)
other secured financings
(short-term)(1)(2)
$
32,410
$
24,290
other secured financings (long-term):
5,535
2,903
2,301
1,894
2,427
5,105
4,973
1,928
2013-thereafter
20,696
10,795
total other secured financings
(long-term)(3)(4)
33,300
26,134
total other secured
financings(5)
$
65,710
$
50,424
(1)
as of november 2007, consists of u.s. dollar-denominated
financings of $18.47billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 5.32% and
non-u.s.
dollar-denominated financings of $13.94billion with a
weighted average interest rate of 0.91%, after giving effect to
hedging activities. as of november 2006, consists of u.s.
dollar-denominated financings of $14.28billion with a
weighted average interest rate of 5.22% and
non-u.s.
dollar-denominated financings of $10.01billion with a
weighted average interest rate of 2.00%, after giving effect to
hedging activities. the weighted average interest rates as of
november 2007 and november 2006 excluded financial instruments
accounted for at fair value under sfasno.155 or
sfasno.159.
(2)
includes other secured financings maturing within one year of
the financial statement date and other secured financings that
are redeemable within one year of the financial statement date
at the option of the holder.
(3)
as of november 2007, consists of u.s. dollar-denominated
financings of $22.13billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 5.73% and
non-u.s.
dollar-denominated financings of $11.17billion with a
weighted average interest rate of 4.28%, after giving effect to
hedging activities. as of november 2006, consists of u.s.
dollar-denominated financings of $16.97billion with a
weighted average interest rate of 5.61% and
non-u.s.
dollar-denominated financings of $9.16billion with a
weighted average interest rate of 3.81%, after giving effect to
hedging activities.
(4)
secured long-term financings that are repayable prior to
maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their
contractual maturity dates. secured long-term financings that
are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holder are
reflected at the dates such options become exercisable.
(5)
as of november 2007, $61.34billion of these financings
were collateralized by financial instruments and
$4.37billion by other assets (primarily real estate and
cash). as of november 2006, $47.22 billion of these financings
were collateralized by financial instruments and
$3.20billion by other assets. other secured financings
include $25.37billion and $19.79billion of
nonrecourse obligations as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note4.unsecured
short-term borrowings
the firm obtains unsecured short-term borrowings primarily
through the issuance of promissory notes, commercial paper and
hybrid financial instruments. as of november 2007 and november
2006, these borrowings were $71.56billion and
$47.90billion, respectively. such amounts include the
portion of unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one
year of the financial statement date and unsecured long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder. the firm accounts
for promissory notes, commercial paper and certain hybrid
financial instruments at fair value under sfasno.155
or sfasno.159. short-term borrowings that are not
recorded at fair value are recorded based on the amount of cash
received plus accrued interest, and such amounts approximate
fair value due to the short-term nature of the obligations.
unsecured short-term borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
13,251
$
13,811
commercial paper
4,343
1,489
current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings
22,740
14,115
hybrid financial instruments
22,318
14,060
other short-term borrowings
8,905
4,429
total(1)
$
71,557
$
47,904
(1)
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings, after
giving effect to hedging activities, were 5.05% and 5.16% as of
november 2007 and november2006, respectively. the weighted
average interest rates as of november2007 and november
2006 excluded financial instruments accounted for at fair value
under sfasno.155 or sfasno.159.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note5.unsecured
long-term borrowings
the firms unsecured long-term borrowings extend through
2043 and consist principally of senior borrowings. as of
november 2007 and november 2006, these borrowings were
$164.17billion and $122.84billion, respectively.
unsecured long-term borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate
obligations(1)
u.s. dollar
$
55,281
$
41,719
non-u.s.
dollar
29,139
22,854
floating rate
obligations(2)
u.s. dollar
47,308
38,342
non-u.s.
dollar
32,446
19,927
total
$
164,174
$
122,842
(1)
as of november 2007 and november 2006, interest rates on u.s.
dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from 3.88% to 10.04% and
from 3.88% to 12.00%, respectively. as of november 2007 and
november 2006, interest rates on
non-u.s.
dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from 0.67% to 8.88% and
from 0.31% to 8.88%, respectively.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the
federal funds target rate. equity-linked and indexed instruments
are included in floating rate obligations.
unsecured long-term borrowings by maturity date are set forth
below:
as of november
2007(1)(2)
2006(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
14,848
$
3,038
$
17,886
20,204
2,978
23,182
12,398
2,978
15,376
7,989
5,714
13,703
5,034
4,945
9,979
5,848
4,839
10,687
5,675
4,389
10,064
14,913
3,695
18,608
4,500
2,098
6,598
2013-thereafter
53,635
44,359
97,994
37,606
25,333
62,939
total
$
102,589
$
61,585
$
164,174
$
80,061
$
42,781
$
122,842
(1)
unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one year of the
financial statement date and certain unsecured
long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder are included as
unsecured short-term borrowings in the consolidated statements
of financial condition.
(2)
unsecured long-term borrowings that are repayable prior to
maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their
contractual maturity dates. unsecured long-term borrowings that
are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of
theholder are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
the firm enters into derivative contracts, such as interest rate
futures contracts, interest rate swap agreements, currency swap
agreements, commodity contracts and equity-linked and indexed
contracts, to effectively convert a substantial portion of its
unsecured long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. accordingly, the carrying value of
unsecured long-term borrowings approximated fair value as of
november 2007 and november 2006.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the effective weighted average interest rates for unsecured
long-term borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
3,787
5.28
%
$
1,997
6.13
%
floating rate
obligations(1)(2)
160,387
5.68
120,845
5.75
total
$
164,174
5.67
$
122,842
5.75
(1)
includes fixed rate obligations that have been converted into
floating rate obligations through derivative contracts.
(2)
the weighted average interest rates as of november 2007 and
november 2006 excluded financial instruments accounted for at
fair value under sfasno.155 or
sfasno.159.
subordinated
borrowings
unsecured long-term borrowings include subordinated borrowings
with outstanding principal amounts of $16.32billion and
$7.51billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively, as set forth below.
subordinated notes.as of november 2007, the
firm had $11.23billion of subordinated notes outstanding
with maturities ranging from fiscal 2009 to 2037. the effective
weighted average interest rate on these subordinated notes was
5.75%, after giving effect to derivative contracts used to
convert fixed rate obligations into floating rate obligations.
as of november 2006, the firm had $4.67billion of
subordinated notes outstanding with maturities ranging from 2007
to 2036 and with an effective weighted average interest rate of
6.24%. these notes are junior in right of payment to all of the
firms senior indebtedness.
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust in connection with
trustpreferred securities. the firm issued
$2.84billion of junior subordinated debentures in its
first quarter of 2004 to goldman sachs capital i (the trust), a
delaware statutory trust that, in turn, issued
$2.75billion of guaranteed preferred beneficial interests
to third parties and $85million of common beneficial
interests to the firm and invested the proceeds from the sale in
junior subordinated debentures issued by the firm. the trust is
a wholly owned finance subsidiary of the firm for regulatory and
legal purposes but is not consolidated for accounting purposes.
the firm pays interest semiannually on these debentures at an
annual rate of 6.345% and the debentures mature on
february15, 2034. the coupon rate and the payment dates
applicable to the beneficial interests are the same as the
interest rate and payment dates applicable to the debentures.
the firm has the right, from time to time, to defer payment of
interest on the debentures, and, therefore, cause payment on the
trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in
each case up to ten consecutive semiannual periods. during any
such extension period, the firm will not be permitted to, among
other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of
its common stock. the trust is not permitted to pay any
distributions on the common beneficial interests held by the
firm unless all dividends payable on the preferred beneficial
interests have been paid in full. these debentures are junior in
right of payment to all of the firms senior indebtedness
and all of the firms subordinated borrowings, other than
the junior subordinated debt issued in connection with the
normal automatic preferred enhanced capital securities (see
discussion below).
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts in connection with
fixed-to-floating and floating rate normal automatic preferred
enhanced capital securities.in the second
quarter of 2007, the firm issued a total of $2.25billion
of remarketable junior subordinated notes to goldman sachs
capital ii and goldman sachs capital iii (the trusts), delaware
statutory trusts that, in turn, issued $2.25billion of
guaranteed perpetual automatic preferred enhanced capital
securities (apex) to third parties and a de minimis amount of
common securities to the firm. the firm also entered into
contracts with the trusts to sell $2.25billion of
perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock to be issued by the
firm (the stock purchase contracts). the trusts are wholly owned
finance subsidiaries of the firm for regulatory and legal
purposes but are not consolidated for accounting purposes.
the firm pays interest semiannually on $1.75billion of
junior subordinated notes issued to goldman sachs capital ii at
a fixed annual rate of 5.59% and the notes mature on
june1, 2043. the firm pays interest quarterly on
$500million of junior subordinated notes issued to goldman
sachs capital iii at a rate per annum equal to three-month libor
plus .57% and the notes mature on september1, 2043. in
addition, the firm makes contract payments at a rate of .20% per
annum on the stock purchase contracts held by the trusts. the
firm has the right to defer payments on the junior subordinated
notes and the stock purchase contracts, subject to limitations,
and therefore cause payment on the apex to be deferred. during
any such extension period, the firm will not be permitted to,
among other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases
of its common or preferred stock. the junior subordinated notes
are junior in right of payment to all of the firms senior
indebtedness and all of the firms other subordinated
borrowings.
in connection with the apex issuance, the firm covenanted in
favor of certain of its debtholders, who are initially the
holders of the firms 6.345% junior subordinated debentures
due february15,2034, that, subject to certain
exceptions, the firm would not redeem or purchase (i)the
firms junior subordinated debt issued to the apex trusts
prior to the applicable stock purchase date or (ii)apex or
shares of the firms seriese or seriesf
preferred stock prior to the date that is ten years after the
applicable stock purchase date, unless the applicable redemption
or purchase price does not exceed a maximum amount determined by
reference to the aggregate amount of net cash proceeds that the
firm has received from the sale of qualifying equity securities
during the 180day period preceding the redemption or
purchase.
the firm has accounted for the stock purchase contracts as
equity instruments under eitf issue
no.00-19,
accounting for derivative financial instruments indexed
to, and potentially settled in, a companys own
stock, and, accordingly, recorded the cost of the stock
purchase contracts as a reduction to additional paid-in capital.
see note7 for information on the preferred stock that the
firm will issue in connection with the stock purchase contracts.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note6.commitments,
contingencies and guarantees
commitments
forward starting collateralized agreements and
financings.the firm had forward starting resale
agreements and securities borrowing agreements of
$28.14billion and $18.29billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively. the firm had forward starting
repurchase agreements and securities lending agreements of
$15.39billion and $17.15billion as of
november2007 and november 2006, respectively.
commitments to extend credit.in connection
with its lending activities, the firm had outstanding
commitments to extend credit of $82.75billion and
$100.48billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively. the firms commitments to extend credit are
agreements to lend to counterparties that have fixed termination
dates and are contingent on the satisfaction of all conditions
to borrowing set forth in the contract. since these commitments
may expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the
counterpartys request, the total commitment amount does
not necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow
requirements. the firm accounts for these commitments at fair
value. to the extent that the firm recognizes losses on these
commitments, such losses are recorded within the firms
trading and principal investments segment net of any related
underwriting fees.
the following table summarizes the firms commitments to
extend credit as of november 2007 and november 2006:
year ended november
(in millions)
commercial lending commitments
investment-grade
$
11,719
$
7,604
non-investment-grade
41,930
57,017
william street program
24,488
18,831
warehouse financing
4,610
17,026
total commitments to extend credit
$
82,747
$
100,478
commercial lending commitments.the firm
extends commercial lending commitments primarily in connection
with contingent acquisition financing and other types of
corporate lending as well as commercial real estate financing.
the total commitment amount does not necessarily reflect the
actual future cash flow requirements, as the firm often
syndicates all or substantial portions of these commitments, the
commitments may expire unused, or the commitments may be
cancelled or reduced at the request of the counterparty. in
addition, commitments that are extended for contingent
acquisition financing are often intended to be short-term in
nature, as borrowers often seek to replace them with other
funding sources. included within the non-investment-grade amount
as of november 2007 was $26.09billion of exposure to
leveraged lending capital market transactions,
$3.50billion related to commercial real estate
transactions and $12.34billion arising from other unfunded
credit facilities. included within the non-investment-grade
amount as of november 2006 was $39.68billion of exposure
to leveraged lending capital market transactions,
$12.11billion related to commercial real estate
transactions and $5.23billion arising from other unfunded
credit facilities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
william street program.substantially all of
the commitments provided under the william street credit
extension program are to investment-grade corporate borrowers.
commitments under the program are extended by william street
commitment corporation (commitment corp.), a consolidated wholly
owned subsidiary of group inc. whose assets and liabilities are
legally separated from other assets and liabilities of the firm,
william street credit corporation, gs bank usa, goldman sachs
credit partners l.p. or other consolidated wholly owned
subsidiaries of group inc. the commitments extended by
commitment corp. are supported, in part, by funding raised by
william street funding corporation (funding corp.), another
consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of group inc. whose assets
and liabilities are also legally separated from other assets and
liabilities of the firm. the assets of commitment corp. and of
funding corp. will not be available to their respective
shareholders until the claims of their respective creditors have
been paid. in addition, no affiliate of either commitment corp.
or funding corp., except in limited cases as expressly agreed in
writing, is responsible for any obligation of either entity.
with respect to most of the william street commitments, sumitomo
mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg) provides the firm with
credit loss protection that is generally limited to 95% of the
first loss the firm realizes on approved loan commitments, up to
a maximum of $1.00billion. in addition, subject to the
satisfaction of certain conditions, upon the firms
request, smfg will provide protection for 70% of the second loss
on such commitments, up to a maximum of $1.13billion. the
firm also uses other financial instruments to mitigate credit
risks related to certain william street commitments not covered
by smfg.
warehouse financing.the firm provides
financing for the warehousing of financial assets to be
securitized. these financings are expected to be repaid from the
proceeds of the related securitizations for which the firm may
or may not act as underwriter. these arrangements are secured by
the warehoused assets, primarily consisting of corporate bank
loans and commercial mortgages as of november 2007 and
residential mortgages and mortgage-backed securities, corporate
bank loans and commercial mortgages as of november 2006. in
connection with its warehouse financing activities, the firm had
loans of $44million collateralized by subprime mortgages
as of november 2007.
letters of credit.the firm provides letters
of credit issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu of
securities or cash to satisfy various collateral and margin
deposit requirements. letters of credit outstanding were
$8.75billion and $5.73billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively.
investment commitments.in connection with its
merchant banking and other investing activities, the firm
invests in private equity, real estate and other assets directly
and through funds that it raises and manages. in connection with
these activities, the firm had commitments to invest up to
$17.76billion and $8.24billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively, including $12.32billion
and $4.41billion, respectively, of commitments to invest
in funds managed by the firm.
construction-related commitments.as of
november 2007 and november 2006, the firm had
construction-related commitments of $769million and
$1.63billion, respectively, including outstanding
commitments of $642million and $500million as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively, related to the
firms new world headquarters in new york city, which is
expected to cost between $2.3billion and
$2.5billion. the firm is partially financing this
construction project with  tax-exempt liberty bonds. the firm
borrowed approximately $1.40billion and approximately
$250million in 2005 and 2007, respectively, through the
issuance of liberty bonds.
underwriting commitments.as of november 2007
and november 2006, the firm had commitments to purchase
$88million and $2.62billion, respectively, of
securities in connection with its underwriting activities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
other.the firm had other purchase commitments
of $420million and $393million as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively.
in addition, the firm entered into an agreement in 2007 to
acquire litton loan servicing lp (litton), the mortgage
servicing unit of credit-based asset servicing and
securitization llc
(c-bass).
the transaction closed in december 2007 at a purchase price of
$428million, plus the repayment of $916million of
outstanding litton debt obligations.
leases.the firm has contractual obligations
under long-term noncancelable lease agreements, principally for
office space, expiring on various dates through 2069. certain
agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for
increases in real estate taxes and other charges. future minimum
rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals are set forth
below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2013-thereafter
2,022
total
$
3,890
rent charged to operating expense is set forth below:
net rent expense
$
contingencies
the firm is involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and
arbitration proceedings concerning matters arising in connection
with the conduct of its businesses. management believes, based
on currently available information, that the results of such
proceedings, in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse
effect on the firms financial condition, but may be
material to the firms operating results for any particular
period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such
period. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome
of the firms litigation and regulatory matters,
particularly in cases or proceedings in which substantial or
indeterminate damages or fines are sought, the firm cannot
estimate losses or ranges of losses for cases or proceedings
where there is only a reasonable possibility that a loss may be
incurred.
in connection with its insurance business, the firm is
contingently liable to provide guaranteed minimum death and
income benefits to certain contract holders and has established
a reserve related to $10.84billion and $8.04billion
of contract holder account balances as of november 2007 and
november 2006, respectively, for such benefits. the weighted
average attained age of these contract holders was 67years
and 70years as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively. the net amount at risk, representing guaranteed
minimum death and income benefits in excess of contract holder
account balances, was $1.04billion and $1.27billion
as of november 2007 and november2006, respectively. see
note10 for more information on the firms insurance
liabilities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
guarantees
the firm enters into various derivative contracts that meet the
definition of a guarantee under finno.45,
guarantors accounting and disclosure requirements
for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of indebtedness of
others. such derivative contracts include credit default
and total return swaps, written equity and commodity put
options, written currency contracts and interest rate caps,
floors and swaptions. finno.45 does not require
disclosures about derivative contracts if such contracts may be
cash settled and the firm has no basis to conclude it is
probable that the counterparties held, at inception, the
underlying instruments related to the derivative contracts. the
firm has concluded that these conditions have been met for
certain large, internationally active commercial and investment
bank end users and certain other users. accordingly, the firm
has not included such contracts in the tables below.
the firm, in its capacity as an agency lender, indemnifies most
of its securities lending customers against losses incurred in
the event that borrowers do not return securities and the
collateral held is insufficient to cover the market value of the
securities borrowed.
in the ordinary course of business, the firm provides other
financial guarantees of the obligations of third parties (e.g.,
performance bonds, standby letters of credit and other
guarantees to enable clients to complete transactions and
merchant banking fund-related guarantees). these guarantees
represent obligations to make payments to beneficiaries if the
guaranteed party fails to fulfill its obligation under a
contractual arrangement with that beneficiary.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following tables set forth certain information about the
firms derivative contracts that meet the definition of a
guarantee and certain other guarantees as of november 2007 and
november 2006:
as of november 2007
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration
(1)
2009-
2011-
2013-
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives
(2)
$
580,769
$
492,563
$
457,511
$
514,498
$
2,045,341
securities lending
indemnifications(3)
26,673
26,673
performance bonds
(4)
2,046
2,046
other financial guarantees
(5)
as of november 2006
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration
(1)
2008-
2010-
2012-
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives
(2)
$
379,256
$
428,258
$
460,088
$
399,449
$
1,667,051
securities lending
indemnifications(3)
19,023
19,023
performance bonds
other financial guarantees
(5)
(1)
such amounts do not represent the
anticipated losses in connection with these contracts.
(2)
the aggregate carrying value of
these derivatives as of november 2007 was a liability of
$33.10billion. the aggregate carrying value of these
derivatives as of november 2006 was an asset of
$1.12billion, consisting of contracts with an asset value
of $11.06billion and contracts with a liability value of
$9.94billion. the carrying value excludes the effect of a
legal right of setoff that may exist under an enforceable
netting agreement. these derivative contracts are risk managed
together with derivative contracts that are not considered
guarantees under finno.45, and therefore, these
amounts do not reflect the firms overall risk related to
its derivative activities.
(3)
collateral held by the lenders in
connection with securities lending indemnifications was
$27.49billion and $19.70billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively.
(4)
excludes collateral of
$2.05billion related to these obligations.
(5)
the carrying value of these
guarantees was a liability of $43million and
$15million as of november2007 and
november2006, respectively.
the firm has established trusts, including goldman sachs
capitali,ii and iii, and other entities for the
limited purpose of issuing securities to third parties, lending
the proceeds to the firm and entering into contractual
arrangements with the firm and third parties related to this
purpose. (see note5 for information regarding the
transactions involving goldman sachs capitali,ii and
iii.) the firm effectively provides for the full and
unconditional guarantee of the securities issued by these
entities, which are not consolidated for accounting purposes.
timely payment by the firm of amounts due to these entities
under the borrowing, preferred stock and related contractual
arrangements will be sufficient to cover payments due on the
securities issued by these entities. management believes that it
is unlikely that any circumstances will occur, such as
nonperformance on the part of paying agents or other service
providers, that would make it necessary for the firm to make
payments related to these entities other than those required
under the terms of the borrowing, preferred stock and related
contractual arrangements and in connection with certain expenses
incurred by these entities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
in the ordinary course of business, the firm indemnifies and
guarantees certain service providers, such as clearing and
custody agents, trustees and administrators, against specified
potential losses in connection with their acting as an agent of,
or providing services to, the firm or its affiliates. the firm
also indemnifies some clients against potential losses incurred
in the event specified third-party service providers, including
sub-custodians and third-party brokers, improperly execute
transactions. in addition, the firm is a member of payment,
clearing and settlement networks as well as securities exchanges
around the world that may require the firm to meet the
obligations of such networks and exchanges in the event of
member defaults. in connection with its prime brokerage and
clearing businesses, the firm agrees to clear and settle on
behalf of its clients the transactions entered into by them with
other brokerage firms. the firms obligations in respect of
such transactions are secured by the assets in the clients
account as well as any proceeds received from the transactions
cleared and settled by the firm on behalf of the client. in
connection with joint venture investments, the firm may issue
loan guarantees under which it may be liable in the event of
fraud, misappropriation, environmental liabilities and certain
other matters involving the borrower. the firm is unable to
develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these guarantees
and indemnifications. however, management believes that it is
unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under
these arrangements, and no liabilities related to these
guarantees and indemnifications have been recognized in the
consolidated statements of financial condition as of november
2007 and november 2006.
the firm provides representations and warranties to
counterparties in connection with a variety of commercial
transactions and occasionally indemnifies them against potential
losses caused by the breach of those representations and
warranties. the firm may also provide indemnifications
protecting against changes in or adverse application of certain
u.s.tax laws in connection with ordinary-course
transactions such as securities issuances, borrowings or
derivatives. in addition, the firm may provide indemnifications
to some counterparties to protect them in the event additional
taxes are owed or payments are withheld, due either to a change
in or an adverse application of certain
non-u.s.tax
laws. these indemnifications generally are standard contractual
terms and are entered into in the ordinary course of business.
generally, there are no stated or notional amounts included in
these indemnifications, and the contingencies triggering the
obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur. the firm is
unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these
guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes
that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material
payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities related to
these arrangements have been recognized in the consolidated
statements of financial condition as of november 2007 and
november 2006.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note7.shareholders
equity
dividends declared per common share were $1.40 in 2007, $1.30 in
2006, and $1.00 in 2005. on december17, 2007, the board of
directors of group inc. (the board) declared a dividend of
$0.35per common share to be paid on february28,
2008, to common shareholders of record on january29, 2008.
during 2007 and 2006, the firm repurchased 41.2million and
50.2million shares of its common stock at a total cost of
$8.96billion and $7.82billion, respectively. the
average price paid per share for repurchased shares was $217.29
and $155.64 for the years ended november 2007 and
november2006, respectively. in addition, to satisfy
minimum statutory employee tax withholding requirements related
to the delivery of common stock underlying restricted stock
units, the firm cancelled 4.7million and 3.0million
of restricted stock units with a total value of
$929million and $375million in 2007 and 2006,
respectively.
the firms share repurchase program is intended to help
maintain the appropriate level of common equity and to
substantially offset increases in share count over time
resulting from employee share-based compensation. the repurchase
program is effected primarily through regular  open-market
purchases, the amounts and timing of which are determined
primarily by the firms current and projected capital
positions (i.e., comparisons of the firms desired level of
capital to its actual level of capital) but which may also be
influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price
and trading volumes of the firms common stock.
as of november 2007, the firm had 124,000shares of
perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock issued and outstanding
in four series as set forth in the following table:
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
issued
authorized
dividend rate
redemption date
(in millions)
a
30,000
50,000
3month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 3.75% per annum
april 25, 2010
$
b
32,000
50,000
6.20% per annum
october 31, 2010
c
8,000
25,000
3month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 4% per annum
october 31, 2010
d
54,000
60,000
3month libor + 0.67%,
with floor of 4% per annum
may 24, 2011
1,350
124,000
185,000
$
3,100
each share of preferred stock issued and outstanding has a par
value of $0.01, has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is
represented by 1,000 depositary shares and is redeemable at the
firms option at a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus
declared and unpaid dividends. dividends on each series of
preferred stock, if declared, are payable quarterly in arrears.
the firms ability to declare or pay dividends on, or
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, its common stock is
subject to certain restrictions in the event that the firm fails
to pay or set aside full dividends on the preferred stock for
the latest completed dividend period. all series of preferred
stock are pari passu and have a preference over the firms
common stock upon liquidation.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
in the second quarter of 2007, the board authorized
17,500.1shares of perpetual non-cumulative preferred
stock, seriese and 5,000.1shares of perpetual
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesf in connection with
the apex issuance (see note5 for further information on
the apex issuance). under the stock purchase contracts, the firm
will issue on the relevant stock purchase dates (on or before
june1, 2013 and september1, 2013 for seriese
and seriesf preferred stock, respectively) one share of
seriese and seriesf preferred stock to goldman sachs
capitalii and iii, respectively, for each $100,000
principal amount of subordinated notes held by these trusts.
when issued, each share of seriese and seriesf
preferred stock will have a par value of $0.01 and a liquidation
preference of $100,000 per share. dividends on seriese
preferred stock, if declared, will be payable semiannually at a
fixed annual rate of 5.79% if the stock is issued prior to
june1, 2012 and quarterly thereafter, at a rate per annum
equal to the greater of (i)three-month libor plus .77% and
(ii)4%. dividends on seriesf preferred stock, if
declared, will be payable quarterly at a rate per annum equal to
three-month libor plus .77% if the stock is issued prior to
september1, 2012 and quarterly thereafter, at a rate per
annum equal to the greater of (i)three-month libor plus
.77% and (ii)4%. the preferred stock may be redeemed at
the option of the firm on the stock purchase dates or any day
thereafter, subject to the approval of the securities and
exchange commission (sec) and certain covenant restrictions
governing the firms ability to redeem or purchase the
preferred stock without issuing common stock or other
instruments with equity-like characteristics.
dividends declared per preferred share were $1,563.51,
$1,550.00, $1,563.51 and $1,543.06 for seriesa,
seriesb, seriesc and seriesd preferred stock,
respectively, in 2007. dividends declared per preferred share
were $1,434.79, $1,593.06, $1,465.19 and $709.10 for
seriesa, seriesb, seriesc and seriesd
preferred stock, respectively, in 2006. in addition, on
december17, 2007, the board declared dividends per
preferred share of $351.84, $387.50, $351.84 and $346.84 for
seriesa, seriesb, seriesc and seriesd
preferred stock, respectively, to be paid on february11,
2008 to preferred shareholders of record on january27,
2008.
the following table sets forth the firms accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss) by type:
as of
november
(in millions)
adjustment from adoption of sfasno.158, net of tax
$
(194
)
$
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax
(38
)
net gains on cash flow hedges, net of tax
net unrealized gains on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
(1)
total accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax
$
(118
)
$
(1)
consists of net unrealized gains of $9million on
available-for-sale securities held by investees accounted for
under the equity method and net unrealized losses of
$1million on available-for-sale securities held by the
firms insurance subsidiaries.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note8.earnings
per common share
the computations of basic and diluted earnings per common share
are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
numerator for basic and diluted eps net earnings
applicable tocommon shareholders
$11,407
$
9,398
$
5,609
denominator for basic eps weighted average number of
common shares
433.0
449.0
478.1
effect of dilutive securities
restricted stock units
13.6
13.6
9.9
stock options
14.6
14.8
12.2
dilutive potential common shares
28.2
28.4
22.1
denominator for diluted eps weighted average number
of common shares and dilutive potential common shares
(1)
461.2
477.4
500.2
basic eps
$26.34
$
20.93
$
11.73
diluted eps
24.73
19.69
11.21
(1)
the diluted eps computations do not
include the anti-dilutive effect of the following options:
year ended november
(in millions)
number of anti-dilutive options, end of period
note9.goodwill
and identifiable intangible assets
goodwill
the following table sets forth the carrying value of the
firms goodwill by operating segment, which is included in
other assets in the consolidated statements of
financial condition:
as of november
(in millions)
investment banking
financial advisory
$
$
underwriting
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities
(1)
2,381
2,381
principal investments
asset management and securities services
asset management
(2)
securities services
total
$
3,321
$
3,184
(1)
primarily related to slk llc (slk).
(2)
primarily related to the ayco
company, l.p. (ayco). the increase in goodwill from november
2006 relates to the firms acquisition of
macquarie imm investment management.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
identifiable
intangible assets
the following table sets forth the gross carrying amount,
accumulated amortization and net carrying amount of the
firms identifiable intangible assets:
as of november
(in millions)
customer
lists(1)
gross carrying amount
$
1,086
$
1,034
accumulated amortization
(354
)
(297
)
net carrying amount
$
$
new york stock
gross carrying amount
$
$
exchange (nyse)
accumulated amortization
(212
)
(172
)
specialist rights
net carrying amount
$
$
insurance-related
gross carrying amount
$
$
assets(2)
accumulated amortization
(89
)
(34
)
net carrying amount
$
$
exchange-traded
gross carrying amount
$
$
fund (etf)
accumulated amortization
(38
)
(33
)
specialist rights
net carrying amount
$
$
power
contracts(3)
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(13
)
(83
)
net carrying amount
$
$
other(4)
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(282
)
(246
)
net carrying amount
$
$
total
gross carrying amount
$
2,759
$
3,367
accumulated amortization
(988
)
(865
)
net carrying amount
$
1,771
$
2,502
(1)
primarily includes the firms
clearance and execution and nasdaq customer lists related to slk
and financial counseling customer lists related to ayco.
(2)
consists of voba and dac. voba
represents the present value of estimated future gross profits
of the variable annuity and life insurance business. dac results
from commissions paid by the firm to the primary insurer (ceding
company) on life and annuity reinsurance agreements as
compensation to place the business with the firm and to cover
the ceding companys acquisition expenses. voba and dac are
amortized over the estimated life of the underlying contracts
based on estimated gross profits, and amortization is adjusted
based on actual experience. theweighted average remaining
amortization period for voba and dac is seven years as of
november 2007.
(3)
the reduction in power contracts
from november 2006 is due to the sale of the majority of the
firms ownership interests in 14 power generation
facilities during 2007.
(4)
primarily includes marketing and
technology-related assets.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
substantially all of the firms identifiable intangible
assets are considered to have finite lives and are amortized
over their estimated useful lives. the weighted average
remaining life of the firms identifiable intangibles is
approximately 12years.
amortization expense associated with identifiable intangible
assets was $251million, $246million and
$165million for the years ended november 2007, november
2006 and november 2005, respectively. amortization expense
associated with the firms consolidated power generation
facilities is reported within cost of power
generation in the consolidated statements of earnings.
the estimated future amortization for existing identifiable
intangible assets through 2012 is set forth below:
(in millions)
$
note10.
other
assets and other liabilities
other
assets
other assets are generally less liquid, nonfinancial assets. the
following table sets forth the firms other assets by type:
as of november
(in millions)
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(1)
$
8,975
$
6,990
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
(2)
5,092
5,686
income tax-related assets
4,177
3,427
equity-method investments
(3)
2,014
2,764
miscellaneous receivables and other
3,809
3,009
total
$
24,067
$
21,876
(1)
net of accumulated depreciation and
amortization of $5.88billion and $5.06billion as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively.
(2)
see note9 for further
information regarding the firms goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets.
(3)
excludes investments of
$2.25billion accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.159 as of november 2007, which are included
in financial instruments owned, at fair value in the
consolidated statements of financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
other
liabilities
the following table sets forth the firms other liabilities
and accrued expenses by type:
as of november
(in millions)
compensation and benefits
$
11,816
$
9,165
insurance-related liabilities
(1)
10,344
11,471
minority interest
(2)
7,265
2,069
income tax-related liabilities
2,546
2,639
employee interests in consolidated funds
2,187
2,690
accrued expenses and other payables
4,749
3,832
total
$
38,907
$
31,866
(1)
insurance-related liabilities are
set forth in the table below:
as of november
(in millions)
separate account liabilities
$
7,039
$
7,957
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims
2,142
2,123
contract holder account balances
1,134
reserves for guaranteed minimum death and income benefits
total insurance-related liabilities
$
10,344
$
11,471
separate account liabilities are offset by separate account
assets, representing segregated contract holder funds under
variable annuity and life insurance contracts. separate account
assets are included in cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims include
liabilities arising from reinsurance provided by the firm to
other insurers. the firm had a receivable for $1.30billion
and $1.33billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively, related to such reinsurance contracts, which is
reported in receivables from customers and
counterparties in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. in addition, the firm has ceded risks to reinsurers
related to certain of its liabilities for future benefits and
unpaid claims and had a receivable of $785million and
$786million as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively, related to such reinsurance contracts, which is
reported in receivables from customers and
counterparties in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. contracts to cede risks to reinsurers do not relieve
the firm from its obligations to contract holders.
reserves for guaranteed minimum death and income benefits
represent a liability for the expected value of guaranteed
benefits in excess of projected annuity account balances. these
reserves are computed in accordance with aicpa
sop03-1
and are based on total payments expected to be made less total
fees expected to be assessed over the life of the contract.
(2)
includes $5.95billion and
$619million related to consolidated investment funds as of
november 2007 and november2006, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note11.employee
benefit plans
the firm sponsors various pension plans and certain other
postretirement benefit plans, primarily healthcare and life
insurance. the firm also provides certain benefits to former or
inactive employees prior to retirement.
defined
benefit pension plans and postretirement plans
employees of certain
non-u.s.subsidiaries
participate in various defined benefit pension plans. these
plans generally provide benefits based on years of credited
service and a percentage of the employees eligible
compensation. the firm maintains a defined benefit pension plan
for substantially all u.k. employees. the firm expects to close
the u.k. pension plan to new participants during the first half
of 2008, but will continue to accrue benefits for existing
participants.
the firm also maintains a defined benefit pension plan for
substantially all u.s.employees hired prior to
november1, 2003. as of november 2004, this plan has been
closed to new participants and no further benefits will be
accrued to existing participants. in addition, the firm has
unfunded postretirement benefit plans that provide medical and
life insurance for eligible retirees and their dependents
covered under these programs.
on november30, 2007, the firm adopted
sfasno.158 which requires an entity to recognize in
its statement of financial condition the funded status of its
defined benefit pension and postretirement plans, measured as
the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the
benefit obligation. upon adoption, sfasno.158
requires an entity to recognize previously unrecognized
actuarial gains and losses, prior service costs, and transition
obligations and assets within accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss) in the consolidated statements
of changes in shareholders equity. additional minimum
pension liabilities are derecognized upon adoption of the new
standard.
as a result of adopting sfasno.158, the firm
recorded increases of $59million and $253million to
other assets and other liabilities and accrued
expenses, respectively, and a $194million loss, net
of taxes, within accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss).
the accumulated other comprehensive loss at november30,
2007 includes actuarial losses, prior service costs, and
transition assets of $269million, $37million, and
$(9)million, pre-tax, respectively, of which
$8million, $13million and $(2)million,
pre-tax, respectively, will be amortized from accumulated other
comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit cost in 2008.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table provides a summary of the changes in the
plans benefit obligations and the fair value of assets for
november 2007 and november 2006 and a statement of the funded
status of the plans as of november 2007 and november 2006:
as of or for the year ended november
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
benefit obligation
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
service cost
interest cost
plan amendments
(1
)
actuarial loss
(11
)
(79
)
(13
)
benefits paid
(7
)
(1
)
(7
)
(6
)
(4
)
(8
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
fair value of plan assets
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
actual return on plan assets
firm contributions
employee contributions
benefits paid
(7
)
(1
)
(7
)
(6
)
(3
)
(8
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
funded status
$
$
(134
)
$
(445
)
$
$
(167
)
$
(372
)
unrecognized loss
unrecognized transition (asset)/obligation
(17
)
unrecognized prior service cost
adjustment to recognize additional minimum liability
(10
)
(46
)
prepaid/(accrued) benefit cost
$
$
(134
)
$
(445
)
$
$
(44
)
$
(224
)
amounts recognized in the statements of financial condition
consist of:
other assets
$
$
$
$
$
$
other liabilities and accrued expenses
(134
)
(445
)
(21
)
(44
)
(224
)
net amounts recognized
$
$
(134
)
$
(445
)
$
$
(44
)
$
(224
)
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit
pension plans was $1.05billion and $944million as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively.
for plans in which the accumulated benefit obligation exceeded
plan assets, the aggregate projected benefit obligation and
accumulated benefit obligation was $722million and
$636million, respectively, as of november 2007, and
$771million and $647million, respectively, as of
november2006. the fair value of plan assets for each of
these plans was $590million and $583million as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively.
the components of pension expense/(income) and postretirement
expense are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s. pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(32
)
(26
)
(27
)
net amortization
total
$
(9
)
$
$
(2
)
non-u.s.
pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(36
)
(29
)
(23
)
net amortization
other
(1)
(17
)
total
$
$
$
postretirement
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
net amortization
total
$
$
$
(1)
represents a benefit as a result of
the termination of a japanese pension plan.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the weighted average assumptions used to develop the actuarial
present value of the projected benefit obligation and net
periodic pension cost are set forth below. these assumptions
represent a weighted average of the assumptions used for the
u.s.and
non-u.s.plans
and are based on the economic environment of each applicable
country.
year ended november
defined benefit pension plans
u.s. pension projected benefit obligation
discount rate
6.00
%
5.50
%
5.25
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
n/a
n/a
u.s. pension net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.50
5.25
5.50
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
n/a
n/a
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
7.50
7.50
7.50
non-u.s.
pension projected benefit obligation
discount rate
5.91
4.85
4.81
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.38
4.98
4.75
non-u.s.
pension net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
4.85
4.81
4.63
rate of increase in future compensation levels
4.98
4.75
4.49
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
6.84
6.93
6.35
postretirement plans benefit obligation
discount rate
6.00
%
5.50
%
5.25
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
postretirement plans net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.50
5.25
5.50
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
generally, the firm determined the discount rates for its
defined benefit plans by referencing indices for long-term,
high-quality bonds and ensuring that the discount rate does not
exceed the yield reported for those indices after adjustment for
the duration of the plans liabilities.
the firms approach in determining the long-term rate of
return for plan assets is based upon historical financial market
relationships that have existed over time with the presumption
that this trend will generally remain constant in the future.
for measurement purposes, an annual growth rate in the per
capita cost of covered healthcare benefits of 10.02% was assumed
for the year ending november 2008. the rate was assumed to
decrease ratably to 5.00% for the year ending november 2015 and
remain at that level thereafter.
the assumed cost of healthcare has an effect on the amounts
reported for the firms postretirement plans. a 1% change
in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would have the
following effects:
1% increase
1% decrease
(in millions)
service plus interest costs
$
$
$
(9
)
$
(7
)
obligation
(72
)
(62
)
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the following table sets forth the composition of plan assets
for the u.s.and
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans by asset category:
as of november
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
pension
pension
pension
pension
equity securities
%
%
%
%
debt securities
other
total
%
%
%
%
the investment approach of the firms u.s.and major
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans involves employing a sufficient level of
flexibility to capture investment opportunities as they occur,
while maintaining reasonable parameters to ensure that prudence
and care are exercised in the execution of the investment
programs. the plans employ a total return on investment
approach, whereby a mix, which is broadly similar to the actual
asset allocation as of november 2007, of equity securities, debt
securities and other assets, is targeted to maximize the
long-term return on assets for a given level of risk. investment
risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis by the
firms retirement committee through periodic portfolio
reviews, meetings with investment managers and annual liability
measurements.
the firm expects to contribute a minimum of $133million to
its pension plans and $9million to its postretirement
plans in 2008.
the following table sets forth benefits projected to be paid
from the firms u.s.and
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension and postretirement plans (net of medicare
subsidy receipts) and reflects expected future service costs,
where appropriate:
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
$
$
$
2013-2017
defined
contribution plans
the firm contributes to employer-sponsored u.s.and
non-u.s.defined
contribution plans. the firms contribution to these plans
was $258million, $230million and $305million
for the years ended november2007, november2006 and
november2005, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note12.employee
incentive plans
stock
incentive plan
the firm sponsors a stock incentive plan, the goldman sachs
amended and restated stock incentive plan (the amended sip),
which provides for grants of incentive stock options,
nonqualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, dividend
equivalent rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units,
awards with performance conditions and other share-based awards.
in the second quarter of 2003, the amended sip was approved by
the firms shareholders, effective for grants after
april1,2003.
the total number of shares of common stock that may be issued
under the amended sip through 2008may not exceed
250million shares and, in each year thereafter, may not
exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock,
determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding year,
increased by the number of shares available for awards in
previous years but not covered by awards granted in such years.
as of november 2007 and november 2006, 160.6million and
180.0million shares, respectively, were available for
grant under the amended sip.
other
compensation arrangements
the firm has deferred compensation plans for eligible employees.
in general, under the plans, participants are able to defer
payment of a portion of their cash year-end compensation. during
the deferral period, participants are able to nominally invest
their deferrals in certain alternatives available under the
plans. generally, under current tax law, participants are not
subject to income tax on amounts deferred or on any notional
investment earnings until the returns are distributed, and the
firm is not entitled to a corresponding tax deduction until the
amounts are distributed. the firm has recognized compensation
expense for the amounts deferred under these plans. as of
november 2007 and november 2006, $281million and
$245million, respectively, related to these plans was
included in other liabilities and accrued expenses
in the consolidated statements of financial condition.
the firm has a discount stock program through which eligible
senior executives may acquire restricted stock units at an
effective 25% discount. the 25% discount is effected by an
additional grant of restricted stock units equal to one-third of
the number of restricted stock units purchased by qualifying
participants. the purchased restricted stock units are 100%
vested when granted, but the shares underlying them are not able
to be sold or transferred (other than to satisfy tax
obligations) before the third anniversary of the grant date. the
shares underlying the restricted stock units that are granted in
order to effect the 25% discount will generally vest in equal
installments on the second and third anniversaries following the
grant date and will not be transferable before the third
anniversary of the grant date. compensation expense related to
these restricted stock units is recognized over the vesting
period. the total value of restricted stock units granted in
2007 and 2006 in order to effect the 25% discount was
$66million and $72million, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
restricted
stock units
the firm issued restricted stock units to employees under the
amended sip, primarily in connection with year-end compensation
and acquisitions. restricted stock units are valued based on the
closing price of the underlying shares at the date of grant.
year-end restricted stock units generally vest as outlined in
the applicable restricted stock unit agreements and deliver
shortly after the third anniversary of the grant date. all
employee restricted stock unit agreements provide that vesting
is accelerated in certain circumstances, such as upon
retirement, death and extended absence. of the total restricted
stock units outstanding as of november 2007 and november 2006,
(i)22.0million units and 26.4million units,
respectively, required future service as a condition to the
delivery of the underlying shares of common stock and
(ii)51.6million units and 38.9million units,
respectively, did not require future service. in all cases,
delivery of the underlying shares of common stock is conditioned
on the grantees satisfying certain vesting and other
requirements outlined in the award agreements. when delivering
the underlying shares to employees, the firm generally issues
new shares of common stock. the activity related to these
restricted stock units is set forth below:
weighted average grant-date
restricted stock
fair value of restricted
units outstanding
stock units outstanding
future
no future
future
no future
service
service
service
service
required
required
required
required
outstanding, november 2006
(1)
26,380,372
38,918,141
$
138.83
$
138.22
granted
(2)(3)(4)
7,968,028
13,870,644
224.40
223.97
forfeited
(816,924
)
(282,019
)
145.30
135.46
delivered
(5)
(12,447,338
)
103.49
vested
(4)
(11,506,129
)
11,506,129
116.95
116.95
outstanding, november 2007
22,025,347
51,565,557
$
180.98
$
164.94
(1)
includes restricted stock units
granted to employees during the year ended november 2007 as part
of compensation for 2006.
(2)
includes restricted stock units
granted to employees subsequent to november 2007 as part of
compensation for 2007.
(3)
the weighted average grant-date
fair value of restricted stock units granted during the years
ended november 2007, november 2006 and november 2005 was
$224.13, $196.99 and $129.03, respectively.
(4)
the aggregate fair value of awards
vested during the years ended november 2007, november 2006 and
november2005 was $5.63billion, $4.40billion
and $2.05billion, respectively.
(5)
includes restricted stock units
that were cash settled.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
stock
options
stock options granted to employees generally vest as outlined in
the applicable stock option agreement and first become
exercisable on or after the third anniversary of the grant date.
year-end stock options for 2007 and 2006 become exercisable in
january 2011 and january 2010, respectively, and expire on
november24, 2017 and november25, 2016, respectively.
shares received on exercise prior to january 2013 for year-end
2007 options and january 2011 for year-end 2006 options can not
be sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of until january 2013
and january 2011, respectively. all employee stock option
agreements provide that vesting is accelerated in certain
circumstances, such as upon retirement, death and extended
absence. in general, all stock options expire on the tenth
anniversary of the grant date, although they may be subject to
earlier termination or cancellation under certain circumstances
in accordance with the terms of the amended sip and the
applicable stock option agreement. the dilutive effect of the
firms outstanding stock options is included in
average common shares outstanding
diluted on the consolidated statements of earnings.
the activity related to these stock options is set forth below:
weighted
weighted
average
aggregate
average
options
exercise
intrinsic value
remaining
outstanding
price
(in millions)
life (years)
outstanding, november 2006
(1)
45,647,096
$
93.12
granted
(2)
3,549,856
204.16
exercised
(9,918,538
)
79.54
forfeited
(48,785
)
75.08
outstanding, november 2007
39,229,629
$
106.63
$
4,708
5.05
exercisable, november 2007
29,613,029
$
83.05
$
4,252
3.75
(1)
includes stock options granted to
employees during the year ended november 2007 as part of
compensation for 2006.
(2)
includes stock options granted to
employees subsequent to november 2007 as part of compensation
for 2007.
the total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years
ended november 2007, november2006 and november 2005 was
$1.32billion, $1.52billion and $766million,
respectively.
the options outstanding as of november 2007 are set forth below:
weighted
weighted
average
options
average
remaining
exercise price
outstanding
exercise price
life (years)
$45.00
$
59.99
2,943,014
$
52.98
1.50
60.00
74.99
75.00
89.99
13,537,137
81.03
3.94
90.00
104.99
13,132,878
91.86
4.07
105.00
119.99
120.00
134.99
3,128,972
131.64
8.00
135.00
194.99
195.00
209.99
6,487,628
202.20
9.55
outstanding, november 2007
39,229,629
(1)
(1)
includes stock options granted to
employees subsequent to november 2007 as part of compensation
for 2007.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the weighted average fair value of options granted for 2007,
2006 and 2005 was $51.04, $49.96 and $32.91 per option,
respectively. fair value was estimated as of the grant date
based on a black-scholes option-pricing model principally using
the following weighted average assumptions:
year ended november
risk-free interest rate
4.0
%
4.6
%
4.5
%
expected volatility
35.0
27.5
30.0
dividend yield
0.7
0.7
0.9
expected life
7.5 years
7.5 years
7.5 years
the common stock underlying the options granted in 2007, 2006
and 2005 is subject to transfer restrictions for a period of
2years, 1year and 1year, respectively, from
the date the options become exercisable. the value of the common
stock underlying the options granted in 2007, 2006 and 2005
reflects a liquidity discount of 24.0%, 17.5% and 17.5%,
respectively, as a result of these transfer restrictions. the
liquidity discount was based on the firms pre-determined
written liquidity discount policies. the 7.5years expected
life of the options reflects the estimated impact of these sales
restrictions on the life of the awards.
the following table sets forth share-based compensation and the
related tax benefit:
year ended november
(in millions)
share-based compensation
$
4,549
$
3,669
$
1,758
excess tax benefit related to options exercised
excess tax benefit related to share-based
compensation(1)
(1)
represents the tax benefit,
recognized in additional paid-in capital, on stock options
exercised and the delivery of common stock underlying restricted
stock units.
as of november 2007, there was $2.75billion of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested share-based
compensation arrangements. this cost is expected to be
recognized over a weighted average period of 2.15years.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note13.transactions
with affiliated funds
the firm has formed numerous nonconsolidated investment funds
with third-party investors. the firm generally acts as the
investment manager for these funds and, as such, is entitled to
receive management fees and, in certain cases, advisory fees,
incentive fees or overrides from these funds. these fees
amounted to $3.62billion, $3.37billion and
$2.08billion for the years ended november2007,
november 2006 and november 2005, respectively. as of november
2007 and november 2006, the fees receivable from these funds
were $596million and $362million, respectively.
additionally, the firm may invest alongside the third-party
investors in certain funds. the aggregate carrying value of the
firms interests in these funds was $12.90billion and
$3.94billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively. in the ordinary course of business, the firm may
also engage in other activities with these funds, including,
among others, securities lending, trade execution, trading,
custody and acquisition and bridge financing. see note6
for the firms commitments related to these funds.
note14.income
taxes
the components of the net tax expense reflected in the
consolidated statements of earnings are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
current taxes
u.s. federal
$
2,934
$
3,736
$
1,504
state and local
non-u.s.
2,554
2,165
1,380
total current tax expense
5,876
6,528
3,097
deferred taxes
u.s. federal
(635
)
state and local
(262
)
(4
)
non-u.s.
(89
)
(608
)
(449
)
total deferred tax (benefit)/expense
(1,505
)
(450
)
net tax expense
$
6,005
$
5,023
$
2,647
deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of
assets and liabilities. these temporary differences result in
taxable or deductible amounts in future years and are measured
using the tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such
differences are expected to reverse.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
significant components of the firms deferred tax assets
and liabilities are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
deferred tax assets
compensation and benefits
$
3,869
$
2,763
other, net
1,104
4,866
3,867
valuation
allowance(1)
(112
)
(81
)
total deferred tax assets
4,754
3,786
deferred tax liabilities
depreciation and amortization
1,208
1,040
unrealized gains
1,279
total deferred tax liabilities
$
2,487
$
1,407
(1)
relates primarily to the ability to
utilize losses in various tax jurisdictions.
the firm permanently reinvests eligible earnings of certain
foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly, does not accrue any
u.s.income taxes that would arise if such earnings were
repatriated. as of november 2007, this policy resulted in an
unrecognized net deferred tax liability of $350million
attributable to reinvested earnings of $4.97billion.
during 2007, the valuation allowance was increased by
$31million, primarily due to an increase in deferred tax
assets relating to net operating losses considered more likely
than not to expire unused. net operating loss carryforwards were
$2.12billion and $1.78billion as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively.
the firm had federal net operating loss carryforwards, primarily
resulting from acquisitions, of $139million and
$203million as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively. the firm recorded a related net deferred income
tax asset of $44million and $69million as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively. these
carryforwards are subject to annual limitations on utilization
and will begin to expire in 2011.
the firm had state and local net operating loss carryforwards,
primarily resulting from acquisitions, of $1.62billion and
$1.52billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively. the firm recorded a related net deferred income
tax asset of $21million and $31million as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively. these
carryforwards are subject to annual limitations on utilization
and will begin to expire in 2012.
the firm had foreign net operating loss carryforwards of
$306million and $50million as of november 2007 and
november 2006, respectively. the firm recorded a related net
deferred income tax asset of $84million and
$13million as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively. these carryforwards are subject to limitation on
utilization and can be carried forward indefinitely.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
the firm is subject to examination by the u.s.internal
revenue service (irs) and other taxing authorities in
jurisdictions where the firm has significant business
operations, such as the united kingdom, japan, korea and various
states, such as new york. during fiscal 2007, the irs
substantially concluded its examination of fiscal years 2003 and
2004 and the firm does not expect that potential additional
assessments from this examination will be material to its
results of operations. the firm expects the irs examination of
the firms 2005 and 2006 fiscal years will begin during
2008. tax reserves have been established, which the firm
believes are adequate in relation to the potential for
additional assessments. the resolution of tax matters is not
expected to have a material effect on the firms financial
condition but may be material to the firms operating
results for a particular period, depending, in part, upon the
operating results for that period and the firms effective
tax rate for that period.
a reconciliation of the u.s.federal statutory income tax
rate to the firms effective income tax rate is set forth
below:
year ended november
u.s. federal statutory income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase related to state and local taxes, net of u.s. income
taxeffects
1.8
1.6
1.6
tax credits
(0.5
)
(0.6
)
(1.6
)
foreign operations
(1.6
)
(1.3
)
(1.2
)
tax-exempt income, including dividends
(0.4
)
(0.4
)
(0.6
)
other
(0.2
)
0.2
(1)
(1.2
)
effective income tax rate
34.1
%
34.5
%
32.0
%
(1)
primarily includes the effect of
audit settlements.
tax benefits of approximately $908million in november
2007, $653million in november 2006 and $272million
in november 2005, related to the delivery of common stock
underlying restricted stock units and the exercise of options,
were credited directly to additional paid-in capital
in the consolidated statements of financial condition and
changes in shareholders equity.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note15.regulation
the firm is regulated by the u.s.securities and exchange
commission as a consolidated supervised entity (cse). as such,
it is subject to group-wide supervision and examination by the
sec and to minimum capital standards on a consolidated basis. as
of november 2007 and november2006, the firm was in
compliance with the cse capital standards.
the firms principal u.s.regulated subsidiaries
include goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.) and goldman
sachs execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec). gs&co.
and gsec are registered u.s.
broker-dealers
and futures commission merchants subject to
rule15c3-1
of the sec and rule1.17 of the commodity futures trading
commission, which specify uniform minimum net capital
requirements, as defined, for their registrants, and also
require that a significant part of the registrants assets
be kept in relatively liquid form. gs&co. and gsec have
elected to compute their minimum capital requirements in
accordance with the alternative net capital
requirement as permitted by
rule15c3-1.
as of november 2007 and november 2006, gs&co. and gsec had
net capital in excess of their minimum capital requirements. in
addition to its alternative minimum net capital requirements,
gs&co. is also required to hold tentative net capital in
excess of $1billion and net capital in excess of
$500million in accordance with the market and credit risk
standards of appendixe of
rule15c3-1.
gs&co. is also required to notify the sec in the event that
its tentative net capital is less than $5billion. as of
november 2007 and november 2006, gs&co. had tentative net
capital and net capital in excess of both the minimum and the
notification requirements.
gs bank usa, a wholly owned industrial bank, is regulated by the
federal deposit insurance corporation and the state of utah
department of financial institutions and is subject to minimum
capital requirements. as of november 2007, gs bank usa was in
compliance with all regulatory capital requirements.
substantially all of the firms bank deposits as of
november 2007 consisted of u.s.dollar-denominated savings
accounts at gs bank usa. savings accounts at gs bank usa have no
stated maturity and can be withdrawn upon short notice. the
weighted average interest rates for savings deposits were 4.71%
and 5.17% as of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively.
the carrying value of savings deposits approximated fair value
as of november 2007 and november 2006.
the firm has u.s.insurance subsidiaries that are subject
to state insurance regulation and oversight in the states in
which they are domiciled and in the other states in which they
are licensed. in addition, certain of the firms insurance
subsidiaries are regulated by the bermuda registrar of
companies. the firms insurance subsidiaries were in
compliance with all regulatory capital requirements as of
november 2007 and november 2006.
the firms principal
non-u.s.regulated
subsidiaries include goldman sachs international (gsi) and
goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl). gsi, the firms
regulated u.k. broker-dealer, is subject to the capital
requirements of the u.k.s financial services authority.
gsjcl, the firms regulated japanese broker-dealer, is
subject to the capital requirements of japans financial
services agency. as of november 2007 and november 2006, gsi and
gsjcl were in compliance with their local capital adequacy
requirements. certain other
non-u.s.subsidiaries
of the firm are also subject to capital adequacy requirements
promulgated by authorities of the countries in which they
operate. as of november 2007 and november 2006, these
subsidiaries were in compliance with their local capital
adequacy requirements.
the regulatory requirements referred to above restrict group
inc.s ability to withdraw capital from its regulated
subsidiaries. as of november 2007, approximately
$18.10billion of net assets of regulated subsidiaries were
restricted as to the payment of dividends to group inc.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
note16.business
segments
in reporting to management, the firms operating results
are categorized into the following three business segments:
investment banking, trading and principal investments, and asset
management and securities services.
basis of
presentation
in reporting segments, certain of the firms business lines
have been aggregated where they have similar economic
characteristics and are similar in each of the following areas:
(i)the nature of the services they provide,
(ii)their methods of distribution, (iii)the types of
clients they serve and (iv)the regulatory environments in
which they operate.
the cost drivers of the firm taken as a whole
compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of the
firms business segments. compensation and benefits
expenses within the firms segments reflect, among other
factors, the overall performance of the firm as well as the
performance of individual business units. consequently, pre-tax
margins in one segment of the firms business may be
significantly affected by the performance of the firms
other business segments.
the firm allocates revenues and expenses among the three
business segments. due to the integrated nature of these
segments, estimates and judgments have been made in allocating
certain revenue and expense items. transactions between segments
are based on specific criteria or approximate third-party rates.
total operating expenses include corporate items that have not
been allocated to individual business segments. the allocation
process is based on the manner in which management views the
business of the firm.
the segment information presented in the table below is prepared
according to the following methodologies:
revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are
included in determining pre-tax earnings.
net revenues in the firms segments include allocations of
interest income and interest expense to specific securities,
commodities and other positions in relation to the cash
generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying
positions. net interest is included within segment net revenues
as it is consistent with the way in which management assesses
segment performance.
overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments
are allocated ratably based on direct segment expenses.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
segment
operating results
management believes that the following information provides a
reasonable representation of each segments contribution to
consolidated pre-tax earnings and total assets:
as of or for the year ended november
(in millions)
investment
net revenues
$
7,555
$
5,629
$
3,671
banking
operating expenses
4,985
4,062
3,258
pre-tax earnings
$
2,570
$
1,567
$
segment assets
$
5,526
$
4,967
$
4,869
trading and principal
net revenues
$
31,226
$
25,562
$
16,818
investments
operating expenses
17,998
14,962
10,600
pre-tax earnings
$
13,228
$
10,600
$
6,218
segment assets
$
744,647
$
566,499
$
505,536
asset management and
net revenues
$
7,206
$
6,474
$
4,749
securities services
operating expenses
5,363
4,036
3,070
pre-tax earnings
$
1,843
$
2,438
$
1,679
segment assets
$
369,623
$
266,735
$
196,399
total
net
revenues(1)
$
45,987
$
37,665
$
25,238
operating
expenses(2)
28,383
23,105
16,965
pre-tax
earnings(3)
$
17,604
$
14,560
$
8,273
total assets
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
$
706,804
(1)
net revenues include net interest
as set forth in the table below:
yearendednovember
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
1,512
1,535
1,366
asset management and securities services
2,475
1,947
1,659
total net interest
$
3,987
$
3,498
$
3,097
(2)
operating expenses include net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory proceedings
of $37million, $45million and $37million for
the years ended november 2007, november 2006 and november 2005,
respectively, that have not been allocated to the firms
segments.
(3)
pre-tax earnings include total
depreciation and amortization as set forth in the table below:
yearendednovember
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
asset management and securities services
total depreciation and amortization
$
1,167
$
$
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to
consolidated financial statements (continued)
geographic
information
due to the highly integrated nature of international financial
markets, the firm manages its businesses based on the
profitability of the enterprise as a whole. since a significant
portion of the firms activities require cross-border
coordination in order to facilitate the needs of the firms
clients, the methodology for allocating the firms
profitability to geographic regions is dependent on the judgment
of management.
geographic results are generally allocated as follows:
investment banking: location of the client and investment
banking team.
fixed income, currency and commodities, and equities: location
of the trading desk.
principal investments: location of the investment.
asset management: location of the sales team.
securities services: location of the primary market for the
underlying security.
the following table sets forth the total net revenues and
pre-tax earnings of the firm and its consolidated subsidiaries
by geographic region allocated on the methodology described
above, as well as the percentage of total net revenues and total
pre-tax earnings for each geographic region:
year ended november
($ in millions)
net revenues
americas(1)
$
23,412
%
$
20,361
%
$
14,639
%
emea(2)
13,538
9,354
6,063
asia
9,037
7,950
4,536
total net revenues
$
45,987
%
$
37,665
%
$
25,238
%
pre-tax earnings
americas(1)
$
7,673
%
$
7,515
%
$
4,977
%
emea(2)
5,458
3,075
1,457
asia
4,510
4,015
1,876
corporate(3)
(37
)
(45
)
(37
)
total pre-tax earnings
$
17,604
%
$
14,560
%
$
8,273
%
(1)
substantially all relates to u.s.
results.
(2)
emea (europe, middle east and
africa).
(3)
consists of net provisions for a
number of litigation and regulatory proceedings.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
quarterly
results (unaudited)
the following represents the firms unaudited quarterly
results for 2007 and 2006. these quarterly results were prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
reflect all adjustments that are, in the opinion of management,
necessary for a fair statement of the results. these adjustments
are of a normal recurring nature.
2007 quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
22,280
$
20,351
$
23,803
$
21,534
interest expense
9,550
10,169
11,469
10,793
revenues, net of interest expense
12,730
10,182
12,334
10,741
operating
expenses(1)
7,871
6,751
8,075
5,686
pre-tax earnings
4,859
3,431
4,259
5,055
provision for taxes
1,662
1,098
1,405
1,840
net earnings
3,197
2,333
2,854
3,215
preferred stock dividend
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
3,148
$
2,287
$
2,806
$
3,166
earnings per common share
basic
$
7.08
$
5.25
$
6.54
$
7.49
diluted
6.67
4.93
6.13
7.01
dividends declared and paid per common share
0.35
0.35
0.35
0.35
2006 quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
17,246
$
18,002
$
15,979
$
18,126
interest expense
6,813
7,761
8,395
8,719
revenues, net of interest expense
10,433
10,241
7,584
9,407
operating
expenses(1)
6,744
6,717
5,222
4,422
pre-tax earnings
3,689
3,524
2,362
4,985
provision for taxes
1,210
1,212
1,833
net earnings
2,479
2,312
1,594
3,152
preferred stock dividend
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
2,453
$
2,286
$
1,555
$
3,104
earnings per common share
basic
$
5.36
$
5.08
$
3.46
$
7.06
diluted
5.08
4.78
3.26
6.59
dividends declared and paid per common share
0.25
0.35
0.35
0.35
(1)
the timing and magnitude of
changes in the firms bonus accruals can have a significant
effect on results in a given quarter.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
common stock
price range
the following table sets forth, for the quarters indicated, the
high and low sales prices per share of the firms common
stock.
sales price
high
low
high
low
high
low
first quarter
$
222.75
$
191.50
$
146.35
$
124.23
$
113.93
$
101.79
second quarter
232.41
189.85
169.31
139.18
114.25
95.16
third quarter
233.97
157.38
157.00
136.79
114.87
94.75
fourth quarter
250.70
175.00
203.35
145.66
134.99
108.86
as of january18, 2008, there were 7,784 holders of record
of the firms common stock.
on january18, 2008, the last reported sales price for the
firms common stock on the new york stock exchange was
$187.21 per share.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
selected
financial data
as of or for the year ended november
income statement data (in millions)
total revenues
$
87,968
$
69,353
$
43,391
$
29,839
$
23,623
interest expense
41,981
31,688
18,153
8,888
7,600
revenues, net of interest expense
45,987
37,665
25,238
20,951
16,023
compensation and benefits
20,190
16,457
11,758
9,681
7,515
other operating expenses
8,193
6,648
5,207
4,594
4,063
pre-tax earnings
$
17,604
$
14,560
$
8,273
$
6,676
$
4,445
balance sheet data (in millions)
total assets
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
$
706,804
$
531,379
$
403,799
other secured financings
(long-term)
33,300
26,134
15,669
12,087
6,043
unsecured long-term borrowings
164,174
122,842
84,338
68,609
51,439
total liabilities
1,076,996
802,415
678,802
506,300
382,167
total shareholders equity
42,800
35,786
28,002
25,079
21,632
common share data (in millions,
except per share amounts)
earnings per common share
basic
$
26.34
$
20.93
$
11.73
$
9.30
$
6.15
diluted
24.73
19.69
11.21
8.92
5.87
dividends declared and paid per common share
1.40
1.30
1.00
1.00
0.74
book value
per common
share(1)
90.43
72.62
57.02
50.77
43.60
average common shares outstanding
basic
433.0
449.0
478.1
489.5
488.4
diluted
461.2
477.4
500.2
510.5
511.9
selected data (unaudited)
employees
united states
17,383
15,477
14,466
13,846
13,189
non-u.s.
13,139
10,990
9,157
7,890
7,170
total employees
30,522
26,467
23,623
21,736
20,359
assets under management (in
billions)(2)
asset class
alternative
investments(3)
$
$
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
book value per common share is
based on common shares outstanding, including restricted stock
units granted to employees with no future service requirements,
of 439.0million, 450.1million, 460.4million,
494.0million and 496.1million as of november 2007,
november 2006, november 2005, november 2004 and november 2003,
respectively.
(2)
substantially all assets under
management are valued as of calendar month-end.
(3)
primarily includes hedge funds,
private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset
allocation strategies.
table of contents
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
there were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure during the last two fiscal
years.
item9a.
controls
and procedures
as of the end of the period covered by this report, an
evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs management,
with the participation of our chief executive officer and chief
financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in
rule13a-15(e)
under the securities exchange act of 1934). based upon that
evaluation, our chief executive officer and chief financial
officer concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures
were effective as of the end of the period covered by this
report. in addition, no change in our internal control over
financial reporting (as defined in
rule13a-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934)occurred during
the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended november30,
2007 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting and the report of independent registered public
accounting firm are set forth in partii, item8 of
the annual report on
form10-k.
item9b.
other
information
not applicable.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance
information relating to our executive officers is included on
pages42 to 43 of the annual report on
form10-k.
information relating to our directors, including our audit
committee and audit committee financial experts and the
procedures by which shareholders can recommend director
nominees, and our executive officers will be in our definitive
proxy statement for our 2008 annual meeting of shareholders to
be held on april10, 2008, which will be filed within
120days of the end of our fiscal year ended
november30, 2007 (the 2008 proxy statement) and is
incorporated herein by reference. information relating to our
code of business conduct and ethics that applies to our senior
financial officers, as defined in the code, is included in
parti, item1 of the annual report on
form10-k.
item11.
executive
compensation
information relating to our executive officer and director
compensation will be in the 2008 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
information relating to security ownership of certain beneficial
owners of our common stock and information relating to the
security ownership of our management will be in the 2008 proxy
statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
the following table provides information generally as of
november30, 2007, the last day of fiscal 2007 (but taking
into consideration equity-based awards granted on
december19, 2007 in respect of fiscal 2007 performance or
as part of the firms discount stock program), regarding
securities to be issued on exercise of stock options, and
securities remaining available for issuance under our equity
compensation plans that were in effect during fiscal 2007.
number of securities
number of
remaining available
securities to be
for future issuance
issued upon
weighted-average
under equity
exercise of
exercise price of
compensation plans
outstanding
outstanding
(excluding securities
options, warrants
options, warrants
reflected in the
plan category
and
rights
and rights
second
column)
equitycompensationplans
approvedbysecurity
holders
the goldman
sachs amended
and restated
stock incentive
plan(1)
39,229,629
(2)
$106.63
(2)
227,452,035
(3)
equity compensation plans
not approved by security
holders
none
total
39,229,629
(2)
227,452,035
(3)(4)
(1)
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (the
sip) was approved by the shareholders of goldman sachs at our
2003 annual meeting of shareholders and is a successor plan to
the goldman sachs 1999 stock incentive plan (the 1999 plan),
which was approved by our shareholders immediately prior to our
initial public offering in may 1999 and under which no
additional awards have been granted since approval of the sip.
(2)
includes options that are subject to vesting and other
conditions.
(3)
of these shares, 72,092,339shares may be issued pursuant
to outstanding restricted stock units, including
71,982,173shares granted under the sip and
110,166shares granted under the 1999 plan;
268,404shares may be issued pursuant to outstanding
performance-based units granted under the sip.
(4)
represents shares remaining to be issued under the sip
(227,341,869shares) and the 1999 plan
(110,166shares). the total number of shares of common
stock that may be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the
sip initially may not exceed 250,000,000shares. beginning
november29, 2008 and each fiscal year thereafter, the
number of shares of common stock that may be delivered pursuant
to awards granted after april1, 2003 under the sip may not
exceed 5% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock,
determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding
fiscal year, increased by the number of shares that were
available for awards in previous fiscal years but were not, at
the date of determination, covered by awards granted in previous
years.
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
information regarding certain relationships and related
transactions and director independence will be in the 2008 proxy
statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.
principal
accountant fees and services
information regarding principal accountant fees and services
will be in the 2008 proxy statement and is incorporated herein
by reference.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits,
financial statement schedules
(a)documents
filed as part of this report:
1.
consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed
in the annual report on
form10-k
are listed on
pagef-1
hereof and in partii, item8 hereof.
2.
financial statement schedule
the financial statement schedule required in the annual
report on
form10-k
is listed on
pagef-1
hereof. the required schedule appears on pages f-2 through f-11
hereof.
3.exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation (incorporated by reference to the
corresponding exhibit to the registrants registration
statement on
forms-1
(no.333-74449)).
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of the goldman sachs
group, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to
the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended may25, 2007).
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs group, inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to the
registrants current report on
form8-k,
filed december12, 2006).
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19, 1999, between the goldman
sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit6 to the
registrants registration statement on
form8-a,
filed june29, 1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated as of february20, 2004,
between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york,
as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.2 to the
registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november28, 2003).
4.3
warrant indenture, dated as of february14, 2006, between
the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as
trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.34 to the
registrants post-effective amendment no.3 to
forms-3,
filed on march1, 2006).
4.4
senior debt indenture, dated as of december4, 2007, among
gs finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as
guarantor, and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit4.69 to the registrants
post-effective amendment no.10 to
forms-3,
filed on december4, 2007).
certain instruments defining the rights of holders of
long-term debt securities of the registrant and its subsidiaries
are omitted pursuant to item601(b)(4)(iii) of
regulations-k.
the registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon
request, copies of any such instruments.
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended february28, 2003).
10.2
the goldman sachs defined contribution plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.16 to the registrants
registration statement on
forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.3
the goldman sachs amended and restated restricted partner
compensation plan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended february24, 2006).
10.4
form of employment agreement for pre-ipo participating managing
directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.19 to
the registrants registration statement on
forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
table of contents
10.5
form of agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.20 to the
registrants registration statement on
forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.6
form of option agreement (discretionary options) (incorporated
by reference to exhibit10.24 to the registrants
registration statement on
forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.7
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7, 1999, by
and among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.25 to the
registrants registration statement on
forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.8
amended and restated shareholders agreement, dated
june22, 2004, among the goldman sachs group, inc. and
various parties (incorporated by reference to exhibitm to
amendment no.54 to schedule13d, filed june23,
2004, relating to the registrants common stock).
10.9
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.27 to the registrants registration
statement on
forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.10
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.28 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.11
registration rights instrument, dated as of december10,
1999 (incorporated by reference to exhibitg to amendment
no.1 to schedule13d, filed
december17,1999, relating to the registrants
common stock
(no.005-56295)).
10.12
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december10, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibith to amendment no.1 to schedule13d,
filed december17, 1999, relating to the registrants
common stock).
10.13
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.44 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.14
form of indemnification agreement, dated as of july5, 2000
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended august25, 2000).
10.15
amendment no.1, dated as of september5, 2000, to the
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7, 1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.3 to the
registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended august25,2000).
10.16
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december21, 2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibit aa
to amendment no.12 to schedule13d, filed
january23, 2001, relating to the registrants common
stock).
10.17
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december21, 2001 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to the registrants registration statement
on forms-3
(no.333-74006)).
10.18
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december20, 2002 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to the registrants registration statement
on
forms-3
(no.333-101093)).
10.19
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs
group, inc. to dr.ruth j. simmons (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.63 to the registrants annual
report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.20
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs
group, inc. to mr.john h. bryan (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.64 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
10.21
letter, dated february6, 2001, from the goldman sachs
group, inc. to mr.james a. johnson (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.65 to the registrants annual
report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november24, 2000).
table of contents
10.22
letter, dated december18, 2002, from the goldman sachs
group, inc. to mr.william w. george (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.39 to the registrants annual
report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended
november29,2002).
10.23
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.claes dahlbck (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report
on
form10-q
for the period ended may30, 2003).
10.24
letter, dated june20, 2003, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.edward m. liddy (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended may30, 2003).
10.25
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december19, 2003 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit4.4 to the registrants registration statement
on
forms-3
(no.333-110371)).
10.26
letter, dated march31, 2004, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to ms.lois d. juliber (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended may28, 2004).
10.27
letter, dated april6, 2005, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.stephen friedman (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants current report on
form8-k,
filed april8, 2005).
10.28
form of amendment, dated november27, 2004, to agreement
relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated
may7, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.32 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 2004).
10.29
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
(subject to transfer restrictions).
10.30
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (not
subject to transfer restrictions).
10.31
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
(subject to transfer restrictions) (french alternative
award).
10.32
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (not
subject to transfer restrictions) (french alternative
award).
10.33
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (u.k.
employee benefit trusts).
10.34
form of year-end restricted stock award.
10.35
form of year-end restricted stock award in connection with
outstanding rsu awards.
10.36
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred
compensation plan for u.s. participating managing
directors.
10.37
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred
compensation plan for u.s. extended managing directors and other
select employees.
10.38
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred
compensation plan for u.k. participating managing directors
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.34 to the
registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended
november25,2005).
10.39
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred
compensation for u.k. extended managing directors and other
select u.k. employees (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.38 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26, 2004).
10.40
form of year-end option award agreement.
10.41
form of year-end rsu award agreement (fully vested upon
grant).
10.42
form of year-end rsu award agreement (not fully vested upon
grant).
10.43
form of year-end rsu award agreement (french alternative
award).
table of contents
10.44
amendments to 2005 and 2006year-end rsu and option award
agreements.
10.45
form of non-employee director option award agreement.
10.46
form of non-employee director rsu award agreement .
10.47
description of non-employee director compensation.
10.48
form of one-time rsu award agreement (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.43 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november24, 2006).
10.49
ground lease, dated august23, 2005, between battery park
city authority d/b/a/ hugh l. carey battery park city authority,
as landlord, and goldman sachs headquarters llc, as tenant
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants current report on
form8-k,
filed august26, 2005).
10.50
general guarantee agreement, dated january30, 2006, made
by the goldman sachs group, inc. (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.45 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november25, 2005).
10.51
letter, dated november10, 2006, from the goldman sachs
group, inc. to mr.rajat k. gupta (incorporated by
reference to exhibit99.1 to the registrants current
report on
form8-k,
filed november13, 2006).
10.52
goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance policy and
certificate with metropolitan life insurance company for
participating managing directors (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended august25, 2006).
10.53
form of goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance
policy with pacific life & annuity company for
participating managing directors, including policy
specifications and form of restriction on policy owners
rights (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended august25, 2006).
10.54
form of signature card for equity awards.
10.55
form of employment agreement for post-ipo participating managing
directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.50 to the
registrants annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year
ended november24, 2006).
10.56
form of second amendment, dated november25, 2006, to
agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated
may7, 1999, as amended effective november27, 2004
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.51 to the
registrants annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year
ended november24, 2006).
10.57
description of goldman sachs gives program.
12.1
statement re: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
and ratios of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred
stock dividends.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1
powers of attorney (included on signature page).
31.1
rule13a-14(a)
certifications.
32.1
section1350 certifications.
99.1
report of independent registered public accounting firm on
selected financial data.
this exhibit is a management contract or a compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
index to financial statements and financial
statement schedule
items15(a)(1) and 15(a)(2)
page
no.
managements report on internal control over
financial reporting
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive
income
notes to consolidated financial statements
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
selected financial data
financial statement schedule
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
schedulei condensed
nonconsolidated financial information of registrant
(parent company only)
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of
earnings
f-2
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial
condition
f-3
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash
flows
f-4
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
f-5
schedules not listed are omitted because of the absence of the
conditions under which they are required or because the
information is in the consolidated financial statements and
notes thereto.
f-1
table of contents
schedule
i
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of
earnings
year ended november
(in millions)
revenues
equity in earnings of subsidiaries
$
10,999
$
9,877
$
4,763
principal investments
1,871
1,789
1,927
interest income
10,556
9,931
5,351
total revenues
23,426
21,597
12,041
interest expense
10,421
9,460
5,069
revenues, net of interest expense
13,005
12,137
6,972
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other expenses
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
12,135
11,715
6,550
provision for taxes
2,178
net earnings
11,599
9,537
5,626
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
11,407
$
9,398
$
5,609
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed
nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-2
table of contents
schedule
i
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of
financial condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
$
cash segregated for margin purposes
3,221
1,965
receivables from subsidiaries
9,827
7,468
loans to subsidiaries
129,074
97,985
subordinated loans to subsidiaries
34,094
35,187
investments in subsidiaries
39,997
32,582
financial instruments owned, at fair value
35,614
17,741
other assets
7,292
4,843
total assets
$
259,181
$
197,776
liabilities and shareholders equity
unsecured short-term borrowings:
with third parties (includes $28,689 and $1,173 at fair value as
of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively)
$
46,577
$
32,632
with subsidiaries
5,137
1,539
total unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current
portion of unsecured long-term borrowings
51,714
34,171
payables to subsidiaries
secured short-term financings ($380 at fair value as of november
2006)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
1,971
1,885
other liabilities and accrued expenses
5,038
3,027
unsecured long-term borrowings:
with third parties (includes $10,292 and $7,214 at fair value as
of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively)
156,997
119,043
with subsidiaries
3,275
total unsecured long-term borrowings
157,266
122,318
total liabilities
216,381
161,990
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share;
150,000,000shares authorized, 124,000shares issued
and outstanding as of both november 2007 and november2006,
with liquidation preference of $25,000 per share
3,100
3,100
common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
4,000,000,000shares authorized, 618,707,032 and
599,697,200shares issued as of november 2007 and
november2006, respectively, and 390,682,013 and
412,666,084shares outstanding as of november 2007 and
november 2006, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
9,302
6,290
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
200,000,000shares authorized, no shares issued and
outstanding
additional paid-in capital
22,027
19,731
retained earnings
38,642
27,868
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(118
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost, par value $0.01 per
share; 228,025,019 and 187,031,116 shares as of november 2007
and november 2006, respectively
(30,159
)
(21,230
)
total shareholders equity
42,800
35,786
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
259,181
$
197,776
the accompanying notes are an
integral part of these condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements.
f-3
table of contents
schedule
i
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
condensed nonconsolidated statements of cash
flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
11,599
$
9,537
$
5,626
non-cash items included in net earnings
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
(6,764
)
(4,840
)
(4,293
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
share-based compensation
changes in operating assets and liabilities
net receivables from subsidiaries
2,396
1,883
(1,020
)
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(17,795
)
(7,763
)
(661
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
(85
)
1,832
other, net
5,448
4,187
(899
)
net cash provided by/(used for) operating activities
(3,683
)
3,605
1,269
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(29
)
(162
)
proceeds from sales of property, leasehold improvements and
equipment
issuance of short-term loans to subsidiaries, net of repayments
(22,668
)
(12,953
)
(13,248
)
issuance of term loans to subsidiaries
(48,299
)
(12,362
)
(12,015
)
repayment of term loans by subsidiaries
41,143
3,967
7,540
dividends received
capital distributions from/(contributions to) subsidiaries, net
(226
)
(2,537
)
1,943
net cash used for investing activities
(30,012
)
(23,531
)
(15,472
)
cash flows from financing activities
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
3,255
(6,621
)
1,118
secured short-term financings, net
(380
)
proceeds from issuance of unsecured long-term borrowings
53,041
44,043
31,382
repayment of unsecured long-term borrowings, including the
current portion
(13,984
)
(12,590
)
(13,579
)
common stock repurchased
(8,956
)
(7,817
)
(7,108
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock,
preferred stock and restricted stock units
(831
)
(754
)
(511
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
1,613
1,143
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
1,349
1,719
excess tax benefit related to share-based compensation
cash settlement of share-based compensation
(1
)
(137
)
net cash provided by financing activities
33,752
19,930
14,164
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
(39
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
$
$
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for third-party interest, net of capitalized
interest, were $7.78billion, $6.11billion and
$3.69billion for the years ended november 2007, november
2006 and november 2005, respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were
$3.27billion, $2.86billion and $1.52billion
for the years ended november 2007, november 2006 and november
2005, respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these condensed
nonconsolidated financial statements.
f-4
table of contents
schedule
i
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements
note1.
significant
accounting policies
basis of
presentation
the condensed nonconsolidated financial statements of the
goldman sachs group, inc. (the parent company), a delaware
corporation, should be read in conjunction with the consolidated
financial statements of the goldman sachs group, inc. and
subsidiaries (the firm) and notes thereto (the consolidated
financial statements), which are included in partii,
item8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements reflect the
results of operations, financial condition and cash flows for
the parent company only. investments in subsidiaries are
accounted for using the equity method of accounting prescribed
by accounting principles board (apb) opinion no.18,
the equity method of accounting for investments in common
stock. for investments, other than investments in
subsidiaries, acquired subsequent to the firms adoption of
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.159,
the fair value option for financial assets and financial
liabilities, at the beginning of 2007, the parent company
generally has elected to apply the fair value option in
accounting for such investments. see notes2 and 3 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of the annual report on
form10-k
for information regarding the firms accounting under
sfasno.159.
unless otherwise stated herein, all references to november 2007,
november 2006 and november 2005 refer to the parent
companys fiscal years ended, or the dates, as the context
requires, november30, 2007, november24, 2006 and
november25, 2005, respectively. certain reclassifications
have been made to previously reported amounts to conform to the
current presentation.
the parent companys significant accounting policies are
identical to those used by the firm, to the extent applicable to
the parent companys activities. for further information
regarding the firms significant accounting policies, refer
to note2 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k.
use of
estimates
these condensed nonconsolidated financial statements have been
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles that require management to make certain estimates and
assumptions. the most important of these estimates and
assumptions relate to fair value measurements, the accounting
for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets and the
provision for potential losses that may arise from litigation
and regulatory proceedings and tax audits. although these and
other estimates and assumptions are based on the best available
information, actual results could be materially different from
these estimates.
financing of
subsidiaries
substantially all of the firms unsecured funding is raised
by the parent company. the parent company then lends the
necessary funds to its subsidiaries, some of which are
regulated, to meet their asset financing and capital
requirements. in addition, the parent company provides its
regulated subsidiaries with the necessary capital to meet their
regulatory requirements. such funding is included in loans
to subsidiaries and subordinated loans to
subsidiaries in the condensed nonconsolidated statements
of financial condition. intercompany exposure is managed by
requiring senior and subordinated intercompany loans to have
maturities equal to or shorter than the maturities of the
f-5
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
aggregate borrowings of the parent company. this policy ensures
that the subsidiaries obligations to the parent company
will generally mature in advance of the parent companys
third-party borrowings. in addition, many of the subsidiaries
pledge collateral at loan value to cover their intercompany
borrowings (other than subordinated debt) in order to mitigate
parent company liquidity risk. equity investments in
subsidiaries are generally funded with equity capital and
included in investments in subsidiaries in the
condensed nonconsolidated statements of financial condition.
the parent company enters into derivative contracts with
subsidiaries to hedge its net investment in
non-u.s.operations
and to manage the interest rate and currency exposure on its
unsecured
long-term
borrowings and certain unsecured short-term borrowings. to
manage exposure on its borrowings, the parent company uses
derivatives to effectively convert a substantial portion of its
unsecured long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. the parent company applies fair value
hedge accounting to derivative contracts that hedge the
benchmark interest rate (i.e., london interbank offered rate
(libor)) on its fixed rate unsecured long-term borrowings.
derivative balances with subsidiaries, included in
financial instruments owned, at fair value and
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair
value in the condensed nonconsolidated statements of
financial condition, were $15.10billion and
$620million, and $6.16billion and $347million,
as of november 2007 and november 2006, respectively.
interest income is largely generated from loans made to
subsidiaries.
the parent company also allocates substantially all rental and
other costs relating to properties occupied by certain
subsidiaries. the parent company additionally allocates the cost
of share-based compensation programs to subsidiaries relating to
costs associated with employees of those subsidiaries.
note2.
unsecured
short-term borrowings
the parent company obtains third-party unsecured short-term
borrowings primarily through the issuance of promissory notes,
commercial paper and hybrid financial instruments. as of
november2007 and november 2006, these borrowings were
$46.58billion and $32.63billion, respectively. such
amounts include the portion of third-party unsecured long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement
date and third-party unsecured long-term borrowings that are
redeemable within one year of the financial statement date at
the option of the holder. the parent company accounts for
promissory notes, commercial paper and certain hybrid financial
instruments at fair value under sfasno.155,
accounting for certain hybrid financial
instruments an amendment of fasb statements
no.133 and 140, or sfasno.159. see
notes2 and 3 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for information regarding the firms accounting under
sfasno.155 and sfasno.159. third-party
short-term
borrowings that are not recorded at fair value are recorded
based on the amount of cash received plus accrued interest, and
such amounts approximate fair value due to the short-term nature
of the obligations.
f-6
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
unsecured short-term borrowings with third parties are set forth
below:
as of november
(in millions)
promissory notes
$
13,251
$
13,811
commercial paper
3,505
current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings
21,410
13,755
hybrid financial instruments
2,090
2,275
other short-term borrowings
6,321
1,848
total
(1)
$
46,577
$
32,632
(1)
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings, after
giving effect to hedging activities, were 5.30% and 5.36% as of
november 2007 and november 2006, respectively. the weighted
average interest rates as of november 2007 and november 2006
excluded financial instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.155 or sfasno. 159.
in addition, the parent company may obtain unsecured short-term
borrowings from certain subsidiaries. as of november 2007 and
november 2006, such amounts were $5.14billion and
$1.54billion, respectively, and included in
unsecured short-term borrowings with
subsidiaries in the condensed nonconsolidated statements
of financial condition.
note3.unsecured
long-term borrowings
the parent companys third-party unsecured long-term
borrowings extend through 2043 and consist principally of senior
borrowings. as of november 2007 and november 2006, these
borrowings were $157.00billion and $119.04billion,
respectively. the parent company accounts for certain of these
unsecured long-term borrowings at fair value under
sfasno.155 or sfasno.159 and applies
fair value hedge accounting to certain of these unsecured
long-term borrowings under sfasno.133,
accounting for derivative instruments and hedging
activities. see notes2 and 3 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k
for information regarding the firms accounting under
sfasno.133, sfasno.155 and
sfasno.159.
unsecured long-term borrowings with third parties are set forth
below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations
(1)
u.s. dollar
$
53,694
$
40,008
non-u.s.
dollar
29,043
22,739
floating rate obligations
(2)
u.s. dollar
42,156
36,472
non-u.s.
dollar
32,104
19,824
total
$
156,997
$
119,043
(1)
as of november 2007 and november 2006, interest rates on u.s.
dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from 3.88% to 10.04% and
from 3.88% to 12.00%, respectively. as of both november 2007 and
november 2006, interest rates on
non-u.s.
dollar fixed rate obligations ranged from 0.67% to 8.88%.
(2)
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the
federal funds target rate. equity-linked and indexed instruments
are included in floating rate obligations.
f-7
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
unsecured long-term borrowings with third parties by maturity
date are set forth below:
as of november
(1)(2)
(1)(2)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
14,645
$
2,742
$
17,387
20,334
3,011
23,345
12,435
2,914
15,349
8,094
5,592
13,686
5,064
4,843
9,907
5,828
4,856
10,684
5,703
4,420
10,123
14,909
3,657
18,566
4,491
2,076
6,567
2013-thereafter
46,685
44,031
90,716
34,142
25,568
59,710
total
$
95,850
$
61,147
$
156,997
$
76,480
$
42,563
$
119,043
(1)
unsecured long-term borrowings
maturing within one year of the financial statement date and
certain unsecured
long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder are included as
unsecured short-term borrowings in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition.
(2)
unsecured long-term borrowings that
are repayable prior to maturity at the option of the parent
company are reflected at their contractual maturity dates.
unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable prior to
maturity at the option of the holder are reflected at the dates
such options become exercisable.
the parent company enters into derivative contracts with
subsidiaries, such as interest rate futures contracts, interest
rate swap agreements, currency swap agreements, commodity
contracts and equity-linked and indexed contracts, to
effectively convert a substantial portion of its third-party
unsecured long-term borrowings into u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. accordingly, the carrying value of
these unsecured long-term borrowings approximated fair value as
of november 2007 and november 2006.
the effective weighted average interest rates for unsecured
long-term borrowings with third parties are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
$
1,858
5.69
%
$
8.98
%
floating rate obligations
(1)(2)
155,139
5.69
118,906
5.73
total
$
156,997
5.69
$
119,043
5.73
(1)
includes fixed rate obligations
that have been converted into floating rate obligations through
derivative contracts.
(2)
the weighted average interest rates
as of november 2007 and november 2006 excluded financial
instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.155 or sfasno.159.
f-8
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
unsecured long-term borrowings with subsidiaries are set forth
below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate obligations
(1)
u.s. dollar
$
$
non-u.s.
dollar
floating rate obligations
(2)
u.s. dollar
1,500
non-u.s.
dollar
total
$
$
3,275
(1)
as of november 2007 the interest
rate on u.s. dollar fixed rate obligations was 4.68% and as of
november 2006 ranged from 4.68% to 5.78%. as of november 2007
the interest rate on
non-u.s.
dollar fixed rate obligations was 6.00% and as of november 2006
ranged from 5.44% to 6.00%.
(2)
floating interest rates generally
are based on libor or the federal funds target rate.
equity-linked and indexed instruments are included in floating
rate obligations.
unsecured long-term borrowings with subsidiaries by maturity
date are set forth below:
as of november
(1)
(1)
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
dollar
dollar
total
dollar
dollar
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
$
$
2,182
2,182
2012-thereafter
total
$
$
$
$
2,235
$
1,040
$
3,275
(1)
unsecured long-term borrowings
maturing within one year of the financial statement date and
certain unsecured
long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder are included as
unsecured short-term borrowings in the condensed nonconsolidated
statements of financial condition.
subordinated
borrowings
unsecured long-term borrowings with third parties include
subordinated borrowings with outstanding principal amounts of
$16.00billion and $7.34billion as of november 2007
and november2006, respectively, as set forth below.
subordinated notes.as of november 2007, the
parent company had $10.91billion of subordinated notes
outstanding with maturities ranging from fiscal 2009 to 2037.
the effective weighted average interest rate on these
subordinated notes was 5.74%, after giving effect to derivative
contracts used to convert fixed rate obligations into floating
rate obligations. as of november 2006, the parent company had
$4.50billion of subordinated notes outstanding with
maturities ranging from 2008 to 2036 and with an effective
weighted average interest rate of 5.45%. these notes are junior
in right of payment to all of the parent companys senior
indebtedness.
f-9
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust in connection with
trustpreferred securities.the parent
company issued $2.84billion of junior subordinated
debentures in its first quarter of 2004 to goldman sachs capital
i (the trust). refer to note5 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k
for information on junior subordinated debentures issued by the
parent company to the trust.
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts in connection with
fixed-to-floating and floating rate normal automatic preferred
enhanced capital securities.in the second
quarter of 2007, the parent company issued a total of
$2.25billion of remarketable junior subordinated notes to
goldman sachs capitalii and goldman sachs capitaliii
(the trusts). refer to note5 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for information on junior subordinated debentures issued by the
parent company to the trusts.
note4.commitments,
contingencies and guarantees
commitments
letters of credit.the parent company provides
letters of credit issued by various banks to counterparties in
lieu of securities or cash to satisfy various collateral
requirements. letters of credit outstanding were
$222million and $171million as of november 2007 and
november 2006, respectively.
investment commitments.in connection with the
firms merchant banking and other investing activities, the
parent company invests in private equity, real estate and other
assets directly and through funds that the firm raises and
manages. in connection with these activities, the parent company
had commitments to invest up to $12.90billion and
$6.34billion as of november 2007 and november 2006,
respectively, including $12.32billion and
$4.39billion, respectively, of commitments to invest in
funds managed by the firm.
construction-related commitments.as of both
november 2007 and november 2006, the parent company had
construction-related commitments of $2million.
leases.the parent company has contractual
obligations under long-term noncancelable lease agreements,
principally for office space, expiring on various dates through
2029. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation
provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges.
future minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals,
which are generally reimbursed by subsidiaries, are set forth
below:
(in millions)
minimum rental payments
$
2013-thereafter
total
$
f-10
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
(parent company only)
notes to condensed nonconsolidated financial
statements(continued)
contingencies
refer to note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for information on contingencies.
guarantees
the parent company has guaranteed the payment obligations of
goldman, sachs& co., its principal
u.s.broker-dealer subsidiary (other than nonrecourse
payment obligations). in addition, the parent company guarantees
many of the obligations of its other consolidated subsidiaries
on a
transaction-by-transaction
basis, as negotiated with the counterparty. the parent company
is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under its
subsidiary guarantees; however, because these guaranteed
obligations are also obligations of consolidated subsidiaries
and included in the consolidated statements of financial
condition or disclosed in note6 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of the annual
report on
form10-k,
the parent companys liabilities as guarantor are not
separately disclosed herein.
the following tables set forth certain information about the
parent companys guarantees as of november 2007 and
november 2006:
as of november 2007
maximum payout/notional amount by period of
expiration(1)
2009 -
2011 -
2013 -
thereafter
total
(in millions)
other financial guarantees
(2)
$
$
$
$
$
as of november 2006
maximum payout/notional amount by period of
expiration(1)
2008 -
2010 -
2012 -
thereafter
total
(in millions)
other financial guarantees
(2)
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
such amounts do not represent the
anticipated losses in connection with these contracts.
(2)
the carrying value of these
guarantees was a liability of $3million and
$4million as of november2007 and november2006,
respectively.
refer to note6 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of the annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding the parent companys
guarantees.
f-11
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/david
a. viniar
name: david a. viniar
title: chief financial officer
date: january28, 2008
ii-1
table of contents
power of
attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each person whose
signature appears below constitutes and appoints lloyd c.
blankfein, gary d. cohn, jon winkelried, david a. viniar,
gregory k. palm and esta e. stecher, and each of them severally,
his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact with power of
substitution and resubstitution to sign in his or her name,
place and stead, in any and all capacities, to do any and all
things and execute any and all instruments that such attorney
may deem necessary or advisable under the securities exchange
act of 1934 and any rules, regulations and requirements of the
u.s.securities and exchange commission in connection with
the annual report on
form10-k
and any and all amendments hereto, as fully for all intents and
purposes as he or she might or could do in person, and hereby
ratifies and confirms all said attorneys-in-fact and agents,
each acting alone, and his or her substitute or substitutes, may
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of
1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
signature
capacity
date
/s/lloyd
c. blankfein
lloyd
c. blankfein
director, chairman and chief executive officer (principal
executive officer)
january28,2008
/s/john
h. bryan
john
h. bryan
director
january 28, 2008
/s/gary
d. cohn
gary
d. cohn
director
january 28, 2008
/s/claes
dahlbck
claes
dahlbck
director
january 28, 2008
/s/stephen
friedman
stephen
friedman
director
january 28, 2008
/s/william
w. george
william
w. george
director
january 28, 2008
/s/rajat
k. gupta
rajat
k. gupta
director
january 28, 2008
/s/james
a. johnson
james
a. johnson
director
january 28, 2008
/s/lois
d. juliber
lois
d. juliber
director
january 28, 2008
/s/edward
m. liddy
edward
m. liddy
director
january 28, 2008
/s/ruth
j. simmons
ruth
j. simmons
director
january 28, 2008
ii-2
table of contents
signature
capacity
date
/s/jon
winkelried
jon
winkelried
director
january28, 2008
/s/david
a. viniar
david
a. viniar
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
january28, 2008
/s/sarah
e. smith
sarah
e. smith
principal accounting officer
january28, 2008
ii-3
