10-k
y74032e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange
commission
washington, d.c.
form10-k
annual report pursuant to
section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of
for the fiscal year ended november28,2008
commission file number: 001-14965
the goldman sachs group,
inc.
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
delaware
13-4019460
(state or other jurisdiction
of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
85broad street
new york, n.y.
(zip code)
(address of principal executive
offices)
(212)902-1000
(registrants telephone
number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the
act:
title of each class:
name of each exchange on which registered:
common stock, par value $.01 per share, and attached
shareholder protection rights
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a
share of floating rate
non-cumulative
preferred stock, seriesa
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a
share of 6.20%
non-cumulative
preferred stock, seriesb
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a
share of floating rate
non-cumulative
preferred stock, seriesc
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a
share of floating rate
non-cumulative
preferred stock, seriesd
new york stock exchange
5.793%
fixed-to-floating
rate normal automatic preferred enhanced capital securities of
goldman sachs capital ii (and registrants guarantee with
respect thereto)
new york stock exchange
floating rate normal automatic preferred enhanced capital
securities of goldman sachs capital iii (and registrants
guarantee with respect thereto)
new york stock exchange
medium-term
notes, seriesb, index-linked notes due february2013;
index-linked notes due april2013; index-linked notes due
may2013; index-linked notes due 2010; and index-linked
notes due 2011
nyse alternext us
medium-term
notes, seriesb, 7.35% notes due 2009; 7.80% notes due
2010; and floating rate notes due 2011
new york stock exchange
medium-term
notes, seriesa, index-linked notes due 2037 of gs finance
corp. (and registrants guarantee with respect thereto)
nyse arca
medium-term
notes, seriesb, index-linked notes due 2037
nyse arca
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the
act: none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer,
as defined in rule405 of the securities act.
yesxnoo
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the act.
yesonox
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all
reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding
12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2)has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yesxnoo
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of the annual report on
form10-k
or any amendment to the annual report on
form10-k.x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated
filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated
filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of
large accelerated filer, accelerated
filer and smaller reporting company in
rule12b-2
of the exchange act.
large accelerated
filerxaccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filer (do not check if a smaller reporting
company)osmaller
reporting
companyo
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as
defined in
rule12b-2
of the exchange act).
yesonox
as of
may30,2008, the aggregate market value of the common
stock of the registrant held by
non-affiliates
of the registrant was approximately $68.2billion.
as of
january16,2009, there were 461,784,433shares
of the registrants common stock outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference:portions of the
goldman sachs group, inc.s proxy statement for its 2009
annual meeting of shareholders to be held on
may8,2009 are incorporated by reference in the
annual report on
form10-k
in response to partiii, items10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
the goldman sachs
group, inc.
annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november 28, 2008
index
page
form 10-k item
number:
no.
parti
item1.
business
introduction
cautionary statement pursuant to the
u.s.private securities litigation reform act of 1995
segment operating results
where we conduct business
business segments
global investment research
business continuity and information security
employees
competition
regulation
item1a.
risk factors
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
executive officers of the goldman sachs group,
inc
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
item9a.
controls and procedures
item9b.
other information
partiii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
item14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
ii-1
power of attorney
ii-2
ex-3.1: restated certificate of incorporation
ex-4.5: form of floating rate senior debt security (tlgp)
ex-4.6: form of fixed rate senior debt security (tlgp)
ex-4.7: form of floating rate medium-term note, series d (tlgp)
ex-4.8: form of fixed rate medium-term note, series d (tlgp)
ex-10.1: amended and restated stock incentive plan
ex-10.36: form of year-end option award agreement
ex-10.37: form of year-end rsu award agreement
ex-10.39: form of year-end rsu award agreement (french alternative award)
ex-10.41: form of non-employee director option award agreement
ex-10.42: form of non-employee director rsu award agreement
ex-10.43: description of non-employee director compensation
ex-10.49: form of signature card for equity awards
ex-10.58: form of letter agreement
ex-10.59: general guarantee agreement - gs bank europe
ex-10.60: guarantee agreement - gs bank usa
ex-10.61: collateral agreement
ex-10.62: form of performance-based one-time rsu award agreement
ex-10.63: form of make-whole one-time rsu award agreement
ex-10.64: form of incentive one-time rsu award agreement
ex-10.65: form of year-end supplemental rsu award agreement (france)
ex-10.66: form of signature card for equity awards (asia ex china)
ex-10.67: form of signature card for equity awards (china)
ex-10.68: amendments to certain equity award agreements
ex-10.69: amendments to certain non-employee director equity award agreements
ex-12.1: statement re: computation of ratios
ex-21.1: list of significant subsidiaries
ex-23.1: consent of independent registered public accounting firm
ex-31.1: rule 13a-14(a) certifications
ex-32.1: section 1350 certifications
ex-99.1: report of independent registered public accounting firm
table of contents
parti
item1.
business
introduction
goldman sachs is a bank holding company and a leading global
investment banking, securities and investment management firm
that provides a wide range of services worldwide to a
substantial and diversified client base that includes
corporations, financial institutions, governments and
high-net-worth
individuals. goldman sachs is the successor to a commercial
paper business founded in 1869 by marcus goldman. on
may7,1999, we converted from a partnership to a
corporation and completed an initial public offering of our
common stock. on september21,2008, the goldman sachs
group, inc. (group inc.) became a bank holding company regulated
by the board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal
reserve board) under the u.s.bank holding company act of
1956 (bhc act). our depository institution subsidiary, goldman
sachs bank usa (gs bank usa), became a new york state-chartered
bank on november28,2008.
our activities are divided into three segments:
(i)investment banking, (ii)trading and principal
investments and (iii)asset management and securities
services.
all references to 2008, 2007 and 2006 refer to our fiscal years
ended, or the dates, as the context requires,
november28,2008, november30,2007 and
november24,2006, respectively. when we use the terms
goldman sachs, the firm, we,
us and our, we mean the goldman sachs
group, inc., a delaware corporation, and its consolidated
subsidiaries. references herein to our annual report on
form10-k
are to our annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november28,2008.
on december15,2008, our board of directors approved
a change in our fiscal year-end from the last friday of november
to the last friday of december. the change is effective for our
2009 fiscal year. our 2009 fiscal year began
december27,2008 and will end
december25,2009, resulting in a
one-month
transition period that began november29,2008 and
ended december26,2008. information on this
one-month
transition period will be included in our quarterly report on
form10-q
for the three months ended march27,2009.
financial information concerning our business segments and
geographic regions for each of 2008, 2007 and 2006 is set forth
in managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, the consolidated
financial statements and the notes thereto, and the supplemental
financial information, which are in partii, items7,
7a and 8 of our annual report on
form10-k.
our internet address is www.gs.com and the investor
relations section of our web site is located at
www.gs.com/shareholders. we make available free of
charge, on or through the investor relations section of our web
site, annual reports on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q
and current reports on
form8-k
and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
section13(a) or 15(d) of the u.s.securities exchange
act of 1934 (exchange act), as well as proxy statements, as soon
as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such
material with, or furnish it to, the u.s.securities and
exchange commission. also posted on our web site, and available
in print upon request of any shareholder to our investor
relations department, are our certificate of incorporation and
by-laws, charters for our audit committee, compensation
committee, and corporate governance and nominating committee,
our policy regarding director independence determinations, our
policy on reporting of concerns regarding accounting and other
matters, our corporate governance guidelines and our code of
business conduct and ethics governing our directors, officers
and employees. within the time period required by the sec and
the new york stock exchange, we will post on our web site any
amendment to the code of business conduct and ethics and any
waiver applicable to any executive officer, director or senior
financial officer (as defined in the code). in addition, our web
site includes information concerning purchases and sales of our
equity securities by our executive officers and directors, as
well as disclosure relating to certain
non-gaap
financial measures (as defined in the secs
regulationg)that we may make public orally,
telephonically, by webcast, by broadcast or by similar means
from time to time.
our investor relations department can be contacted at the
goldman sachs group, inc., 85broad street, 17th floor, new
york, new york 10004, attn: investor relations, telephone:
212-902-0300,
e-mail:
gs-investor-relations@gs.com.
table of contents
cautionary
statement pursuant to the u.s.private securities
litigation reform act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by reference in our annual
report on
form10-k,
and from time to time our management may make, statements that
may constitute forward-looking statements within the
meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the u.s.private
securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking
statements are not historical facts but instead represent only
our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their
nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. these
statements include statements other than historical information
or statements of current condition and may relate to our future
plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may
also include our belief regarding the effect of various legal
proceedings, as set forth under legal proceedings in
parti, item3 of our annual report on
form10-k,
as well as statements about the objectives and effectiveness of
our risk management and liquidity policies, statements about
trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses, statements
about our future status, activities or reporting under
u.s.banking regulation, and statements about our
investment banking transaction backlog, in partii,
item7 of our annual report on
form10-k.
by identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are
alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and
financial condition may differ, possibly materially, from the
anticipated results and financial condition indicated in these
forward-looking statements. important factors that could cause
our actual results and financial condition to differ from those
indicated in the forward-looking statements include, among
others, those discussed below and under risk factors
in parti, item1a of our annual report on
form10-k.
in the case of statements about our investment banking
transaction backlog, such statements are subject to the risk
that the terms of these transactions may be modified or that
they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net revenues,
if any, that we actually earn from these transactions may
differ, possibly materially, from those currently expected.
important factors that could result in a modification of the
terms of a transaction or a transaction not being completed
include, in the case of underwriting transactions, a decline or
continued weakness in general economic conditions, outbreak of
hostilities, volatility in the securities markets generally or
an adverse development with respect to the issuer of the
securities and, in the case of financial advisory transactions,
a decline in the securities markets, an inability to obtain
adequate financing, an adverse development with respect to a
party to the transaction or a failure to obtain a required
regulatory approval. for a discussion of other important factors
that could adversely affect our investment banking transactions,
see risk factors in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
segment operating
results
(in
millions)
year ended november
investment
net revenues
$
5,185
$
7,555
$
5,629
banking
operating expenses
3,143
4,985
4,062
pre-tax earnings
$
2,042
$
2,570
$
1,567
trading and principal
net revenues
$
9,063
$
31,226
$
25,562
investments
operating expenses
11,808
17,998
14,962
pre-tax
earnings/(loss)
$
(2,745
)
$
13,228
$
10,600
asset management and
net revenues
$
7,974
$
7,206
$
6,474
securities services
operating expenses
4,939
5,363
4,036
pre-tax earnings
$
3,035
$
1,843
$
2,438
total
net revenues
$
22,222
$
45,987
$
37,665
operating
expenses(1)
19,886
28,383
23,105
pre-tax
earnings
$
2,336
$
17,604
$
14,560
(1)
operating expenses include net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory proceedings
of $(4) million, $37million and $45million for the
years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively, that have not been allocated
to our segments.
table of contents
where we conduct
business
as of november28,2008, we operated offices in over
30 countries and 43% of our 30,067 employees were based outside
the americas (which includes the countries in north and south
america). in 2008, we derived 30% of our net revenues outside of
the americas. see geographic information in note18 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of our annual report on
form10-k.
our clients are located worldwide, and we are an active
participant in financial markets around the world. we have
developed and continue to build strong investment banking
relationships in new and developing markets. we also continue to
expand our presence throughout these markets to invest
strategically when opportunities arise and to work more closely
with our private wealth and asset management clients in these
regions. our global reach is illustrated by the following:
we are a member of and an active participant in most of the
worlds major stock, options and futures exchanges and
marketplaces;
we are a primary dealer in many of the largest government bond
markets around the world;
we have interbank dealer status in currency markets around the
world;
we are a member of or have relationships with major commodities
exchanges worldwide; and
we have commercial banking or deposit-taking institutions
organized or operating in the united states, the united kingdom,
ireland, brazil, switzerland, germany, france, russia and south
korea.
our businesses are supported by our global investment research
division, which, as of november2008, provided research
coverage of over 3,250 companies worldwide and over 45 national
economies, and maintained a presence in locations around the
world.
we continue to expand our geographic reach. for example, in
recent years we have opened offices in mumbai, moscow, sao
paulo, dubai, qatar, riyadh and tel aviv, become licensed as a
broker-dealer
in russia, india and china, opened banks in brazil, ireland and
russia and entered into the asset management business in south
korea and india.
table of contents
business
segments
the primary products and activities of our business segments are
set forth in the following chart:
business
segment/component
primary products and
activities
investment banking:
financial advisory
mergers and acquisitions advisory services
financial restructuring advisory services
underwriting
equity and debt underwriting
trading and principal investments:
fixed income, currency and commodities
commodities and commodity derivatives,
including power generation and related activities
credit products, including trading and
investing in credit derivatives, investment-grade corporate
securities, high-yield securities, bank and secured loans,
municipal securities, emerging market and distressed debt,
public and private equity securities and real estate
currencies and currency derivatives
interest rate products, including interest
rate derivatives, global government securities and money market
instruments, including matched book positions
mortgage-related securities and loan products
and other asset-backed instruments
equities
equity securities and derivatives
securities, futures and options clearing
services
market-making and specialist activities in
equity securities and options
insurance activities
principal investments
principal investments in connection with
merchant banking activities
investment in the ordinary shares of
industrial and commercial bank of china limited
asset management and securities services:
asset management
investment advisory services, financial
planning and investment products (primarily through separately
managed accounts and commingled vehicles) across all major asset
classes, including money markets, fixed income, equities and
alternative investments (including hedge funds, private equity,
real estate, currencies, commodities and asset allocation
strategies), for institutional and individual investors
(including
high-net-worth
clients, as well as retail clients through third-party channels)
management of merchant banking funds
securities services
prime brokerage
financing services
securities lending
table of contents
investment
banking
investment banking represented 23% of 2008 net revenues. we
provide a broad range of investment banking services to a
diverse group of corporations, financial institutions,
investment funds, governments and individuals and seek to
develop and maintain
long-term
relationships with these clients as their lead investment bank.
our current structure, which is organized by regional, industry
and product groups, seeks to combine client-focused investment
bankers with execution and industry expertise. we continually
assess and adapt our organization to meet the demands of our
clients in each geographic region. through our commitment to
teamwork, we believe that we provide services in an integrated
fashion for the benefit of our clients.
our goal is to make available to our clients the entire
resources of the firm in a seamless fashion, with investment
banking serving as front of the house. to accomplish
this objective, we focus on coordination among our equity and
debt underwriting activities and our corporate risk and
liability management activities. this coordination is intended
to assist our investment banking clients in managing their asset
and liability exposures and their capital.
our investment banking segment is divided into two components:
financial advisory and underwriting.
financial
advisory
financial advisory includes advisory assignments with respect to
mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense
activities, restructurings and
spin-offs.
our mergers and acquisitions capabilities are evidenced by our
significant share of assignments in large, complex transactions
for which we provide multiple services, including
one-stop
acquisition financing and cross-border structuring expertise, as
well as services in other areas of the firm, such as interest
rate and currency hedging. in particular, a significant number
of the loan commitments and bank and bridge loan facilities that
we enter into arise in connection with our advisory assignments.
underwriting
underwriting includes public offerings and private placements of
a wide range of securities and other financial instruments,
including common and preferred stock, convertible and
exchangeable securities,
investment-grade
debt,
high-yield
debt, sovereign and emerging market debt, municipal debt, bank
loans,
asset-backed
securities and real estate-related securities, such as
mortgage-related
securities and the securities of real estate investment trusts.
equity underwriting.equity underwriting has
been a
long-term
core strength of goldman sachs. as with mergers and
acquisitions, we have been particularly successful in winning
mandates for large, complex transactions. we believe our
leadership in worldwide initial public offerings and worldwide
public common stock offerings reflects our expertise in complex
transactions, prior experience and distribution capabilities.
debt underwriting.we engage in the
underwriting and origination of various types of debt
instruments, including
investment-grade
debt securities,
high-yield
debt securities, bank and bridge loans and emerging market debt
securities, which may be issued by, among others, corporate,
sovereign and agency issuers. in addition, we underwrite and
originate structured securities, which include
mortgage-related
securities and other
asset-backed
securities and collateralized debt obligations.
table of contents
trading and
principal investments
trading and principal investments represented 41% of 2008 net
revenues. trading and principal investments facilitates client
transactions with a diverse group of corporations, financial
institutions, investment funds, governments and individuals and
takes proprietary positions through market making in, trading of
and investing in fixed income and equity products, currencies,
commodities and derivatives on these products. in addition, we
engage in
market-making
and specialist activities on equities and options exchanges, and
we clear client transactions on major stock, options and futures
exchanges worldwide. in connection with our merchant banking and
other investing activities, we make principal investments
directly and through funds that we raise and manage.
to meet the needs of our clients, trading and principal
investments is diversified across a wide range of products. we
believe our willingness and ability to take risk to facilitate
client transactions distinguishes us from many of our
competitors and substantially enhances our client relationships.
our trading and principal investments segment is divided into
three components: fixed income, currency and commodities;
equities; and principal investments.
fixed income,
currency and commodities and equities
fixed income, currency and commodities (ficc) and equities are
large and diversified operations through which we engage in a
variety of client-driven and proprietary trading and investing
activities.
in our client-driven businesses, ficc and equities strive to
deliver
high-quality
service by offering broad
market-making
and market knowledge to our clients on a global basis. in
addition, we use our expertise to take positions in markets, by
committing capital and taking risk, to facilitate client
transactions and to provide liquidity. our willingness to make
markets, commit capital and take risk in a broad range of fixed
income, currency, commodity and equity products and their
derivatives is crucial to our client relationships and to
support our underwriting business by providing secondary market
liquidity.
we generate trading net revenues from our client-driven
businesses in three ways:
first, in large, highly liquid markets, we undertake a high
volume of transactions for modest spreads and fees.
second, by capitalizing on our strong relationships and capital
position, we undertake transactions in less liquid markets where
spreads and fees are generally larger.
finally, we structure and execute transactions that address
complex client needs.
our ficc and equities businesses operate in close coordination
to provide clients with services and cross-market knowledge and
expertise.
in our proprietary activities in both ficc and equities, we
assume a variety of risks and devote resources to identify,
analyze and benefit from these exposures. we capitalize on our
analytical models to analyze information and make informed
trading judgments, and we seek to benefit from perceived
disparities in the value of assets in the trading markets and
from macroeconomic and issuer-specific trends.
table of contents
ficc
we make markets in and trade interest rate and credit products,
mortgage-related
securities and loan products and other
asset-backed
instruments, currencies and commodities, structure and enter
into a wide variety of derivative transactions, and engage in
proprietary trading and investing. ficc has five principal
businesses: commodities; credit products; currencies; interest
rate products, including money market instruments; and
mortgage-related
securities and loan products and other
asset-backed
instruments.
commodities.we enter into trades with our
clients in, make markets in, and trade for our own account a
wide variety of commodities, commodity derivatives and interests
in commodity-related assets, including oil and oil products,
metals, natural gas and electricity, and forest products. as
part of our commodities business, we acquire and dispose of
interests in, and engage in the development and operation of,
electric power generation facilities and related activities.
credit products.we offer to and trade for our
clients a broad array of credit and
credit-linked
products all over the world, including credit derivatives,
investment-grade
corporate securities,
high-yield
securities, bank and secured loans (origination and trading),
municipal securities, and emerging market and distressed debt.
for example, we enter, as principal, into complex structured
transactions designed to meet client needs.
in addition, we provide credit through bridge and other loan
facilities to a broad range of clients. commitments that are
extended for contingent acquisition financing are often intended
to be
short-term
in nature, as borrowers often seek to replace them with other
funding sources. as part of our ongoing credit origination
activities, we may seek to reduce our credit risk on commitments
by syndicating all or substantial portions of commitments to
other investors or, upon funding, by securitizing the positions
through investment vehicles sold to other investors.
underwriting fees from syndications of these commitments are
recorded in debt underwriting in our investment banking segment.
however, to the extent that we recognize losses on these
commitments, such losses are recorded within our trading and
principal investments segment, net of any related underwriting
fees. see managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
contractual obligations and commitments in partii,
item7 of our annual report on
form10-k
for additional information on our commitments.
our credit products business includes making significant
long-term
and
short-term
investments for our own account (sometimes investing together
with our merchant banking funds) in a broad array of asset
classes (including distressed debt) globally. we
opportunistically invest in debt and equity securities and
secured loans, and in private equity, real estate and other
assets.
currencies.we act as a dealer in foreign
exchange and trade for our clients and ourselves in most
currencies on exchanges and in cash and derivative markets
globally.
interest rate products.we trade and make
markets in a variety of interest rate products, including
interest rate swaps, options and other derivatives, and
government bonds, as well as money market instruments, such as
commercial paper, treasury bills, repurchase agreements and
other highly liquid securities and instruments. this business
includes our matched book, which consists of
short-term
collateralized financing transactions.
mortgage business.we make markets in and
trade for our clients and ourselves commercial and residential
mortgage-related
securities and loan products (including agency prime and
non-agency prime,
alt-a and
subprime mortgages) and other
asset-backed
and derivative instruments. we acquire positions in these
products for proprietary trading purposes as well as for
securitization or syndication. we also originate and service
commercial and residential mortgages.
table of contents
equities
we make markets in and trade equities and
equity-related
products, structure and enter into equity derivative
transactions, and engage in proprietary trading. we generate
commissions from executing and clearing client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide through our
equities client franchise and clearing activities.
equities includes two principal businesses: our client franchise
business and principal strategies. we also engage in specialist
and insurance activities.
client franchise business.our client
franchise business includes primarily client-driven activities
in the shares, equity derivatives and convertible securities
markets. these activities also include clearing client
transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges
worldwide, as well as our options specialist and
market-making
businesses. our client franchise business increasingly involves
providing our clients with access to electronic
low-touch
equity trading platforms, and electronic trades account for the
majority of our client trading activity in this business.
however, a majority of our net revenues in this business
continues to be derived from our traditional
high-touch
handling of more complex trades. we expect both types of trading
activities to remain important components of our client
franchise business.
we trade equity securities and
equity-related
products, including convertible securities, options, futures and
over-the-counter
(otc) derivative instruments, on a global basis as an agent, as
a market maker or otherwise as a principal. as a principal, we
facilitate client transactions, often by committing capital and
taking risk, to provide liquidity to clients with large blocks
of stocks or options. for example, we are active in the
execution of large block trades. we also execute transactions as
agent and offer clients direct electronic access to trading
markets.
in the options and futures markets, we structure, distribute and
execute derivatives on market indices, industry groups,
financial measures and individual company stocks to facilitate
client transactions and our proprietary activities. we develop
strategies and render advice with respect to portfolio hedging
and restructuring and asset allocation transactions. we also
create specially tailored instruments to enable sophisticated
investors to undertake hedging strategies and to establish or
liquidate investment positions. we are one of the leading
participants in the trading and development of equity derivative
instruments. in options, we are a specialist
and/or
market maker on the international securities exchange, the
chicago board options exchange, nyse arca, the boston options
exchange, the philadelphia stock exchange, nyse alternext us and
the chicago mercantile exchange.
principal strategies.our principal strategies
business is a multi-strategy investment business that invests
and trades our capital across global markets. investment
strategies include fundamental equities and relative value
trading (which involves trading strategies designed to take
advantage of perceived discrepancies in the relative value of
financial instruments, including equity,
equity-related
and debt instruments), event-driven investments (which focus on
event-oriented special situations such as corporate
restructurings, bankruptcies, recapitalizations, mergers and
acquisitions, and legal and regulatory events), convertible bond
trading, various types of volatility trading and principal
finance.
at the start of our first fiscal quarter of 2008, we reassigned
approximately
one-half of
the traders and other personnel and transferred approximately
one-half of
the firms assets comprising our principal strategies
business to our asset management business in an effort to
strengthen and diversify our asset management offerings. these
assets are invested in an alternative investment fund managed by
our asset management business.
table of contents
specialist activities.our specialist
activities business consists of our stock and
exchange-traded
funds (etf) specialist and
market-making
businesses. we engage in specialist and
market-making
activities on equities exchanges. in the united states, we are
one of the leading designated market makers for stocks traded on
the nyse. for etfs, we are registered market makers on nyse arca.
insurance activities.through our insurance
subsidiaries, we engage in a range of insurance and reinsurance
businesses, including buying, originating
and/or
reinsuring variable annuity and life insurance contracts,
reinsuring property catastrophe and residential homeowner risks
and providing power interruption coverage to power generating
facilities.
principal
investments
principal investments primarily represents net revenues from
three primary sources: returns on corporate and real estate
investments; overrides on corporate and real estate investments
made by merchant banking funds that we manage; and our
investment in the ordinary shares of industrial and commercial
bank of china limited (icbc).
returns on corporate and real estate
investments.as of november2008, the
aggregate carrying value of our principal investments held
directly or through our merchant banking funds, excluding our
investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, was
$15.13billion, comprised of corporate principal
investments with an aggregate carrying value of
$12.16billion and real estate investments with an
aggregate carrying value of $2.97billion. in addition, as
of november2008, we had outstanding unfunded equity
capital commitments of up to $13.47billion, comprised of
corporate principal investment commitments of
$10.39billion and real estate investment commitments of
$3.08billion.
overrides.consists of the increased share of
the income and gains derived from our merchant banking funds
when the return on a funds investments over the life of
the fund exceeds certain threshold returns (typically referred
to as an override). overrides are recognized in net revenues
when all material contingencies have been resolved.
icbc.our investment in the ordinary shares of
icbc was acquired on april28,2006. the ordinary
shares acquired from icbc are subject to transfer restrictions
that, among other things, prohibit any sale, disposition or
other transfer until april28,2009. from
april28,2009 to october20,2009, we may
transfer up to 50% of the aggregate ordinary shares of icbc that
we owned as of october20,2006. we may transfer the
remaining shares after october20,2009. as of
november2008, the fair value of our investment in the
ordinary shares of icbc was $5.50billion. a portion of our
interest is held by investment funds managed by goldman sachs.
for further information regarding our investment in the ordinary
shares of icbc, see managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of
operations critical accounting policies
fair value cash instruments in partii,
item7 of our annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
asset management
and securities services
asset management and securities services represented 36% of 2008
net revenues. our asset management business provides investment
advisory and financial planning services and offers investment
products (primarily through separately managed accounts and
commingled vehicles) across all major asset classes to a diverse
group of institutions and individuals worldwide and primarily
generates revenues in the form of management and incentive fees.
securities services provides prime brokerage services, financing
services and securities lending services to institutional
clients, including hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and
foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide, and generates revenues primarily in the
form of interest rate spreads or fees.
our asset management and securities services segment is divided
into two components: asset management and securities services.
asset
management
we offer a broad array of investment strategies, advice and
planning. we provide asset management services and offer
investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes: money
markets, fixed income, equities and alternative investments
(including hedge funds, private equity, real estate, currencies,
commodities and asset allocation strategies). through our
subsidiary, the ayco company, l.p., we also provide fee-based
financial counseling and financial education in the united
states.
assets under management (aum) typically generate fees as a
percentage of asset value, which is affected by investment
performance and by inflows and redemptions. the fees that we
charge vary by asset class, as do our related expenses. in
certain circumstances, we are also entitled to receive incentive
fees based on a percentage of a funds return or when the
return on assets under management exceeds specified benchmark
returns or other performance targets. incentive fees are
recognized when the performance period ends and they are no
longer subject to adjustment. we have numerous incentive fee
arrangements, many of which have annual performance periods that
end on december31. for that reason, incentive fees have
been seasonally weighted to our first quarter.
aum includes our mutual funds, alternative investment funds and
separately managed accounts for institutional and individual
investors. alternative investments include our merchant banking
funds, which generate revenues as described below under
management
of merchant banking funds. aum includes assets in
clients brokerage accounts to the extent that they
generate fees based on the assets in the accounts rather than
commissions on transactional activity in the accounts.
aum does not include assets in brokerage accounts that generate
commissions,
mark-ups and
spreads based on transactional activity, or our own investments
in funds that we manage. net revenues from these assets are
included in our trading and principal investments segment. aum
also does not include
non-fee-paying
assets, including interest-bearing deposits held through our
bank depository institution subsidiaries.
table of contents
the amount of aum is set forth in the graph below. in the
following graph, as well as in the following tables,
substantially all assets under management are valued as of
november 30:
assets under
management
(in
billions)
the following table sets forth aum by asset class:
assets under
management by asset class
(in
billions)
as of november 30
alternative
investments(1)
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total
non-money
market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
(1)
primarily includes hedge funds,
private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset
allocation strategies.
table of contents
clients.our clients are institutions and
individuals, including both
high-net-worth
and retail investors. we access institutional and
high-net-worth
clients through both direct and
third-party
channels and retail clients primarily through
third-party
channels. our institutional clients include pension funds,
governmental organizations, corporations, insurance companies,
banks, foundations and endowments. in
third-party
distribution channels, we distribute our mutual funds,
alternative investment funds and separately managed accounts
through brokerage firms, banks, insurance companies and other
financial intermediaries. our clients are located worldwide.
the table below sets forth the amount of aum by distribution
channel and client category:
assets under
management by distribution channel
(in
billions)
as of november 30
directly distributed
institutional
$
$
$
high-net-worth
individuals
third-party
distributed
institutional,
high-net-worth
individuals and retail
total
$
$
$
management of merchant banking funds.goldman
sachs sponsors numerous corporate and real estate private
investment funds. as of november 2008, the amount of aum in
these funds (including both funded amounts and unfunded
commitments on which we earn fees) was $93billion.
our strategy with respect to these funds generally is to invest
opportunistically to build a portfolio of investments that is
diversified by industry, product type, geographic region, and
transaction structure and type. our corporate investment funds
pursue, on a global basis,
long-term
investments in equity and debt securities in privately
negotiated transactions, leveraged buyouts, acquisitions and
investments in funds managed by external parties. our real
estate investment funds invest in real estate operating
companies, debt and equity interests in real estate assets, and
other real estate-related investments. in addition, our merchant
banking funds include funds that invest in infrastructure and
infrastructure-related assets and companies on a global basis.
merchant banking activities generate three primary revenue
streams. first, we receive a management fee that is generally a
percentage of a funds committed capital, invested capital,
total gross acquisition cost or asset value. these annual
management fees are included in our asset management net
revenues. second, goldman sachs, as a substantial investor in
some of these funds, is allocated its proportionate share of the
funds unrealized appreciation or depreciation arising from
changes in fair value as well as gains and losses upon
realization. third, after a fund has achieved a minimum return
for fund investors, we receive an increased share of the
funds income and gains that is a percentage of the income
and gains from the funds investments. the second and third
of these revenue streams are included in principal investments
within our trading and principal investments segment.
table of contents
securities
services
securities services provides prime brokerage services, financing
services and securities lending services to institutional
clients, including hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and
foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
prime brokerage services.we offer prime
brokerage services to our clients, allowing them the flexibility
to trade with most brokers while maintaining a single source for
financing and consolidated portfolio reports. our prime
brokerage business provides clearing and custody in 53 markets
globally and provides consolidated multi-currency accounting and
reporting, fund administration and other ancillary services.
financing services.a central element of our
prime brokerage business involves providing financing to our
clients for their securities trading activities through margin
and securities loans that are collateralized by securities, cash
or other acceptable collateral.
securities lending services.securities
lending services principally involve the borrowing and lending
of securities to cover clients and goldman sachs
short sales and otherwise to make deliveries into the market. in
addition, we are an active participant in the
broker-to-broker
securities lending business and the
third-party
agency lending business. net revenues in securities lending
services are, as a general matter, weighted toward our second
and third quarters each year due to seasonally higher activity
levels in europe.
global investment
research
global investment research provides fundamental research on
companies, industries, economies, currencies and commodities and
macro strategy research on a worldwide basis.
global investment research employs a team approach that as of
november2008 provided research coverage of over 3,250
companies worldwide and over 45 national economies. this is
accomplished by the following departments:
the equity research departments provide fundamental analysis,
earnings forecasts and investment opinions for equity securities;
the credit research department provides fundamental analysis,
forecasts and investment opinions as to
investment-grade
and
high-yield
corporate bonds and credit derivatives; and
the global ecs department (formed in december2008 through
a consolidation of the economic, commodities and strategy
research departments) formulates macroeconomic forecasts for
economic activity, foreign exchange and interest rates, provides
research on the commodity markets, and provides equity market
forecasts, opinions on both asset and industry sector
allocation, equity trading strategies, credit trading strategies
and options research.
further information regarding research at goldman sachs is
provided below under regulation
regulations applicable in and outside the united states
and legal proceedings research independence
matters in parti, item3 of our annual report
on
form10-k.
table of contents
business
continuity and information security
business continuity and information security are high priorities
for goldman sachs. our business continuity program has been
developed to provide reasonable assurance of business continuity
in the event of disruptions at the firms critical
facilities and to comply with the regulatory requirements of the
financial industry regulatory authority (finra). because we are
a bank holding company, our business continuity program will be
subject to review by the federal reserve board. the key elements
of the program are crisis management, people recovery
facilities, business recovery, systems and data recovery, and
process improvement. in the area of information security, we
have developed and implemented a framework of principles,
policies and technology to protect the information assets of the
firm and our clients. safeguards are applied to maintain the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of information
resources.
employees
management believes that a major strength and principal reason
for the success of goldman sachs is the quality and dedication
of our people and the shared sense of being part of a team. we
strive to maintain a work environment that fosters
professionalism, excellence, diversity, cooperation among our
employees worldwide and high standards of business ethics.
instilling the goldman sachs culture in all employees is a
continuous process, in which training plays an important part.
all employees are offered the opportunity to participate in
education and periodic seminars that we sponsor at various
locations throughout the world. another important part of
instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee review
process. employees are reviewed by supervisors, co-workers and
employees they supervise in a
360-degree
review process that is integral to our team approach.
as of november2008, we had 30,067 employees, excluding
4,671 employees of certain consolidated entities that are held
for investment purposes only. consolidated entities held for
investment purposes are entities that are held strictly for
capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and are
engaged in activities that are not closely related to our
principal businesses.
competition
the financial services industry and all of our
businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect
them to remain so. our competitors are other entities that
provide investment banking, securities and investment management
services, as well as those entities that make investments in
securities, commodities, derivatives, real estate, loans and
other financial assets. these entities include brokers and
dealers, investment banking firms, commercial banks, insurance
companies, investment advisers, mutual funds, hedge funds,
private equity funds and merchant banks. we compete with some of
our competitors globally and with others on a regional, product
or niche basis. our competition is based on a number of factors,
including transaction execution, our products and services,
innovation, reputation and price.
we also face intense competition in attracting and retaining
qualified employees. our ability to continue to compete
effectively in our businesses will depend upon our ability to
attract new employees and retain and motivate our existing
employees.
table of contents
over time, there has been substantial consolidation and
convergence among companies in the financial services industry.
this trend accelerated over the course of the past year as the
credit crisis caused numerous mergers and asset acquisitions
among industry participants. many commercial banks and other
broad-based
financial services firms have had the ability for some time to
offer a wide range of products, from loans, deposit-taking and
insurance to brokerage, asset management and investment banking
services, which may enhance their competitive position. they
also have had the ability to support investment banking and
securities products with commercial banking, insurance and other
financial services revenues in an effort to gain market share,
which has resulted in pricing pressure in our investment banking
and trading businesses and could result in pricing pressure in
other of our businesses.
moreover, we have faced, and expect to continue to face,
pressure to retain market share by committing capital to
businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns that may
not be commensurate with their risks. in particular, corporate
clients seek such commitments (such as agreements to participate
in their commercial paper backstop or other loan facilities)
from financial services firms in connection with investment
banking and other assignments.
we provide these commitments primarily through gs bank usa and
its subsidiaries, including our william street entities and
goldman sachs credit partners l.p. with respect to most of the
william street commitments, sumitomo mitsui financial group,
inc. (smfg) provides us with credit loss protection that is
generally limited to 95% of the first loss we realize on
approved loan commitments, up to a maximum of
$1.00billion. in addition, subject to the satisfaction of
certain conditions, upon our request, smfg will provide
protection for 70% of additional losses on such commitments, up
to a maximum of $1.13billion, of which $375million
of protection has been provided as of november2008. we
also use other financial instruments to mitigate credit risks
related to certain william street commitments not covered by
smfg. see managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
contractual obligations and commitments in partii,
item7 of our annual report on
form10-k
and note8 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for more information regarding the william street entities and
for a description of the credit loss protection provided by
smfg. an increasing number of our commitments in connection with
investment banking and other assignments do not meet the
criteria established for the william street entities and do not
benefit from the smfg loss protection. these commitments are
issued through gs bank usa and its subsidiaries or our other
subsidiaries.
the trend toward consolidation and convergence has significantly
increased the capital base and geographic reach of some of our
competitors. this trend has also hastened the globalization of
the securities and other financial services markets. as a
result, we have had to commit capital to support our
international operations and to execute large global
transactions. to take advantage of some of our most significant
challenges and opportunities, we will have to compete
successfully with financial institutions that are larger and
better capitalized and that may have a stronger local presence
and longer operating history outside the united states.
we have experienced intense price competition in some of our
businesses in recent years. there has been considerable pressure
in the pricing of block trades. also, equity and debt
underwriting discounts, as well as trading spreads, have been
under pressure for a number of years and the ability to execute
trades electronically, through the internet and through
alternative trading systems, has increased the pressure on
trading commissions. it appears that this trend toward
electronic and other
low-touch,
low-commission
trading will continue. we believe that we will continue to
experience competitive pressures in these and other areas in the
future as some of our competitors seek to obtain market share by
reducing prices.
table of contents
regulation
goldman sachs, as a participant in the banking, securities,
commodity futures and options and insurance industries, is
subject to extensive regulation in the united states and the
other countries in which we operate. see risk
factors our businesses and those of our clients are
subject to extensive and pervasive regulation around the
world in parti, item1a of our annual report on
form10-k
for a further discussion of the effect that regulation may have
on our businesses. as a matter of public policy, regulatory
bodies around the world are charged with safeguarding the
integrity of the securities and other financial markets and with
protecting the interests of clients participating in those
markets, including depositors in u.s.depository
institutions such as gs bank usa. they are not, however,
generally charged with protecting the interests of goldman
sachs shareholders or creditors.
on september21,2008, group inc. became a bank
holding company under the bhc act. as of that date, the federal
reserve board became the primary u.s.regulator of group
inc., as a consolidated entity. prior to
september21,2008, group inc. was subject to
regulation by the sec as a consolidated supervised entity (cse)
and was subject to
group-wide
supervision and examination by the sec and to minimum capital
standards on a consolidated basis. on
september26,2008, the sec announced that it was
ending the cse program. our principal
u.s.broker-dealer,
goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.) remains subject to
regulation by the sec.
banking
regulation
supervision
and regulation
as a bank holding company under the bhc act, group inc. is now
subject to supervision and examination by the federal reserve
board. under the system of functional regulation
established under the bhc act, the federal reserve board
supervises group inc., including all of its nonbank
subsidiaries, as an umbrella regulator of the
consolidated organization and generally defers to the primary
u.s.regulators of group inc.s u.s.depository
institution subsidiary, as applicable, and to the other
u.s.regulators of group inc.s
u.s.non-depository
institution subsidiaries that regulate certain activities of
those subsidiaries. such functionally regulated
non-depository
institution subsidiaries include
broker-dealers
registered with the sec, insurance companies regulated by state
insurance authorities, investment advisors registered with the
sec with respect to their investment advisory activities and
entities regulated by the u.s.commodity futures trading
commission (cftc) with respect to certain futures-related
activities.
activities
the bhc act generally restricts us from engaging in business
activities other than the business of banking and certain
closely related activities. however, the bhc act also grants a
new bank holding company, such as group inc., two years from the
date the entity becomes a bank holding company to comply with
the restrictions on its activities imposed by the bhc act with
respect to any activities that it was engaged in when it became
a bank holding company. we expect that this
grandfather right will allow us to continue to
conduct our business substantially as we have in the past until
at least september22,2010. in addition, under the
bhc act, we can apply to the federal reserve board for up to
three
one-year
extensions.
under the
u.s.gramm-leach-bliley
act of 1999 (glb act), an eligible bank holding company may
elect to become a financial holding company.
financial holding companies may engage in a broader range of
financial and related activities than are permissible for bank
holding companies as long as they continue to meet the
eligibility requirements for financial holding companies. these
activities include underwriting, dealing and making markets in
securities, insurance underwriting and making merchant banking
investments in nonfinancial companies. in addition, the glb act
also allows a company that was not a bank holding company and
becomes a financial holding company after
november12,1999 to continue to engage in certain
commodities activities that are otherwise
table of contents
impermissible for bank holding companies if the company was
engaged in any of these activities in the united states as of
september30,1997 and if the assets held pursuant to
these activities do not equal 5% or more of the consolidated
assets of the bank holding company.
we intend to apply to elect to become a financial holding
company under the glb act as soon as practicable. our ability to
achieve and maintain financial holding company status is
dependent on a number of factors, including our
u.s.depository institution subsidiaries continuing to
qualify as well capitalized as described under
prompt
corrective action below. we do not believe that any
activities that are material to our current or currently
proposed business would be impermissible activities for us as a
financial holding company.
as a bank holding company, group inc. is required to obtain
prior federal reserve board approval before directly or
indirectly acquiring more than 5% of any class of voting shares
of any unaffiliated depository institution. in addition, as a
bank holding company, we may generally engage in banking and
other financial activities abroad, including investing in and
owning
non-u.s.banks,
if those activities and investments do not exceed certain limits
and, in some cases, if we have obtained the prior approval of
the federal reserve board.
capital
requirements
we are subject to regulatory capital requirements administered
by the u.s.federal banking agencies. our bank depository
institution subsidiaries, including gs bank usa, are subject to
similar capital guidelines. under the federal reserve
boards capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory
framework for prompt corrective action (pca) that is applicable
to gs bank usa, goldman sachs and its bank depository
institution subsidiaries must meet specific capital guidelines
that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and
certain
off-balance-sheet
items as calculated under regulatory reporting practices.
goldman sachs and its bank depository institution
subsidiaries capital amounts, as well as gs bank
usas pca classification, are also subject to qualitative
judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings
and other factors. we anticipate reporting capital ratios as
follows:
before we became a bank holding company, we were subject to
capital guidelines by the sec as a cse that were generally
consistent with those set out in the revised framework for the
international convergence of capital measurement and capital
standards issued by the basel committee on banking supervision
(basel ii). we currently compute and report our firmwide capital
ratios in accordance with the basel ii requirements as
applicable to us when we were regulated as a cse for the purpose
of assessing the adequacy of our capital. we expect to continue
to report to investors for a period of time our basel ii capital
ratios as applicable to us when we were regulated as a cse.
the regulatory capital guidelines currently applicable to bank
holding companies are based on the capital accord of the basel
committee on banking supervision (basel i), with basel ii to be
phased in over time. we are currently working with the federal
reserve board to put in place the appropriate reporting and
compliance mechanisms and methodologies to allow reporting of
the basel i capital ratios as of the end of march2009.
in addition, we are currently working to implement the basel ii
framework as applicable to us as a bank holding company (as
opposed to as a cse). u.s.banking regulators have
incorporated the basel ii framework into the existing
risk-based
capital requirements by requiring that internationally active
banking organizations, such as group inc., transition to basel
ii over the next several years.
under the basel ii framework as it applied to us when we were
regulated as a cse, we evaluate our tier1 capital and
total allowable capital as a percentage of
risk-weighted
assets (rwas). rwas are calculated based on the level of market
risk, credit risk and operational risk associated with our
business activities, using methodologies generally consistent
with those set out in basel ii. our
table of contents
tier1 capital consists of common shareholders
equity, qualifying preferred stock (including the cumulative
preferred stock issued by group inc. to the u.s.department
of the treasurys (u.s.treasury) tarp capital
purchase program and our junior subordinated debt issued to
trusts, less deductions for goodwill, disallowed intangible
assets and other items. our total allowable capital consists of
our tier1 capital and our qualifying subordinated debt,
less certain deductions. additional information on the
calculation of our tier1 capital, total allowable capital
and rwas under the baselii framework as it applied to us
as a cse is set forth in managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of
operations equity capital consolidated
capital requirements, and in note17 to the
consolidated financial statements, which are in partii,
items7 and 8 of our annual report on
form10-k.
as of november2008, our total capital ratio (total
allowable capital as a percentage of rwas) was 18.9% and our
tier1 ratio (tier1 capital as a percentage of rwas)
was 15.6%, in each case calculated under the basel ii framework
as it applied to us when we were regulated as a cse.
as noted above, we are currently working to implement the basel
ii framework as applicable to us as a bank holding company (as
opposed to as a cse). during a parallel period, we anticipate
that group inc.s capital calculations computed under both
the basel i rules and the basel ii rules will be reported to the
federal reserve board for examination and compliance for at
least four consecutive quarterly periods. once the parallel
period and subsequent three-year transition period are
successfully completed, group inc. will utilize the basel ii
framework as its means of capital adequacy assessment,
measurement and reporting and will discontinue use of basel i.
internationally, the basel ii framework was implemented in
several countries during the second half of 2007 and in 2008,
while others will begin implementation in 2009. the basel ii
rules therefore also apply to certain of our operations in
non-u.s.jurisdictions.
the federal reserve board also has established minimum leverage
ratio guidelines. we were not subject to these guidelines before
becoming a bank holding company and, accordingly, we are
currently working with the federal reserve board to finalize our
methodology for calculating this ratio. the tier1 leverage
ratio is defined as tier1 capital (as applicable to us as
a bank holding company) divided by adjusted average total assets
(which includes adjustments for disallowed goodwill and certain
intangible assets). the minimum tier1 leverage ratio is 3%
for bank holding companies that have received the highest
supervisory rating under federal reserve board guidelines or
that have implemented the federal reserve boards
risk-based
capital measure for market risk. other bank holding companies
must have a minimum tier1 leverage ratio of 4%. bank
holding companies may be expected to maintain ratios well above
the minimum levels, depending upon their particular condition,
risk profile and growth plans. as of november2008, our
estimated tier1 leverage ratio was 6.1%. this ratio
represents a preliminary estimate and may be revised in
subsequent filings as we continue to work with the federal
reserve board to finalize the methodology for the calculation.
gs&co. will continue to calculate its regulatory capital
requirements in accordance with the market and credit risk
standards of appendixe of
rule15c3-1
under the exchange act, which are consistent with basel ii.
payment of
dividends
federal and state law imposes limitations on the payment of
dividends by our bank depository institution subsidiaries. the
amount of dividends that may be paid by a state-chartered bank
that is a member of the federal reserve system, such as gs bank
usa or our national bank trust company subsidiary, is limited to
the lesser of the amounts calculated under a recent
earnings test and an undivided profits test.
under the recent earnings test, a dividend may not be paid if
the total of all dividends declared by a bank in any calendar
year is in excess of the current years net income combined
with the retained net income of the two preceding years, unless
the bank obtains the approval of its chartering authority. under
the undivided profits test, a dividend may not be paid in excess
of a banks undivided profits. new york law
imposes similar limitations on new york state-
table of contents
chartered banks. as a result of these restrictions, gs bank usa
was not able to declare dividends to group inc. without
regulatory approval as of november2008.
in addition to the dividend restrictions described above, the
banking regulators have authority to prohibit or to limit the
payment of dividends by the banking organizations they supervise
if, in the banking regulators opinion, payment of a
dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in light
of the financial condition of the banking organization.
it is also the policy of the federal reserve board that a bank
holding company generally only pay dividends on common stock out
of net income available to common shareholders over the past
year and only if the prospective rate of earnings retention
appears consistent with the bank holding companys capital
needs, asset quality, and overall financial condition. in the
current financial and economic environment, the federal reserve
board has indicated that bank holding companies should carefully
review their dividend policy and has discouraged dividend
pay-out ratios that are at the 100% level unless both asset
quality and capital are very strong. a bank holding company also
should not maintain a dividend level that places undue pressure
on the capital of bank depository institution subsidiaries, or
that may undermine the bank holding companys ability to
serve as a source of strength for such bank depository
institution subsidiaries. see
u.s.treasurys
tarp capital purchase program below for a discussion of
additional restrictions on group inc.s ability to pay
dividends. in addition, certain of group inc.s nonbank
subsidiaries are subject to separate regulatory limitations on
dividends and distributions, including our
broker-dealer
and our insurance subsidiaries as described below.
source of
strength
under federal reserve board policy, group inc. is expected to
act as a source of strength to gs bank usa and to commit capital
and financial resources to support this subsidiary. the required
support may be needed at times when, absent that federal reserve
board policy, we may not find ourselves able to provide it.
capital loans by a bank holding company to any of its subsidiary
banks are subordinate in right of payment to deposits and to
certain other indebtedness of such subsidiary banks. in the
event of a bank holding companys bankruptcy, any
commitment by the bank holding company to a federal bank
regulator to maintain the capital of a subsidiary bank will be
assumed by the bankruptcy trustee and entitled to a priority of
payment.
however, because the bhc act provides for functional regulation
of bank holding company activities by various regulators, the
bhc act prohibits the federal reserve board from requiring
payment by a holding company or subsidiary to a depository
institution if the functional regulator of the payor objects to
such payment. in such a case, the federal reserve board could
instead require the divestiture of the depository institution
and impose operating restrictions pending the divestiture.
cross-guarantee
provisions
each insured depository institution controlled (as
defined in the bhc act) by the same bank holding company can be
held liable to the u.s.federal deposit insurance
corporation (fdic) for any loss incurred, or reasonably expected
to be incurred, by the fdic due to the default of any other
insured depository institution controlled by that holding
company and for any assistance provided by the fdic to any of
those banks that is in danger of default. such a
cross-guarantee claim against a depository
institution is generally superior in right of payment to claims
of the holding company and its affiliates against that
depository institution. at this time, we control only one
insured depository institution for this purpose, namely gs bank
usa. however, if, in the future, we were to control other
insured depository institutions, such cross-guarantee would
apply to all such insured depository institutions.
table of contents
u.s.treasurys
tarp capital purchase program
on october28,2008, group inc. issued preferred stock
and a warrant to purchase its common stock to the
u.s.treasury as a participant in the tarp capital purchase
program. prior to october28,2011, unless we have
redeemed all of this preferred stock or the u.s.treasury
has transferred all of this preferred stock to a third party,
the consent of the u.s.treasury will be required for us
to, among other things, increase our common stock dividend above
the current quarterly cash dividend of $0.35 per share or
repurchase our common stock or outstanding preferred stock
except in limited circumstances. in addition, until the
u.s.treasury ceases to own any group inc. securities sold
under the tarp capital purchase program, the compensation
arrangements for our senior executive officers must comply in
all respects with the u.s.emergency economic stabilization
act of 2008 and the rules and regulations thereunder. see
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations equity
capital equity capital management in
partii, item7 of our annual report on
form10-k
for a further discussion of our participation in the
u.s.treasurys tarp capital purchase program.
fdic temporary
liquidity guarantee program
group inc. and gs bank usa have chosen to participate in the
fdics temporary liquidity guarantee program (tlgp), which
applies to, among others, all u.s.depository institutions
insured by the fdic and all u.s.bank holding companies,
unless they have opted out of the tlgp or the fdic has
terminated their participation. under the tlgp, the fdic
guarantees certain senior unsecured debt of group inc. and gs
bank usa, as well as noninterest-bearing transaction account
deposits at gs bank usa, and in return for these guarantees the
fdic is paid a fee based on the amount of the deposit or the
amount and maturity of the debt. under the debt guarantee
component of the tlgp, the fdic will pay the unpaid principal
and interest on an fdic-guaranteed debt instrument upon the
uncured failure of the participating entity to make a timely
payment of principal or interest in accordance with the terms of
the instrument. under the transaction account guarantee
component of the tlgp, all noninterest-bearing transaction
accounts maintained at gs bank usa are insured in full by the
fdic until december31,2009, regardless of the
standard maximum deposit insurance amount. see
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations liquidity and
funding risk conservative liability structure
in partii, item7 of our annual report on
form10-k
for a further discussion of our participation in the tlgp.
gs bank
usa
our u.s. depository institution subsidiary, gs bank usa, a new
york state-chartered bank and a member of the federal reserve
system and the fdic, is regulated by the federal reserve board
and the new york state banking department and is subject to
minimum capital requirements that (subject to certain
exceptions) are similar to those applicable to bank holding
companies. gs bank usa was formed in november2008 through
the merger of our existing utah industrial bank (named gs bank
usa) into our new york limited purpose trust company, with the
surviving company taking the name gs bank usa. concurrently with
this merger, we contributed subsidiaries with an aggregate of
$117.16billion of assets into gs bank usa (which brought
total assets in gs bank usa to $145.06billion as of
november 2008). as a result, a number of our businesses are now
conducted partially or entirely through gs bank usa, including:
bank loan trading and origination; interest rate, credit,
currency and other derivatives; leveraged finance; commercial
and residential mortgage origination, trading and servicing;
structured finance; and agency lending, custody and hedge fund
administration services. the businesses conducted through gs
bank usa are now subject to regulation by the federal reserve
board, the new york state banking department and the fdic.
table of contents
deposit
insurance
gs bank usa accepts deposits, and those deposits have the
benefit of fdic insurance up to the applicable limits. the
fdics deposit insurance fund is funded by assessments on
insured depository institutions, which depend on the risk
category of an institution and the amount of insured deposits
that it holds. the fdic may increase or decrease the assessment
rate schedule on a
semi-annual
basis. we are also participants in the tlgp as discussed above
under
fdic
temporary liquidity guarantee program.
prompt
corrective action
the u.s.federal deposit insurance corporation improvement
act of 1991 (fdicia), among other things, requires the federal
banking agencies to take prompt corrective action in
respect of depository institutions that do not meet specified
capital requirements. fdicia establishes five capital categories
for fdic-insured banks: well capitalized, adequately
capitalized, undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized
and critically undercapitalized. a depository institution is
deemed to be well capitalized, the highest category,
if it has a total capital ratio of 10% or greater, a tier1
capital ratio of 6% or greater and a tier1 leverage ratio
of 5% or greater and is not subject to any order or written
directive by any such regulatory authority to meet and maintain
a specific capital level for any capital measure. in connection
with the november 2008 asset transfer described below, gs bank
usa agreed with the federal reserve board to minimum capital
ratios in excess of these well capitalized levels.
accordingly, for a period of time, gs bank usa is expected to
maintain a tier1 capital ratio of at least 8%, a total
capital ratio of at least 11% and a tier1 leverage ratio
of at least 6%. we contributed subsidiaries with an aggregate of
$117.16billion in assets into gs bank usa in november 2008
(which brought total assets in gs bank usa to
$145.06billion as of november 2008). as a result, we are
currently working with the federal reserve board to finalize our
methodology for the baseli calculations. as of november
2008, under baseli, gs bank usas estimated
tier1 capital ratio was 8.9% and estimated total capital
ratio was 11.6%. in addition, gs bank usas estimated
tier1 leverage ratio was 9.1%. an institution may be
downgraded to, or deemed to be in, a capital category that is
lower than is indicated by its capital ratios if it is
determined to be in an unsafe or unsound condition or if it
receives an unsatisfactory examination rating with respect to
certain matters.
fdicia imposes progressively more restrictive constraints on
operations, management and capital distributions, as the capital
category of an institution declines. failure to meet the capital
guidelines could also subject a depository institution to
capital raising requirements. ultimately, critically
undercapitalized institutions are subject to the appointment of
a receiver or conservator.
the prompt corrective action regulations apply only to
depository institutions and not to bank holding companies such
as group inc. however, the federal reserve board is authorized
to take appropriate action at the holding company level, based
upon the undercapitalized status of the holding companys
depository institution subsidiaries. in certain instances
relating to an undercapitalized depository institution
subsidiary, the bank holding company would be required to
guarantee the performance of the undercapitalized
subsidiarys capital restoration plan and might be liable
for civil money damages for failure to fulfill its commitments
on that guarantee. furthermore, in the event of the bankruptcy
of the parent holding company, the guarantee would take priority
over the parents general unsecured creditors.
insolvency of
an insured depository institution
if the fdic is appointed the conservator or receiver of an
insured depository institution such as gs bank usa, upon its
insolvency or in certain other events, the fdic has the power:
to transfer any of the depository institutions assets and
liabilities to a new obligor without the approval of the
depository institutions creditors;
table of contents
to enforce the terms of the depository institutions
contracts pursuant to their terms; or
to repudiate or disaffirm any contract or lease to which the
depository institution is a party, the performance of which is
determined by the fdic to be burdensome and the disaffirmance or
repudiation of which is determined by the fdic to promote the
orderly administration of the depository institution.
in addition, under federal law, the claims of holders of deposit
liabilities and certain claims for administrative expenses
against an insured depository institution would be afforded a
priority over other general unsecured claims against such an
institution, including claims of debt holders of the
institution, in the liquidation or other resolution
of such an institution by any receiver. as a result, whether or
not the fdic ever sought to repudiate any debt obligations of gs
bank usa, the debt holders would be treated differently from,
and could receive, if anything, substantially less than, the
depositors of the depository institution.
transactions
with affiliates
transactions between gs bank usa and group inc. and its
subsidiaries and affiliates are regulated by the federal reserve
board. these regulations limit the types and amounts of
transactions (including loans to and credit extensions from gs
bank usa) that may take place and generally require those
transactions to be on an arms-length basis. these regulations
generally do not apply to transactions between gs bank usa and
its subsidiaries. in november2008, group inc. transferred
assets and operations to gs bank usa as described above under
gs
bank usa. in connection with this transfer, group inc.
entered into a guarantee agreement with gs bank usa whereby
group inc. agreed to (i)purchase from gs bank usa certain
transferred assets (other than derivatives and mortgage
servicing rights) or reimburse gs bank usa for certain losses
relating to those assets; (ii)reimburse gs bank usa for
credit-related
losses from assets transferred to gs bank usa; and
(iii)protect gs bank usa or reimburse it for certain
losses arising from derivatives and mortgage servicing rights
transferred to gs bank usa. group inc. also agreed to pledge to
gs bank usa collateral with an aggregate value at any time not
less than 5% of the face amount of committed but unfunded credit
lines plus the original transfer value of the assets transferred
to gs bank usa, which amounted to a required collateral value of
approximately $7.1billion as of november2008.
trustcompanies
group inc.s two limited purpose trust company subsidiaries
operate under state or federal law. they are not permitted to
and do not accept deposits (other than as incidental to their
trust activities) or make loans and, as a result, are not
insured by the fdic. the goldman sachs trustcompany, n.a.,
a national banking association that is limited to fiduciary
activities, is regulated by the office of the comptroller of the
currency and is a member bank of the federal reserve system. the
goldman sachs trustcompany of delaware, a delaware limited
purpose trust company, is regulated by the office of the
delaware state bank commissioner.
u.s.securities
and commodities regulation
goldman sachs
broker-dealer
subsidiaries are subject to regulations that cover all aspects
of the securities business, including sales methods, trade
practices, use and safekeeping of clients funds and
securities, capital structure, recordkeeping, the financing of
clients purchases, and the conduct of directors, officers
and employees.
in the united states, the sec is the federal agency responsible
for the administration of the federal securities laws.
gs&co. is registered as a
broker-dealer
and as an investment adviser with the sec and as a
broker-dealer
in all 50 states and the district of columbia. self-regulatory
organizations, such as finra and the nyse, adopt rules that
apply to, and examine,
broker-dealers
such as gs&co. in addition, state securities and other
regulators also have regulatory or oversight
table of contents
authority over gs&co. similarly, our businesses are also
subject to regulation by various
non-u.s.governmental
and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory authorities in
virtually all countries where we have offices. goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec) and two of its
subsidiaries are registered
u.s.broker-dealers
and are regulated by the sec, the nyse and finra. goldman sachs
financial markets, l.p. is registered with the sec as an otc
derivatives dealer and conducts certain otc derivatives
businesses.
the commodity futures and commodity options industry in the
united states is subject to regulation under the
u.s.commodity exchange act (cea). the cftc is the federal
agency charged with the administration of the cea. several of
goldman sachs subsidiaries, including gs&co. and
gsec, are registered with the cftc and act as futures commission
merchants, commodity pool operators or commodity trading
advisors and are subject to the cea. the rules and regulations
of various self-regulatory organizations, such as the chicago
board of trade and the chicago mercantile exchange, other
futures exchanges and the national futures association, also
govern the commodity futures and commodity options businesses of
these entities.
gs&co. and gsec are subject to
rule15c3-1
of the sec and rule1.17 of the cftc, which specify uniform
minimum net capital requirements and also effectively require
that a significant part of the registrants assets be kept
in relatively liquid form. gs&co. and gsec have elected to
compute their minimum capital requirements in accordance with
the alternative net capital requirement as permitted
by
rule15c3-1.
as of november2008, gs&co. had regulatory net
capital, as defined by
rule15c3-1,
of $10.92billion, which exceeded the amounts required by
$8.87billion. as of november2008, gsec had
regulatory net capital, as defined by
rule15c3-1,
of $1.38billion, which exceeded the amounts required by
$1.29billion. in addition to its alternative minimum net
capital requirements, gs&co. is also required to hold
tentative net capital in excess of $1billion and net
capital in excess of $500million in accordance with the
market and credit risk standards of appendixe of
rule15c3-1.
gs&co. is also required to notify the sec in the event that
its tentative net capital is less than $5billion. as of
november2008, gs&co. had tentative net capital and
net capital in excess of both the minimum and the notification
requirements. these net capital requirements may have the effect
of prohibiting these entities from distributing or withdrawing
capital and may require prior notice to the sec for certain
withdrawals of capital. see note17 to the consolidated
financial statements in partii, item8 of our annual
report on
form10-k.
our specialist businesses are subject to extensive regulation by
a number of securities exchanges. as a designated market maker
on the nyse and as a specialist on other exchanges, we are
required to maintain orderly markets in the securities to which
we are assigned. under the nyses new designated market
maker rules, this may require us to supply liquidity to these
markets in certain circumstances.
j.aron& company is authorized by the
u.s.federal energy regulatory commission (ferc) to sell
wholesale physical power at
market-based
rates. as a ferc-authorized power marketer, j. aron&
company is subject to regulation under the u.s.federal
power act and ferc regulations and to the oversight of ferc. as
a result of our investing activities, gs&co. is also an
exempt holding company under the u.s.public
utility holding company act of 2005 and applicable ferc rules.
in addition, as a result of our power-related activities, we are
subject to extensive and evolving energy, environmental and
other governmental laws and regulations, as discussed under
risk factors our power generation interests
and related activities subject us to extensive regulation, as
well as environmental and other risks associated with power
generation activities in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k.
other regulation
in the united states
our u.s.insurance subsidiaries are subject to state
insurance regulation and oversight in the states in which they
are domiciled and in the other states in which they are
licensed, and we are subject to oversight as an insurance
holding company in states where our insurance subsidiaries are
table of contents
domiciled. state insurance regulations limit the ability of our
insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to group inc. in certain
circumstances, and could require regulatory approval for any
change in control of group inc., which may include
control of 10% or more of our voting stock. in addition, a
number of our other businesses, including our lending and
mortgage businesses, require us to obtain licenses, adhere to
applicable regulations and be subject to the oversight of
various regulators in the states in which we conduct these
businesses.
the u.s.bank secrecy act (bsa), as amended by the usa
patriot act of 2001 (patriot act), contains anti-money
laundering and financial transparency laws and mandated the
implementation of various regulations applicable to all
financial institutions, including standards for verifying client
identification at account opening, and obligations to monitor
client transactions and report suspicious activities. through
these and other provisions, the bsa and the patriot act seek to
promote the identification of parties that may be involved in
terrorism, money laundering or other suspicious activities.
anti-money laundering laws outside the united states contain
some similar provisions. the obligation of financial
institutions, including goldman sachs, to identify their
clients, to monitor for and report suspicious transactions, to
respond to requests for information by regulatory authorities
and law enforcement agencies, and to share information with
other financial institutions, has required the implementation
and maintenance of internal practices, procedures and controls
that have increased, and may continue to increase, our costs,
and any failure with respect to our programs in this area could
subject us to substantial liability and regulatory fines.
regulationoutside
the united states
goldman sachs provides investment services in and from the
united kingdom under the regulation of the financial services
authority (fsa). goldman sachs international (gsi), our
regulated u.k.
broker-dealer,
is subject to the capital requirements imposed by the fsa. as of
november2008, gsi was in compliance with the fsa capital
requirements. other subsidiaries, including goldman sachs
international bank, are also regulated by the fsa.
goldman sachs bank (europe) plc (gs bank europe), our regulated
irish bank, is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed
by the irish financial services regulatory authority. as of
november2008, this bank was in compliance with all
regulatory capital requirements. group inc. has issued a general
guarantee of the obligations of this bank.
various other goldman sachs entities are regulated by the
banking, insurance and securities regulatory authorities of the
european countries in which they operate, including, among
others, the federal financial supervisory authority (bafin) and
the bundesbank in germany, banque de france and the
autorit des marchs financiers in france, banca
ditalia and the commissione nazionale per le societ
e la borsa (consob) in italy, the federal financial markets
service in russia and the swiss federal banking commission.
certain goldman sachs entities are also regulated by the
european securities, derivatives and commodities exchanges of
which they are members.
the investment services that are subject to oversight by the fsa
and other regulators within the european union (eu) are
regulated in accordance with national laws, many of which
implement eu directives requiring, among other things,
compliance with certain capital adequacy standards, customer
protection requirements and market conduct and trade reporting
rules. these standards, requirements and rules are similarly
implemented, under the same directives, throughout the eu.
goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl), our regulated japanese
broker-dealer,
is subject to the capital requirements imposed by japans
financial services agency. as of november2008, gsjcl was
in compliance with its capital adequacy requirements. gsjcl is
also regulated by the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka securities
exchange, the tokyo financial exchange, the japan securities
dealers association, the tokyo commodity exchange and the
ministry of economy, trade and industry in japan.
table of contents
also in asia, the securities and futures commission in hong
kong, the monetary authority of singapore, the china securities
regulatory commission, the korean financial supervisory service,
the reserve bank of india and the securities and exchange board
of india, among others, regulate various of our subsidiaries and
also have capital standards and other requirements comparable to
the rules of the sec.
various goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking and
regulatory authorities in other
non-u.s.countries
in which goldman sachs operates, including, among others, brazil
and dubai. in addition, certain of our insurance subsidiaries
are regulated by lloyds (which is, in turn, regulated by
the fsa) and by the bermuda monetary authority.
regulations
applicable in and outside the united states
the u.s.and
non-u.s.government
agencies, regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations,
as well as state securities commissions and other state
regulators in the united states, are empowered to conduct
administrative proceedings that can result in censure, fine, the
issuance of cease and desist orders, or the suspension or
expulsion of a
broker-dealer
or its directors, officers or employees. from time to time, our
subsidiaries have been subject to investigations and
proceedings, and sanctions have been imposed for infractions of
various regulations relating to our activities, none of which
has had a material adverse effect on us or our businesses.
the research areas of investment banks have been and remain the
subject of regulatory scrutiny. the sec and finra have rules
governing research analysts, including rules imposing
restrictions on the interaction between equity research analysts
and investment banking personnel at member securities firms.
various
non-u.s.jurisdictions
have imposed both substantive and disclosure-based requirements
with respect to research and may impose additional regulations.
in 2003, gs&co. agreed to a global settlement with certain
federal and state securities regulators and self-regulatory
organizations to resolve investigations into equity research
analysts alleged conflicts of interest. the global
settlement includes certain restrictions and undertakings that
have imposed additional costs and limitations on the conduct of
our businesses, including restrictions on the interaction
between research and investment banking areas.
in connection with the research settlement, we have also
subscribed to a voluntary initiative imposing restrictions on
the allocation of shares in initial public offerings to
executives and directors of public companies. the fsa in the
united kingdom has imposed requirements on the conduct of the
allocation process in equity and fixed income securities
offerings (including initial public offerings and secondary
distributions). the sec, the fsa, finra and other u.s.or
non-u.s.regulators
may in the future adopt additional and more stringent rules with
respect to offering procedures and the management of conflicts
of interest, and we cannot fully predict the effect that any new
requirements will have on our business.
our investment management businesses are subject to significant
regulation in numerous jurisdictions around the world relating
to, among other things, the safeguarding of client assets and
our management of client funds.
as discussed above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to
regulatory capital requirements in jurisdictions throughout the
world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold
capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency
requirements or internal policies, including policies concerning
the minimum amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based
upon its underlying risk.
certain of our businesses are subject to compliance with
regulations enacted by u.s.federal and state governments,
the european union or other jurisdictions
and/or
enacted by various regulatory organizations or exchanges
relating to the privacy of the information of clients, employees
or others, and any failure to comply with these regulations
could expose us to liability
and/or
reputational damage.
table of contents
item1a.risk
factors
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in
our businesses, including market, liquidity, credit,
operational, legal and regulatory risks. the following are some
of the more important factors that could affect our businesses.
our businesses
have been and may continue to be adversely affected by
conditions in the global financial markets and economic
conditions generally.
our businesses, by their nature, do not produce predictable
earnings, and all of our businesses are materially affected by
conditions in the global financial markets and economic
conditions generally. in the past twelve months, these
conditions have changed suddenly and negatively.
since mid-2007, and particularly during the second half of 2008,
the financial services industry and the securities markets
generally were materially and adversely affected by significant
declines in the values of nearly all asset classes and by a
serious lack of liquidity. this was initially triggered by
declines in the values of subprime mortgages, but spread to all
mortgage and real estate asset classes, to leveraged bank loans
and to nearly all asset classes, including equities. the global
markets have been characterized by substantially increased
volatility and
short-selling
and an overall loss of investor confidence, initially in
financial institutions, but more recently in companies in a
number of other industries and in the broader markets. the
decline in asset values has caused increases in margin calls for
investors, requirements that derivatives counterparties post
additional collateral and redemptions by mutual and hedge fund
investors, all of which have increased the downward pressure on
asset values and outflows of client funds across the financial
services industry. in addition, the increased redemptions and
unavailability of credit have required hedge funds and others to
rapidly reduce leverage, which has increased volatility and
further contributed to the decline in asset values.
market conditions have also led to the failure or merger of a
number of prominent financial institutions. financial
institution failures or near-failures have resulted in further
losses as a consequence of defaults on securities issued by them
and defaults under bilateral derivatives and other contracts
entered into with such entities as counterparties. furthermore,
declining asset values, defaults on mortgages and consumer
loans, and the lack of market and investor confidence, as well
as other factors, have all combined to increase credit default
swap spreads, to cause rating agencies to lower credit ratings,
and to otherwise increase the cost and decrease the availability
of liquidity, despite very significant declines in central bank
borrowing rates and other government actions. banks and other
lenders have suffered significant losses and have become
reluctant to lend, even on a secured basis, due to the increased
risk of default and the impact of declining asset values on the
value of collateral. the markets for securitized debt offerings
backed by mortgages, loans, credit card receivables and other
assets have for the most part been closed.
in 2008, governments, regulators and central banks in the united
states and worldwide have taken numerous steps to increase
liquidity and to restore investor confidence, but asset values
have continued to decline and access to liquidity continues to
be very limited.
we have long proprietary positions in a number of
our businesses. these positions are accounted for at fair value,
and the declines in the values of assets have had a direct and
large negative impact on our earnings in fiscal 2008. revenues
from our asset management and merchant banking businesses were
also negatively impacted by declines in the values of assets
managed for our clients.
the ongoing liquidity crisis and the loss of confidence in
financial institutions has increased our cost of funding and
limited our access to some of our traditional sources of
liquidity, including both secured and unsecured borrowings.
while the numerous steps taken by governments, regulators and
central banks have helped reduce these funding costs somewhat
and increase our access to traditional and new sources of
liquidity, increases in funding costs and limitations on our
access to liquidity have
table of contents
negatively impacted our earnings and our ability to engage in
certain activities. in particular, in the latter half of 2008,
we were unable to raise significant amounts of
long-term
unsecured debt in the public markets, other than as a result of
the issuance of securities guaranteed by the fdic under the
tlgp. we are able to have outstanding approximately
$35billion of debt under the tlgp that is issued prior to
june30,2009. it is unclear when we will regain
access to the public
long-term
unsecured debt markets on customary terms or whether any similar
program will be available after the tlgps scheduled
june2009 expiration. however, we continue to have access
to
short-term
funding and to a number of sources of secured funding, both in
the private markets and through various government and central
bank sponsored initiatives. in december2008, moodys
investors service downgraded our
long-term
debt credit rating and standard& poors
downgraded both our
long-term
and
short-term
debt credit ratings, in each case with an outlook of
negative.
we have been able to fund our operations during fiscal 2008. our
global core excess (our cash and cash equivalent positions
maintained to ensure
short-term
liquidity) and our capital ratios are at levels significantly
higher than in the past. nevertheless, our credit spreads have
widened and the average maturity of our new funding has
decreased. recently, we have relied to a significant extent for
our
long-term
unsecured funding on emergency funding programs implemented by
governments and central banks. it is unclear whether or for how
long these facilities will be extended and what impact
termination of these facilities could have on our ability to
access funding. see managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of
operations liquidity and funding risk in
partii, item7 of our annual report on
form10-k.
furthermore, the increased riskiness of assets due to increases
in the volatility of asset prices, coupled with market concerns
about the levels of financial institution leverage ratios, as
well as fewer attractive business opportunities, have caused us
to significantly decrease the size of our balance sheet and to
increase the size of our global core excess. both of these steps
may have a negative effect on our profitability, until reversed.
concerns about financial institution profitability and solvency
as a result of general market conditions, particularly in the
credit markets, together with the forced merger or failure of a
number of major commercial and investment banks, have at times
caused a number of our clients to reduce the level of business
that they do with us, either because of concerns about the
safety of their assets held by us or simply arising from a
desire to diversify their risk or for other reasons. some
clients have withdrawn some of the funds held at our firm or
transferred them from deposits with gs bank usa to other types
of assets (in many cases leaving those assets in their brokerage
accounts held with us). some counterparties have at times
refused to enter into certain derivatives and other
long-term
transactions with us or have requested additional collateral.
these instances were more prevalent during periods when the lack
of confidence in financial institutions was most widespread and
have become significantly less frequent in recent months in the
wake of government and central bank actions, greater
understanding of client account protections and higher limits of
fdic insurance. in addition, we have acquired some new clients
as a result of the difficulties experienced by other financial
institutions.
during the fourth quarter of 2008, we raised $20.75billion
in equity, comprised of a $5.75billion public common stock
offering, a $5billion preferred stock and warrant issuance
to berkshire hathaway inc. and certain affiliates and a
$10billion preferred stock and warrant issuance under the
u.s. treasurys tarp capital purchase program. while this
additional capital provides further funding to our business and
we believe has improved investor perceptions with regard to our
financial position, it has increased our equity and the number
of actual and diluted outstanding shares of our common stock as
well as our preferred dividend requirements, which will reduce
our earnings per share and the return on our equity unless our
earnings increase sufficiently.
in addition, as of the end of 2008, the united states, europe
and japan are all in a recession. business activity across a
wide range of industries and regions is greatly reduced and
local governments and many companies are in serious difficulty
due to the lack of consumer spending and
table of contents
the lack of liquidity in the credit markets. unemployment has
increased significantly. while lower interest rates, increased
volatility and substantial increases in trading volumes have
positively impacted earnings in a number of our trading
businesses, declines in asset values, the lack of liquidity,
general uncertainty about economic and market activities and a
lack of consumer, investor and ceo confidence have negatively
impacted many of our other businesses, particularly our
investment banking, merchant banking, asset management, credit
products, mortgage, leveraged lending and equity principal
strategies businesses. in particular, our investment banking
business has been affected during the last twelve months by the
decrease in equity and debt underwritings and the decline in
both announced and completed mergers and acquisitions.
our financial performance is highly dependent on the environment
in which our businesses operate. a favorable business
environment is generally characterized by, among other factors,
high global gross domestic product growth, transparent, liquid
and efficient capital markets, low inflation, high business and
investor confidence, stable geopolitical conditions, and strong
business earnings. unfavorable or uncertain economic and market
conditions can be caused by: declines in economic growth,
business activity or investor or business confidence;
limitations on the availability or increases in the cost of
credit and capital; increases in inflation, interest rates,
exchange rate volatility, default rates or the price of basic
commodities; outbreaks of hostilities or other geopolitical
instability; corporate, political or other scandals that reduce
investor confidence in capital markets; natural disasters or
pandemics; or a combination of these or other factors.
overall, during fiscal 2008, the business environment has been
extremely adverse for many of our businesses and there can be no
assurance that these conditions will improve in the near term.
until they do, we expect our results of operations to be
adversely affected.
our businesses
have been and may continue to be adversely affected by declining
asset values.
many of our businesses, such as our merchant banking businesses,
our mortgages, leveraged loan and credit products businesses in
our ficc segment, and our equity principal strategies business,
have net long positions in debt securities, loans,
derivatives, mortgages, equities (including private equity) and
most other asset classes. in addition, many of our
market-making
and other businesses in which we act as a principal to
facilitate our clients activities, including our
specialist businesses, commit large amounts of capital to
maintain trading positions in interest rate and credit products,
as well as currencies, commodities and equities. because nearly
all of these investing and trading positions are
marked-to-market
on a daily basis, declines in asset values directly and
immediately impact our earnings, unless we have effectively
hedged our exposures to such declines. in certain
circumstances (particularly in the case of leveraged loans and
private equities or other securities that are not freely
tradable or lack established and liquid trading markets), it may
not be possible or economic to hedge such exposures and to the
extent that we do so the hedge may be ineffective or may greatly
reduce our ability to profit from increases in the values of the
assets. sudden declines and significant volatility in the prices
of assets may substantially curtail or eliminate the trading
markets for certain assets, which may make it very difficult to
sell, hedge or value such assets. the inability to sell or
effectively hedge assets reduces our ability to limit losses in
such positions and the difficulty in valuing assets may increase
our
risk-weighted
assets which requires us to maintain additional capital and
increases our funding costs.
in our specialist businesses, we are obligated by stock exchange
rules to maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing
shares in a declining market. in markets where asset values are
declining and in volatile markets, this results in trading
losses and an increased need for liquidity.
we receive
asset-based
management fees based on the value of our clients
portfolios or investment in funds managed by us and, in some
cases, we also receive incentive fees based on increases in the
value of such investments. declines in asset values reduce the
value of our clients portfolios or fund assets, which in
turn reduce the fees we earn for managing such assets.
table of contents
we post collateral to support our obligations and receive
collateral to support the obligations of our clients and
counterparties in connection with our trading businesses. when
the value of the assets posted as collateral declines, the party
posting the collateral may need to provide additional collateral
or, if possible, reduce its trading position. a classic example
of such a situation is a margin call in connection
with a brokerage account. therefore, declines in the value of
asset classes used as collateral mean that either the cost of
funding trading positions is increased or the size of trading
positions is decreased. if we are the party providing collateral
this can increase our costs and reduce our profitability and if
we are the party receiving collateral this can also reduce our
profitability by reducing the level of business done with our
clients and counterparties. in addition, volatile or less liquid
markets increase the difficulty of valuing assets which can lead
to costly and time-consuming disputes over asset values and the
level of required collateral, as well as increased credit risk
to the recipient of the collateral due to delays in receiving
adequate collateral.
our businesses
have been and may continue to be adversely affected by
disruptions in the credit markets, including reduced access to
credit and higher costs of obtaining credit.
widening credit spreads, as well as significant declines in the
availability of credit, have adversely affected our ability to
borrow on a secured and unsecured basis and may continue to do
so. we fund ourselves on an unsecured basis by issuing
commercial paper, promissory notes and
long-term
debt, or by obtaining bank loans or lines of credit. we seek to
finance many of our assets, including our less liquid assets, on
a secured basis, including by entering into repurchase
agreements. disruptions in the credit markets make it harder and
more expensive to obtain funding for our businesses. if our
available funding is limited or we are forced to fund our
operations at a higher cost, these conditions may require us to
curtail our business activities and increase our cost of
funding, both of which could reduce our profitability,
particularly in our businesses that involve investing, lending
and taking principal positions, including market making.
our clients engaging in mergers and acquisitions often rely on
access to the secured and unsecured credit markets to finance
their transactions. the lack of available credit and the
increased cost of credit can adversely affect the size, volume
and timing of our clients merger and acquisition
transactions particularly large
transactions and adversely affect our financial
advisory and underwriting businesses.
in addition, we may incur significant unrealized gains or losses
due solely to changes in our credit spreads or those of third
parties, as these changes may affect the fair value of our
derivative instruments and the debt securities that we hold or
issue.
our businesses
have been and may continue to be affected by changes in the
levels of market volatility.
certain of our trading businesses depend on market volatility to
provide trading and arbitrage opportunities, and decreases in
volatility may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect
the results of these businesses. on the other hand, increased
volatility, while it can increase trading volumes and spreads,
also increases risk as measured by var and may expose us to
increased risks in connection with our
market-making
and proprietary businesses or cause us to reduce the size of
these businesses in order to avoid increasing our var. limiting
the size of our
market-making
positions and investing businesses can adversely affect our
profitability, even though spreads are widening and we may earn
more on each trade. in periods when volatility is increasing,
but asset values are declining significantly (as has been the
case recently), it may not be possible to sell assets at all or
it may only be possible to do so at steep discounts. in such
circumstances we may be forced to either take on additional risk
or to incur losses in order to decrease our var. in addition,
increases in volatility increase the level of our risk weighted
assets and increase our capital requirements which increases our
funding costs.
table of contents
our businesses
have been adversely affected and may continue to be adversely
affected by market uncertainty or lack of confidence among
investors and ceos due to general declines in economic activity
and other unfavorable economic, geopolitical or market
conditions.
our investment banking business has been and may continue to be
adversely affected by market conditions. poor economic
conditions and other adverse geopolitical conditions can
adversely affect and have adversely affected investor and ceo
confidence, resulting in significant
industry-wide
declines in the size and number of underwritings and of
financial advisory transactions, which could continue to have an
adverse effect on our revenues and our profit margins. in
particular, because a significant portion of our investment
banking revenues are derived from our participation in large
transactions, a decline in the number of large transactions
would adversely affect our investment banking business.
in certain circumstances, market uncertainty or general declines
in market or economic activity may affect our trading businesses
by decreasing levels of overall activity or by decreasing
volatility, but at other times market uncertainty and even
declining economic activity may result in higher trading volumes
or higher spreads or both.
market uncertainty, volatility and adverse economic conditions,
as well as declines in asset values, may cause our clients to
transfer their assets out of our funds or other products or
their brokerage accounts and result in reduced net revenues,
principally in our asset management business. to the extent that
clients do not withdraw their funds, they may invest them in
products that generate less fee income.
our investing
businesses may be affected by the poor investment performance of
our investment products.
poor investment returns in our asset management business, due to
either general market conditions or underperformance (against
the performance of benchmarks or of our competitors) by funds or
accounts that we manage or investment products that we design or
sell, affects our ability to retain existing assets and to
attract new clients or additional assets from existing clients.
this could affect the asset management and incentive fees that
we earn on assets under management or the commissions that we
earn for selling other investment products, such as structured
notes or derivatives.
we have in the past provided financial support to certain of our
investment products in difficult market circumstances and, at
our discretion, we may decide to do so in the future for
reputational or business reasons, including through equity
investments or cash infusions.
we may incur
losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and
strategies.
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a risk
and control framework encompassing a variety of separate but
complementary financial, credit, operational, compliance and
legal reporting systems, internal controls, management review
processes and other mechanisms. our trading risk management
process seeks to balance our ability to profit from trading
positions with our exposure to potential losses. while we employ
a broad and diversified set of risk monitoring and risk
mitigation techniques, those techniques and the judgments that
accompany their application cannot anticipate every economic and
financial outcome or the specifics and timing of such outcomes.
thus, we may, in the course of our activities, incur losses.
recent market conditions have involved unprecedented
dislocations and highlight the limitations inherent in using
historical data to manage risk.
the models that we use to assess and control our risk exposures
reflect assumptions about the degrees of correlation or lack
thereof among prices of various asset classes or other market
indicators. in times of market stress or other unforeseen
circumstances, such as occurred during 2008, previously
uncorrelated indicators may become correlated, or conversely
previously correlated indicators may move in different
directions. these types of market movements have at times
limited the effectiveness of our hedging strategies and have
caused us to incur significant losses, and they
table of contents
may do so in the future. these changes in correlation can be
exacerbated where other market participants are using risk or
trading models with assumptions or algorithms that are similar
to ours. in these and other cases, it may be difficult to reduce
our risk positions due to the activity of other market
participants or widespread market dislocations, including
circumstances where asset values are declining significantly or
no market exists for certain assets. to the extent that we make
investments directly through various of our businesses in
securities, including private equity, that do not have an
established liquid trading market or are otherwise subject to
restrictions on sale or hedging, we may not be able to reduce
our positions and therefore reduce our risk associated with such
positions. in addition, we invest our own capital in our
merchant banking, alternative investment and infrastructure
funds, and limitations on our ability to withdraw some or all of
our investments in these funds, whether for legal, reputational
or other reasons, may make it more difficult for us to control
the risk exposures relating to these investments.
for a further discussion of our risk management policies and
procedures, see managements discussion and analysis
of financial condition and results of operations
risk management in partii, item7 of our annual
report on
form10-k.
our liquidity,
profitability and businesses may be adversely affected by an
inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets
or by a reduction in our credit ratings or by an increase in our
credit spreads.
liquidity is essential to our businesses. our liquidity may be
impaired by an inability to access secured
and/or
unsecured debt markets, an inability to access funds from our
subsidiaries, an inability to sell assets or redeem our
investments, or unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this
situation may arise due to circumstances that we may be unable
to control, such as a general market disruption or an
operational problem that affects third parties or us, or even by
the perception among market participants that we, or other
market participants, are experiencing greater liquidity risk.
the financial instruments that we hold and the contracts to
which we are a party are increasingly complex, as we employ
structured products to benefit our clients and ourselves, and
these complex structured products often do not have readily
available markets to access in times of liquidity stress. our
investing activities may lead to situations where the holdings
from these activities represent a significant portion of
specific markets, which could restrict liquidity for our
positions. further, our ability to sell assets may be impaired
if other market participants are seeking to sell similar assets
at the same time, as is likely to occur in a liquidity or other
market crisis. in addition, financial institutions with which we
interact may exercise set-off rights or the right to require
additional collateral, including in difficult market conditions,
which could further impair our access to liquidity.
our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a reduction
in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and
competitive position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our
access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under
certain bilateral provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions,
counterparties could be permitted to terminate contracts with
goldman sachs or require us to post additional collateral.
termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our
liquidity by requiring us to find other sources of financing or
to make significant cash payments or securities movements.
our cost of obtaining
long-term
unsecured funding is directly related to our credit spreads (the
amount in excess of the interest rate of u.s.treasury
securities (or other benchmark securities) of the same maturity
that we need to pay to our debt investors). increases in our
credit spreads can significantly increase our cost of this
funding. changes in credit spreads are continuous,
market-driven,
and subject at times to unpredictable and highly volatile
movements. credit spreads are influenced by market perceptions
of our creditworthiness. in addition, our credit spreads may be
influenced by movements in the costs to purchasers of credit
default swaps referenced to our
table of contents
long-term
debt. the market for credit default swaps is relatively new,
although very large, and it has proven to be extremely volatile
and currently lacks a high degree of structure or transparency.
group inc. is
a holding company and is dependent for liquidity on payments
from its subsidiaries, which are subject to
restrictions.
group inc. is a holding company and, therefore, depends on
dividends, distributions and other payments from its
subsidiaries to fund dividend payments and to fund all payments
on its obligations, including debt obligations. many of our
subsidiaries, including our
broker-dealer,
bank and insurance subsidiaries, are subject to laws that
restrict dividend payments or authorize regulatory bodies to
block or reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to
group inc. restrictions or regulatory action of that kind could
impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on
its obligations, including debt obligations, or dividend
payments. in addition, group inc.s right to participate in
a distribution of assets upon a subsidiarys liquidation or
reorganization is subject to the prior claims of the
subsidiarys creditors.
furthermore, group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations
of gs&co., gs bank usa and gs bank europe, subject to
certain exceptions, and has pledged significant assets to gs
bank usa to support obligations to gs bank usa. these guarantees
may require group inc. to provide substantial funds or assets to
its subsidiaries or their creditors and counterparties at a time
when group inc. is in need of liquidity to fund its own
obligations. see business regulation in
parti, item1 of our annual report on
form10-k.
our
businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely
affected by deterioration in the credit quality of, or defaults
by, third parties who owe us money, securities or other assets
or whose securities or obligations we hold.
the amount and duration of our credit exposures have been
increasing over the past several years, as have the breadth and
size of the entities to which we have credit exposures. we are
exposed to the risk that third parties that owe us money,
securities or other assets will not perform their obligations.
these parties may default on their obligations to us due to
bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational failure or other
reasons. a failure of a significant market participant, or even
concerns about a default by such an institution, could lead to
significant liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other
institutions, which in turn could adversely affect us.
we are also subject to the risk that our rights against third
parties may not be enforceable in all circumstances. in
addition, deterioration in the credit quality of third parties
whose securities or obligations we hold could result in losses
and/or
adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or otherwise use
those securities or obligations for liquidity purposes. a
significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our
counterparties could also have a negative impact on our results.
while in many cases we are permitted to require additional
collateral from counterparties that experience financial
difficulty, disputes may arise as to the amount of collateral we
are entitled to receive and the value of pledged assets. the
termination of contracts and the foreclosure on collateral may
subject us to claims for the improper exercise of our rights.
default rates, downgrades and disputes with counterparties as to
the valuation of collateral increase significantly in times of
market stress and illiquidity.
as part of our clearing business, we finance our client
positions, and we could be held responsible for the defaults or
misconduct of our clients. although we regularly review credit
exposures to specific clients and counterparties and to specific
industries, countries and regions that we believe may present
credit concerns, default risk may arise from events or
circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee.
table of contents
concentration
of risk increases the potential for significant
losses.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant
losses in our
market-making,
proprietary trading, investing, block trading, merchant banking,
underwriting and lending businesses. this risk may increase to
the extent we expand our proprietary trading and investing
businesses or commit capital to facilitate client-driven
business. the number and size of such transactions may affect
our results of operations in a given period. moreover, because
of concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when
economic and market conditions are generally favorable for our
competitors. disruptions in the credit markets can make it
difficult to hedge these credit exposures effectively or
economically. in addition, we extend large commitments as part
of our credit origination activities. our inability to reduce
our credit risk by selling, syndicating or securitizing these
positions, including during periods of market stress, could
negatively affect our results of operations due to a decrease in
the fair value of the positions, including due to the insolvency
or bankruptcy of the borrower, as well as the loss of revenues
associated with selling such securities or loans.
in the ordinary course of business, we may be subject to a
concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty,
borrower or issuer, and a failure or downgrade of, or default
by, such entity could negatively impact our businesses, perhaps
materially, and the systems by which we set limits and monitor
the level of our credit exposure to individual entities,
industries and countries may not function as we have
anticipated. while our activities expose us to many different
industries and counterparties, we routinely execute a high
volume of transactions with counterparties in the financial
services industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial
banks, and investment funds. this has resulted in significant
credit concentration with respect to this industry.
the financial
services industry is highly competitive.
the financial services industry and all of our
businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect
them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number of
factors, including transaction execution, our products and
services, innovation, reputation, creditworthiness and price.
over time, there has been substantial consolidation and
convergence among companies in the financial services industry.
this trend accelerated over the course of the past year as a
result of numerous mergers and asset acquisitions among industry
participants. this trend has also hastened the globalization of
the securities and other financial services markets. as a
result, we have had to commit capital to support our
international operations and to execute large global
transactions. to the extent we expand into new business areas
and new geographic regions, we will face competitors with more
experience and more established relationships with clients,
regulators and industry participants in the relevant market,
which could adversely affect our ability to expand.
pricing and other competitive pressures in our investment
banking business, as well as our other businesses, have
continued to increase, particularly in situations where some of
our competitors may seek to increase market share by reducing
prices. for example, in connection with investment banking and
other assignments, we have experienced pressure to extend and
price credit at levels that may not always fully compensate us
for the risks we take.
we face
enhanced risks as new business initiatives lead us to transact
with a broader array of clients and counterparties and expose us
to new asset classes and new markets.
a number of our recent and planned business initiatives and
expansions of existing businesses may bring us into contact,
directly or indirectly, with individuals and entities that are
not within our traditional client and counterparty base and
expose us to new asset classes and new markets. these business
activities expose us to new and enhanced risks, including risks
associated with dealing with governmental entities, reputational
concerns arising from dealing with less sophisticated
counterparties and investors, greater regulatory scrutiny of
these activities, increased
credit-related,
sovereign and operational risks, risks arising from accidents or
acts of terrorism, and reputational concerns with the manner in
which these assets are being operated or held.
table of contents
derivative
transactions may expose us to unexpected risk and potential
losses.
we are party to a large number of derivative transactions,
including credit derivatives. many of these derivative
instruments are individually negotiated and
non-standardized,
which can make exiting, transferring or settling the position
difficult. many credit derivatives require that we deliver to
the counterparty the underlying security, loan or other
obligation in order to receive payment. in a number of cases, we
do not hold the underlying security, loan or other obligation
and may not be able to obtain, the underlying security, loan or
other obligation. this could cause us to forfeit the payments
due to us under these contracts or result in settlement delays
with the attendant credit and operational risk as well as
increased costs to the firm.
derivative contracts and other transactions entered into with
third parties are not always confirmed by the counterparties on
a timely basis. while the transaction remains unconfirmed, we
are subject to heightened credit and operational risk and in the
event of a default may find it more difficult to enforce the
contract. in addition, as new and more complex derivative
products are created, covering a wider array of underlying
credit and other instruments, disputes about the terms of the
underlying contracts could arise, which could impair our ability
to effectively manage our risk exposures from these products and
subject us to increased costs. any regulatory effort to create
an exchange or trading platform for credit derivatives and other
otc derivative contracts, or a market shift toward standardized
derivatives, could reduce the risk associated with such
transactions, but under certain circumstances could also limit
our ability to develop derivatives that best suit the needs of
our clients and ourselves and adversely affect our profitability.
a failure in
our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third
parties, could impair our liquidity, disrupt our businesses,
result in the disclosure of confidential information, damage our
reputation and cause losses.
our businesses are highly dependent on our ability to process
and monitor, on a daily basis, a very large number of
transactions, many of which are highly complex, across numerous
and diverse markets in many currencies. these transactions, as
well as the information technology services we provide to
clients, often must adhere to client-specific guidelines, as
well as legal and regulatory standards. as our client base and
our geographical reach expands, developing and maintaining our
operational systems and infrastructure becomes increasingly
challenging. our financial, accounting, data processing or other
operating systems and facilities may fail to operate properly or
become disabled as a result of events that are wholly or
partially beyond our control, such as a spike in transaction
volume, adversely affecting our ability to process these
transactions or provide these services. in addition, we also
face the risk of operational failure, termination or capacity
constraints of any of the clearing agents, exchanges, clearing
houses or other financial intermediaries we use to facilitate
our securities transactions, and as our interconnectivity with
our clients grows, we increasingly face the risk of operational
failure with respect to our clients systems. in recent
years, there has been significant consolidation among clearing
agents, exchanges and clearing houses, which has increased our
exposure to operational failure, termination or capacity
constraints of the particular financial intermediaries that we
use and could affect our ability to find adequate and
cost-effective
alternatives in the event of any such failure, termination or
constraint. industry consolidation, whether among market
participants or financial intermediaries, increases the risk of
operational failure as disparate complex systems need to be
integrated, often on an accelerated basis. furthermore, the
interconnectivity of multiple financial institutions with
central agents, exchanges and clearing houses increases the risk
that an operational failure at one institution may cause an
industry-wide
operational failure that could materially impact our ability to
conduct business. any such failure, termination or constraint
could adversely affect our ability to effect transactions,
service our clients, manage our exposure to risk or expand our
businesses or result in financial loss or liability to our
clients, impairment of our liquidity, disruption of our
businesses, regulatory intervention or reputational damage.
table of contents
despite the resiliency plans and facilities we have in place,
our ability to conduct business may be adversely impacted by a
disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses
and the communities in which we are located. this may include a
disruption involving electrical, communications, internet,
transportation or other services used by us or third parties
with which we conduct business. these disruptions may occur as a
result of events that affect only our buildings or the buildings
of such third parties, or as a result of events with a broader
impact globally, regionally or in the cities where those
buildings are located. nearly all of our employees in our
primary locations, including the new york metropolitan area,
london, frankfurt, hong kong, tokyo and bangalore, work in close
proximity to one another, in one or more buildings.
notwithstanding our efforts to maintain business continuity,
given that our headquarters and the largest concentration of our
employees are in the new york metropolitan area, depending on
the intensity and longevity of the event, a catastrophic event
impacting our new york metropolitan area offices could very
negatively affect our business. if a disruption occurs in one
location and our employees in that location are unable to occupy
our offices or communicate with or travel to other locations,
our ability to service and interact with our clients may suffer,
and we may not be able to successfully implement contingency
plans that depend on communication or travel.
our operations rely on the secure processing, storage and
transmission of confidential and other information in our
computer systems and networks. although we take protective
measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances warrant,
our computer systems, software and networks may be vulnerable to
unauthorized access, computer viruses or other malicious code
and other events that could have a security impact. if one or
more of such events occur, this potentially could jeopardize our
or our clients or counterparties confidential and
other information processed and stored in, and transmitted
through, our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause
interruptions or malfunctions in our, our clients, our
counterparties or third parties operations, which
could result in significant losses or reputational damage. we
may be required to expend significant additional resources to
modify our protective measures or to investigate and remediate
vulnerabilities or other exposures, and we may be subject to
litigation and financial losses that are either not insured
against or not fully covered through any insurance maintained by
us.
we routinely transmit and receive personal, confidential and
proprietary information by email and other electronic means. we
have discussed and worked with clients, vendors, service
providers, counterparties and other third parties to develop
secure transmission capabilities, but we do not have, and may be
unable to put in place, secure capabilities with all of our
clients, vendors, service providers, counterparties and other
third parties and we may not be able to ensure that these third
parties have appropriate controls in place to protect the
confidentiality of the information. an interception, misuse or
mishandling of personal, confidential or proprietary information
being sent to or received from a client, vendor, service
provider, counterparty or other third party could result in
legal liability, regulatory action and reputational harm.
conflicts of
interest are increasing and a failure to appropriately identify
and deal with conflicts of interest could adversely affect our
businesses.
as we have expanded the scope of our businesses and our client
base, we increasingly must address potential conflicts of
interest, including situations where our services to a
particular client or our own investments or other interests
conflict, or are perceived to conflict, with the interests of
another client, as well as situations where one or more of our
businesses have access to material
non-public
information that may not be shared with other businesses within
the firm and situations where we may be a creditor of an entity
with which we also have an advisory or other relationship.
our regulators have the ability to scrutinize our activities for
potential conflicts of interest, including through detailed
examinations of specific transactions. our status as a bank
holding company subjects us to heightened regulation and
increased regulatory scrutiny by the federal reserve board with
respect to transactions between gs bank usa and entities that
are or could be seen as affiliates of ours.
table of contents
we have extensive procedures and controls that are designed to
identify and address conflicts of interest, including those
designed to prevent the improper sharing of information among
our businesses. however, appropriately identifying and dealing
with conflicts of interest is complex and difficult, and our
reputation, which is one of our most important assets, could be
damaged and the willingness of clients to enter into
transactions in which such a conflict might arise may be
affected if we fail, or appear to fail, to identify and deal
appropriately with conflicts of interest. in addition, potential
or perceived conflicts could give rise to litigation or
enforcement actions.
our businesses
and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive
regulation around the world.
as a participant in the financial services industry, we are
subject to extensive regulation in jurisdictions around the
world. we face the risk of significant intervention by
regulatory authorities in all jurisdictions in which we conduct
our businesses. among other things, we could be fined,
prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities or
subject to limitations or conditions on our business activities.
in recent years, firms in the financial services industry have
been operating in a difficult regulatory environment. the
industry has experienced increased scrutiny from a variety of
regulators, both within and outside the united states. penalties
and fines sought by regulatory authorities have increased
substantially over the last several years, and certain
regulators have been more likely in recent years to commence
enforcement actions.
in addition, new laws or regulations or changes in enforcement
of existing laws or regulations applicable to our businesses or
those of our clients may adversely affect our businesses. recent
market disruptions have led to numerous proposals for changes in
the regulation of the financial services industry, including
significant additional regulation. regulatory changes could lead
to business disruptions, could impact the value of assets that
we hold or the scope or profitability of our business
activities, could require us to change certain of our business
practices and could expose us to additional costs (including
compliance costs) and liabilities as well as reputational harm,
and, to the extent the regulations strictly control the
activities of financial services firms, make it more difficult
for us to distinguish ourselves from competitors. for a
discussion of the extensive regulation to which our businesses
are subject, see business regulation in
parti, item1 of our annual report on
form10-k.
our status as a bank holding company and the operation of our
lending and other businesses through gs bank usa subject us to
additional regulation and limitations on our activities, as
described in business regulation
banking regulation in parti, item1 of our
annual report on
form10-k,
as well as some regulatory uncertainty as we apply banking
regulations and practices to many of our businesses. the
application of these regulations and practices may present us
and our regulators with new or novel issues.
our firm is subject to regulatory capital requirements at a
number of levels, as described above under
business regulation in parti,
item1 of our annual report on
form10-k.
as a bank holding company, we will be subject to capital
requirements based on basel i as opposed to the requirements
based on basel ii that applied to us as a cse. complying with
these requirements may require us to liquidate assets or raise
capital in a manner that adversely increases our funding costs
or otherwise adversely affects our shareholders and creditors.
in addition, failure to meet minimum capital requirements can
initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary
actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct
material adverse effect on our financial condition.
our agreements
with the u.s.treasury and berkshire hathaway inc. impose
restrictions and obligations on us that limit our ability to
increase dividends, repurchase our common stock or preferred
stock and access the equity capital markets.
in october2008, we issued preferred stock and a warrant to
purchase our common stock to the u.s.treasury as part of
its tarp capital purchase program. prior to
october28,2011, unless we have redeemed all of the
preferred stock or the u.s.treasury has transferred all of
the preferred stock to a third party, the consent of the
u.s.treasury will be required for us to, among other
things,
table of contents
increase our common stock dividend or repurchase our common
stock or other preferred stock (with certain exceptions,
including the repurchase of our common stock to offset share
dilution from
equity-based
employee compensation awards). we have also granted registration
rights and offering facilitation rights to the
u.s.treasury and to berkshire hathaway inc. pursuant to
which we have agreed to
lock-up
periods during which we would be unable to issue equity
securities.
substantial
legal liability or significant regulatory action against us
could have material adverse financial effects or cause us
significant reputational harm, which in turn could seriously
harm our business prospects.
we face significant legal risks in our businesses, and the
volume of claims and amount of damages and penalties claimed in
litigation and regulatory proceedings against financial
institutions remain high. see legal proceedings in
parti, item3 of our annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of certain legal proceedings in which we are
involved. our experience has been that legal claims by customers
and clients increase in a market downturn. in addition,
employment-related claims typically increase in periods when we
have reduced the total number of employees.
there have been a number of highly publicized cases involving
fraud or other misconduct by employees in the financial services
industry in recent years, and we run the risk that employee
misconduct could occur. it is not always possible to deter or
prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we take to
prevent and detect this activity may not be effective in all
cases.
the growth of
electronic trading and the introduction of new technology may
adversely affect our business and may increase
competition.
technology is fundamental to our business and our industry. the
growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new
technologies is changing our businesses and presenting us with
new challenges. securities, futures and options transactions are
increasingly occurring electronically, both on our own systems
and through other alternative trading systems, and it appears
that the trend toward alternative trading systems will continue
and probably accelerate. some of these alternative trading
systems compete with our trading businesses, including our
specialist businesses, and we may experience continued
competitive pressures in these and other areas. in addition, the
increased use by our clients of
low-cost
electronic trading systems and direct electronic access to
trading markets could cause a reduction in commissions and
spreads. as our clients increasingly use our systems to trade
directly in the markets, we may incur liabilities as a result of
their use of our order routing and execution infrastructure. the
nyses adoption and continued refinement of its hybrid
market for trading securities may increase pressure on our
equities business as clients execute more of their nyse-related
trades electronically. we have invested significant resources
into the development of electronic trading systems and expect to
continue to do so, but there is no assurance that the revenues
generated by these systems will yield an adequate return on our
investment, particularly given the relatively lower commissions
arising from electronic trades.
our businesses
may be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain
qualified employees.
our performance is largely dependent on the talents and efforts
of highly skilled individuals; therefore, our continued ability
to compete effectively in our businesses, to manage our
businesses effectively and to expand into new businesses and
geographic areas depends on our ability to attract new employees
and to retain and motivate our existing employees. competition
from within the financial services industry and from businesses
outside the financial services industry for qualified employees
has often been intense. this is particularly the case in
emerging markets, where we are often competing for qualified
employees with entities that have a significantly greater
presence or more extensive experience in the region.
table of contents
in fiscal 2008, we significantly reduced compensation levels. in
addition, the market price of our shares of our common stock
declined very significantly during the year. a substantial
portion of our annual bonus compensation paid to our senior
employees has in recent years been paid in the form of
equity-based
awards. in addition, we reduced the number of employees across
nearly all of our businesses during the latter portion of the
year. the combination of these events could adversely affect our
ability to hire and retain qualified employees.
our power
generation interests and related activities subject us to
extensive regulation, as well as environmental and other risks
associated with power generation activities.
the power generation facilities that we own and those that we
operate, as well as our other power-related activities, are
subject to extensive and evolving federal, state and local
energy, environmental and other governmental laws and
regulations, including environmental laws and regulations
relating to, among others, air quality, water quality, waste
management, natural resources, site remediation and health and
safety.
we may incur substantial costs (including being required to
cease or curtail operations of one or more of our power
generation facilities) in complying with current or future laws
and regulations relating to electric power generation and
wholesale sales and trading of electricity and natural gas,
including having to commit significant capital toward
environmental monitoring, installation of pollution control
equipment, payment of emission fees and carbon or other taxes,
and application for, and holding of, permits and licenses at our
power generation facilities. our power generation facilities are
also subject to the risk of unforeseen or catastrophic events,
many of which are outside of our control, including breakdown or
failure of power generation equipment, transmission lines or
other equipment or processes or other mechanical malfunctions,
performance below expected levels of output or efficiency,
terrorist attacks, natural disasters or other hostile or
catastrophic events. in addition, these facilities could be
adversely affected by the failure of any of our third party
suppliers or service providers to perform their contractual
obligations, including the failure to obtain raw materials
necessary for operation at reasonable prices. market conditions
or other factors could cause a failure to satisfy or obtain
waivers under agreements with third parties, including lenders
and utilities, which impose significant obligations on our
subsidiaries that own such facilities. in addition, we may not
have insurance against the risks that such facilities face or
the insurance that we have may be inadequate to cover our losses.
the occurrence of any of such events may prevent the affected
facilities from performing under applicable power sales
agreements, may impair their operations or financial results and
may result in litigation or other reputational harm.
in conducting
our businesses around the world, we are subject to political,
economic, legal, operational and other risks that are inherent
in operating in many countries.
in conducting our businesses and maintaining and supporting our
global operations, we are subject to risks of possible
nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital
controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental
actions, as well the outbreak of hostilities or acts of
terrorism. in many countries, the laws and regulations
applicable to the securities and financial services industries
and many of the transactions in which we are involved are
uncertain and evolving, and it may be difficult for us to
determine the exact requirements of local laws in every market.
any determination by local regulators that we have not acted in
compliance with the application of local laws in a particular
market or our failure to develop effective working relationships
with local regulators could have a significant and negative
effect not only on our businesses in that market but also on our
reputation generally. we are also subject to the enhanced risk
that transactions we structure might not be legally enforceable
in all cases.
our businesses and operations are increasingly expanding into
new regions throughout the world, including emerging markets,
and we expect this trend to continue. various emerging market
table of contents
countries have experienced severe economic and financial
disruptions, including significant devaluations of their
currencies, defaults or threatened defaults on sovereign debt,
capital and currency exchange controls, and low or negative
growth rates in their economies, as well as military activity or
acts of terrorism. the possible effects of any of these
conditions include an adverse impact on our businesses and
increased volatility in financial markets generally.
we may incur
losses as a result of unforeseen or catastrophic events,
including the emergence of a pandemic, terrorist attacks or
natural disasters.
the occurrence of unforeseen or catastrophic events, including
the emergence of a pandemic or other widespread health emergency
(or concerns over the possibility of such an emergency),
terrorist attacks or natural disasters, could create economic
and financial disruptions, could lead to operational
difficulties (including travel limitations) that could impair
our ability to manage our businesses, and could expose our
insurance subsidiaries to significant losses.
item1b.
unresolved
staff comments
there are no material unresolved written comments that were
received from the sec staff 180days or more before the end
of our fiscal year relating to our periodic or current reports
under the exchange act.
item2.
properties
our principal executive offices are located at 85broad
street, new york, new york, and comprise approximately one
million rentable square feet of leased space, pursuant to a
lease agreement expiring in june2011. we also occupy over
680,000 rentable square feet at one new york plaza under lease
agreements expiring primarily in 2010 (with options to renew for
up to five additional years), and we lease space at various
other locations in the new york metropolitan area. in total, we
lease approximately 3.7million rentable square feet in the
new york metropolitan area.
in august2005, we leased from battery park city authority
a parcel of land in lower manhattan, pursuant to a ground lease.
we are currently constructing a 2.1million gross square
foot office building on the site that will serve as our
headquarters. under the lease, battery park city authority holds
title to all improvements, including the office building,
subject to goldman sachs right of exclusive possession and
use until june2069, the expiration date of the lease.
under the terms of the ground lease, we made a lump-sum ground
rent payment in june2007 of $161million, which was
paid into escrow, to be released to the battery park city
authority pending performance of specified state and city
obligations. we are required to make additional periodic
payments during the term of the lease. we are obligated under
the ground lease to construct the office building by 2011
(subject to extensions in the case of force majeure) in
accordance with certain
pre-approved
design standards. construction began on the building in
november2005, and we expect construction completion and
initial occupancy of the building during 2009. the building is
projected to cost between $2.1billion and
$2.3billion, including acquisition, development, fitout
and furnishings, financing and other related costs.
we are receiving significant benefits from the city and state of
new york based on our agreement to construct our headquarters in
lower manhattan. these benefits are subject to recoupment or
recapture if we do not satisfy our obligations under these
agreements with the city and state of new york.
we have offices at 30 hudson street in jersey city, new jersey,
which we own and which include approximately 1.6million
gross square feet of office space, and we own over 575,000
square feet of additional office space spread among four
locations in new york and new jersey. we have additional offices
in the u.s.and elsewhere in the americas, which together
comprise approximately 2.9million rentable square feet of
leased space.
table of contents
in europe, the middle east and africa, we have offices that
total approximately 2.2million rentable square feet. our
european headquarters is located in london at peterborough
court, pursuant to a lease expiring in 2026. in total, we lease
approximately 1.6million rentable square feet in london
through various leases, relating to various properties.
in asia, we have offices that total approximately
1.5million rentable square feet. our headquarters in this
region are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in
hong kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently
lease approximately 415,000 rentable square feet, the majority
of which will expire in 2018. in hong kong, we currently lease
approximately 295,000 rentable square feet under lease
agreements, the majority of which will expire in 2011.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office
space held in excess of our current requirements. this excess
space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is
being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied
space that we may exit in the future. we regularly evaluate our
current and future space capacity in relation to current and
projected staffing levels. in 2008, we incurred exit costs of
$80million related to our office space. we may incur exit
costs in the future to the extent we (i)reduce our space
capacity or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties in
the locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of
existing space that had been held for potential growth. these
exit costs may be material to our results of operations in a
given period.
item3.
legal
proceedings
we are involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and
arbitration proceedings (including those described below)
concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of our
businesses. we believe, based on currently available
information, that the results of such proceedings, in the
aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our
financial condition, but might be material to our operating
results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the
operating results for such period. given the range of litigation
and investigations presently under way, our litigation expenses
can be expected to remain high.
ipo process
matters
group inc. and gs&co. are among the numerous financial
services companies that have been named as defendants in a
variety of lawsuits alleging improprieties in the process by
which those companies participated in the underwriting of public
offerings in recent years.
gs&co. has, together with other underwriters in certain
offerings as well as the issuers and certain of their officers
and directors, been named as a defendant in a number of related
lawsuits filed in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york alleging, among other things, that the
prospectuses for the offerings violated the federal securities
laws by failing to disclose the existence of alleged
arrangements tying allocations in certain offerings to higher
customer brokerage commission rates as well as purchase orders
in the aftermarket, and that the alleged arrangements resulted
in market manipulation. the federal district court denied a
motion to dismiss in all material respects relating to the
underwriter defendants and generally granted plaintiffs
motion for class certification in six focus cases.
the u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit reversed
the district courts order granting class certification,
denied plaintiffs applications for rehearing and rehearing
en banc, and remanded. on august14,2007, plaintiffs
amended their complaints in the six focus cases as
well as their master allegations for all such cases to reflect
new class related allegations. on september27,2007,
plaintiffs filed a new motion for class certification in the
district court, and on november14,2007, gs&co.
and the other defendants moved to dismiss the amended
complaints. following a mediation, a settlement in principle has
been reached, subject to negotiation of definitive documentation
and court approval.
gs&co. is among numerous underwriting firms named as
defendants in a number of complaints filed commencing
october3,2007, in the u.s.district court for
the western district of washington alleging violations of the
federal securities laws in connection with offerings of
securities for 16 issuers
table of contents
during 1999 and 2000. the complaints generally assert that the
underwriters, together with each issuers directors,
officers and principal shareholders, entered into purported
agreements to tie allocations in the offerings to increased
brokerage commissions and aftermarket purchase orders. the
complaints further allege that, based upon these and other
purported agreements, the underwriters violated the reporting
provisions of, and are subject to
short-swing
profit recovery under, section16 of the exchange act. on
october29,2007, the cases were reassigned to a
single district judge. on july25,2008, defendants
moved to dismiss the various complaints.
gs&co. has been named as a defendant in an action commenced
on may15,2002 in new york supreme court, new york
county, by an official committee of unsecured creditors on
behalf of etoys, inc., alleging that the firm intentionally
underpriced etoys, inc.s initial public offering. the
action seeks, among other things, unspecified compensatory
damages resulting from the alleged lower amount of offering
proceeds. the court granted gs&co.s motion to dismiss
as to five of the claims; plaintiff appealed from the dismissal
of the five claims, and gs&co. appealed from the denial of
its motion as to the remaining claim. the new york appellate
division, first department affirmed in part and reversed in part
the lower courts ruling on the firms motion to
dismiss, permitting all claims to proceed except the claim for
fraud, as to which the appellate court granted leave to replead,
and the new york court of appeals affirmed in part and reversed
in part, dismissing claims for breach of contract, professional
malpractice and unjust enrichment, but permitting claims for
breach of fiduciary duty and fraud to continue. on remand to the
lower court, gs&co. moved to dismiss the surviving claims
or, in the alternative, for summary judgment, but the motion was
denied by a decision dated march21,2006. plaintiff
has moved for leave to amend the complaint again, and
gs&co. has cross-moved to dismiss.
group inc. and certain of its affiliates have, together with
various underwriters in certain offerings, received subpoenas
and requests for documents and information from various
governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations in
connection with investigations relating to the public offering
process. goldman sachs has cooperated with these investigations.
iridium
securities litigation
gs&co. has been named as a defendant in two purported class
action lawsuits commenced, beginning on may26,1999,
in the u.s.district court for the district of columbia
brought on behalf of purchasers of classa common stock of
iridium world communications, ltd. in a january1999
underwritten secondary offering of 7,500,000shares of
classa common stock. all parties entered into settlement
agreements, with the underwriter defendants contributing
$8.25million to a settlement fund. the settlement was
approved by the court by order dated october23,2008
and has become final.
world online
litigation
several lawsuits have been commenced in the netherlands courts
based on alleged misstatements and omissions relating to the
initial public offering of world online in march2000.
goldman sachs and abn amro rothschild served as joint global
coordinators of the approximately 2.9billion
offering. gsi underwrote 20,268,846shares and gs&co.
underwrote 6,756,282shares for a total offering price of
approximately 1.16billion.
on september11,2000, several dutch world online
shareholders as well as a dutch entity purporting to represent
the interests of certain world online shareholders commenced a
proceeding in amsterdam district court against abn amro
bank n.v., also acting under the name of abn amro
rothschild, alleging misrepresentations and omissions
relating to the initial public offering of world online. the
lawsuit seeks, among other things, the return of the purchase
price of the shares purchased by the plaintiffs or unspecified
damages. the court held that the claims failed and dismissed the
complaint and the amsterdam court of appeal affirmed dismissal
of the complaint.
in march2001, a dutch shareholders association initiated
legal proceedings for an unspecified amount of damages against
gsi in amsterdam district court in connection with the world
online
table of contents
offering. the court rejected the claims against gsi, but found
world online liable in an amount to be determined. the dutch
shareholders association appealed from the dismissal of their
claims against gsi. by a decision dated may3,2007,
the netherlands court of appeals affirmed in part and reversed
in part the decision of the district court dismissing the
complaint, holding that certain of the alleged disclosure
deficiencies were actionable. on july24,2007, the
shareholder association appealed from the netherlands court of
appeals decision to the extent that it affirmed the decision of
the district court dismissing the complaint. on
november2,2007, gsi joined the other defendants in
appealing from the court of appeals decision to the extent that
it reversed the district courts dismissal.
research
independence matters
gs&co. is one of several investment firms that have been
named as defendants in substantively identical purported class
actions filed in the u.s.district court for the southern
district of new york alleging violations of the federal
securities laws in connection with research coverage of certain
issuers and seeking compensatory damages. in one such action,
relating to coverage of rsl communications, inc. commenced on
july15,2003, gs&co.s motion to dismiss
the complaint was denied. the district court granted the
plaintiffs motion for class certification and the
u.s.court of appeals for the second circuit, by an order
dated january26, 2007, vacated the district courts
class certification and remanded for reconsideration.
gs&co. is also a defendant in several actions relating to
research coverage of exodus communications, inc. that commenced
beginning in may2003. the actions were consolidated,
goldman, sachs& co.s motion to dismiss was
granted with leave to replead, and plaintiff filed a second
amended complaint. the defendants motion to dismiss the
second amended complaint was granted by order dated
december4,2007, and plaintiffs motion for
reconsideration was denied by order dated
june3,2008. plaintiff appealed the dismissal, and
while the appeal was pending, the parties entered into a
settlement agreement on a
non-class
basis, disposing of the case.
a purported shareholder derivative action was filed in new york
supreme court, new york county on june13,2003
against group inc. and its board of directors, which, as amended
on march3,2004 and june14,2005, alleges
that the directors breached their fiduciary duties in connection
with the firms research as well as the firms ipo
allocations practices.
group inc., gs&co. and henry m. paulson, jr., the former
chairman and chief executive officer of group inc., have been
named as defendants in a purported class action filed originally
on july18,2003 in the u.s.district court for
the district of nevada on behalf of purchasers of group inc.
stock from july1,1999 through may7,2002.
the complaint alleges that defendants breached their fiduciary
duties and violated the federal securities laws in connection
with the firms research activities. the complaint seeks,
among other things, unspecified compensatory damages
and/or
rescission. the action was transferred on consent to the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york,
and the district court granted the defendants motion to
dismiss with leave to amend. plaintiffs filed a second amended
complaint, and defendants filed a motion to dismiss. in a
decision dated september29,2006, the federal
district court granted mr.paulsons motion to dismiss
with leave to replead but otherwise denied the motion.
plaintiffs motion for class certification was granted by a
decision dated september15,2008, and on
september26,2008, the goldman sachs defendants filed
a petition in the u.s.court of appeals for the second
circuit seeking review of the certification ruling.
group inc. and its affiliates, together with other financial
services firms, have received requests for information from
various governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations
in connection with their review of research independence issues.
goldman sachs has cooperated with these requests. see
business regulation regulations
applicable in and outside the united states in
parti, item1 of our annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of our global research settlement.
table of contents
enron litigation
matters
goldman sachs affiliates are defendants in certain actions
relating to enron corp., which filed for protection under the
u.s.bankruptcy laws on december2,2001.
gs&co. and co-managing underwriters have been named as
defendants in certain purported securities class and individual
actions commenced beginning on december14,2001 in
the u.s.district court for the southern district of texas
and california superior court brought by purchasers of
$255,875,000, (including
over-allotments)
of exchangeable notes of enron corp. in august1999. the
notes were mandatorily exchangeable in 2002 into shares of enron
oil& gas company held by enron corp. or their cash
equivalent. the complaints also name as defendants group inc. as
well as certain past and present officers and directors of enron
corp. and the companys outside accounting firm. the
complaints generally allege violations of the disclosure
requirements of the federal securities laws
and/or state
law, and seek compensatory damages. gs&co. underwrote
$127,937,500 (including
over-allotments)
principal amount of the notes. group inc. and gs&co. moved
to dismiss the class action complaint in the texas federal court
and the motion was granted as to group inc. but denied as to
gs&co. one of the plaintiffs has moved for class
certification. gs&co. has moved for judgment on the
pleadings against all plaintiffs. on october18,2007,
the parties reached a settlement agreement in principle pursuant
to which gs&co. has contributed $11.5million to a
settlement fund, subject to definitive documentation and court
approval. plaintiffs in various consolidated actions relating to
enron entered into a settlement with banc of america securities
llc on july2,2004 and with citigroup, inc. on
june10,2005, including with respect to claims
relating to the exchangeable notes offering, as to which
affiliates of those settling defendants were two of the three
underwriters (together with gs&co.).
several funds which allegedly sustained investment losses of
approximately $125million in connection with secondary
market purchases of the exchangeable notes as well as zero
coupon convertible notes of enron corp. commenced an action in
the u.s.district court for the southern district of new
york on january16,2002. as amended, the lawsuit
names as defendants the underwriters of the august1999
offering and the companys outside accounting firm, and
alleges violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws, fraud and misrepresentation. the judicial panel
on multidistrict litigation has transferred that action to the
texas federal district court for purposes of coordinated or
consolidated pretrial proceedings with other matters relating to
enron corp. gs&co. moved to dismiss the complaint and the
motion was granted in part and denied in part. the district
court granted the funds motion for leave to file a second
amended complaint on january22,2007.
gs&co. is among numerous defendants in two substantively
identical actions filed by enron corp.s bankruptcy trustee
in the u.s.bankruptcy court for the southern district of
new york beginning in november2003 seeking to recover as
fraudulent transfers
and/or
preferences payments made by enron corp. in repurchasing its
commercial paper shortly before its bankruptcy filing.
gs&co., which had acted as a commercial paper dealer for
enron corp., resold to enron corp. approximately
$30million of commercial paper as principal, and as an
agent facilitated enron corp.s repurchase of approximately
$340million additional commercial paper from various
customers who have also been named as defendants. the bankruptcy
court denied gs&co.s motion to dismiss as well as
similar motions by other defendants. on
august1,2005, various defendants including
gs&co. petitioned to have the denial of their motion to
dismiss reviewed by the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york. on march10,2008, the
district court denied gs&co.s motion to remove the
standing reference at the present time. on
april29,2008, gs&co. moved for summary
judgment. on january6,2009, gs&co. entered into
a settlement with the trustee pursuant to which it will pay
$6.95million in exchange for a release and a bar order
against any third party claims. the settlement was approved by
the bankruptcy court on january21, 2009.
table of contents
exodus securities
litigation
by an amended complaint dated july11,2002,
gs&co. and the other lead underwriters for the
february2001 offering of 13,000,000shares of common
stock and $575,000,000 of
51/4%
convertible subordinated notes of exodus communications, inc.
were added as defendants in a purported class action pending in
the u.s.district court for the northern district of
california. the complaint, which also names as defendants
certain officers and directors of exodus communications, inc.,
alleged violations of the disclosure requirements of the federal
securities laws and seeks compensatory damages. the parties
entered into a settlement agreement, with the underwriter
defendants contributing $1million toward a settlement
fund. the settlement was approved by the district court on
october31,2008 and has become final.
montana power
litigation
gs&co. and group inc. have been named as defendants in a
purported class action commenced originally on
october1,2001 in montana district court, second
judicial district on behalf of former shareholders of montana
power company. the complaint generally alleges that montana
power company violated montana law by failing to procure
shareholder approval of certain corporate strategies and
transactions, that the companys board breached its
fiduciary duties in pursuing those strategies and transactions,
and that gs&co. aided and abetted the boards breaches
and rendered negligent advice in its role as financial advisor
to the company. the complaint seeks, among other things,
compensatory damages. in addition to gs&co. and group inc.,
the defendants include montana power company, certain of its
officers and directors, an outside law firm for the montana
power company, and certain companies that purchased assets from
montana power company and its affiliates. the montana state
court denied the goldman sachs defendants motions to
dismiss. following the bankruptcies of certain defendants in the
action, defendants removed the action to federal court, the
u.s.district court for the district of montana, butte
division.
on october26,2004, a creditors committee of touch
america holdings, inc. brought an action against gs&co.,
group inc., and a former outside law firm for montana power
company in montana district court, second judicial district. the
complaint asserts that touch america holdings, inc. is the
successor to montana power corporation and alleges substantially
the same claims as in the purported class action. defendants
removed the action to federal court. defendants moved to dismiss
the complaint, but the motion was denied by a decision dated
june10,2005.
adelphia
communications fraudulent conveyance litigation
gs&co. is among numerous entities named as defendants in
two adversary proceedings commenced in the u.s.bankruptcy
court for the southern district of new york, one on
july6,2003 by a creditors committee, and the second
on or about july31,2003 by an equity committee of
adelphia communications, inc. those proceedings have now been
consolidated in a single amended complaint filed by the adelphia
recovery trust on october31,2007. the complaint
seeks, among other things, to recover, as fraudulent
conveyances, payments made allegedly by adelphia communications,
inc. and its affiliates to certain brokerage firms, including
approximately $62.9million allegedly paid to gs&co.,
in respect of margin calls made in the ordinary course of
business on accounts owned by members of the family that
formerly controlled adelphia communications, inc. gs&co.
moved to dismiss the claim related to such margin payments on
december21,2007.
specialist
matters
spear, leeds& kellogg specialists llc (slks) and
certain affiliates have received requests for information from
various governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations
as part of an
industry-wide
investigation relating to activities of floor specialists in
recent years. goldman sachs has cooperated with the requests.
table of contents
on march30,2004, certain specialist firms on the
nyse, including slks, without admitting or denying the
allegations, entered into a final global settlement with the sec
and the nyse covering certain activities during the years 1999
through 2003. the slks settlement involves, among other things,
(i)findings by the sec and the nyse that slks violated
certain federal securities laws and nyse rules, and in some
cases failed to supervise certain individual specialists, in
connection with trades that allegedly disadvantaged customer
orders, (ii)a cease and desist order against slks,
(iii)a censure of slks, (iv)slks agreement to
pay an aggregate of $45.3million in disgorgement and a
penalty to be used to compensate customers, (v)certain
undertakings with respect to slks systems and procedures,
and (v)slks retention of an independent consultant
to review and evaluate certain of slks compliance systems,
policies and procedures. comparable findings were made and
sanctions imposed in the settlements with other specialist
firms. the settlement did not resolve the related private civil
actions against slks and other firms or regulatory
investigations involving individuals or conduct on other
exchanges.
slks, spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p. and group inc. are
among numerous defendants named in purported class actions
brought beginning in october2003 on behalf of investors in
the u.s.district court for the southern district of new
york alleging violations of the federal securities laws and
state common law in connection with nyse floor specialist
activities. the actions seek unspecified compensatory damages,
restitution and disgorgement on behalf of purchasers and sellers
of unspecified securities between october17,1998 and
october15,2003. plaintiffs filed a consolidated
amended complaint on september16,2004. the
defendants motion to dismiss the amended complaint was
granted in part and denied in part by a decision dated
december13,2005. on june28,2007,
plaintiffs filed a motion seeking to certify a class.
treasury
matters
on september4,2003, the sec announced that
gs&co. had settled an administrative proceeding arising
from certain trading in u.s.treasury bonds over an
approximately eight-minute period after gs&co. received an
october31,2001 telephone call from a washington,
d.c.-based political consultant concerning a forthcoming
treasury refunding announcement. without admitting or denying
the allegations, gs&co. consented to the entry of an order
that, among other things, (i)censured gs&co.;
(ii)directed gs&co. to cease and desist from
committing or causing any violations of
sections15(c)(1)(a) and (c)and 15(f) of, and
rule15c1-2
under, the exchange act; (iii)ordered gs&co. to pay
disgorgement and prejudgment interest in the amount of
$1,742,642, and a civil monetary penalty of $5million; and
(iv)directed gs&co. to conduct a review of its
policies and procedures and adopt, implement and maintain
policies and procedures consistent with the order and that
review. gs&co. also undertook to pay $2,562,740 in
disgorgement and interest relating to certain trading in
u.s.treasury bond futures during the same eight-minute
period.
gs&co. has been named as a defendant in a purported class
action filed on march10,2004 in the
u.s.district court for the northern district of illinois
on behalf of holders of short positions in
30-year
u.s.treasury futures and options on the morning of
october31,2001. the complaint alleges that the firm
purchased
30-year
bonds and futures prior to the treasurys refunding
announcement that morning based on
non-public
information about that announcement, and that such purchases
increased the costs of covering such short positions. the
complaint also names as defendants the washington, d.c.-based
political consultant who allegedly was the source of the
information, a former gs&co. economist who allegedly
received the information, and another company and one of its
employees who also allegedly received and traded on the
information prior to its public announcement. the complaint
alleges violations of the federal commodities and antitrust
laws, as well as illinois statutory and common law, and seeks,
among other things, unspecified damages including treble damages
under the antitrust laws. the district court dismissed the
antitrust and illinois state law claims but permitted the
federal commodities law claims to proceed. plaintiffs
motion for class certification was denied by a decision dated
august22,2008. gs&co. moved for summary
judgment, and by a decision dated july30,2008, the
district court granted the motion insofar as the remaining
table of contents
claim relates to the trading of treasury bonds, but denied the
motion without prejudice to the extent the claim relates to
trading of treasury futures.
mutual
fundmatters
gs&co. and certain mutual fund affiliates have received
subpoenas and requests for information from various governmental
agencies and self-regulatory organizations including the sec as
part of the
industry-wide
investigation relating to the practices of mutual funds and
their customers. gs&co. and its affiliates have cooperated
with such requests.
refco securities
litigation
gs&co. and the other lead underwriters for the
august2005 initial public offering of
26,500,000shares of common stock of refco inc. are among
the defendants in various putative class actions filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
beginning in october2005 by investors in refco inc. in
response to certain publicly reported events that culminated in
the october17,2005 filing by refco inc. and certain
affiliates for protection under u.s.bankruptcy laws. the
actions, which have been consolidated, allege violations of the
disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and seek
compensatory damages. in addition to the underwriters, the
consolidated complaint names as defendants refco inc. and
certain of its affiliates, certain officers and directors of
refco inc., thomas h. lee partners, l.p. (which held a majority
of refco inc.s equity through certain funds it manages),
grant thornton (refco inc.s outside auditor), and bawag
p.s.k. bank fur arbeit und wirtschaft und osterreichische
postsparkasse aktiengesellschaft (bawag). lead plaintiffs
entered into a settlement with bawag, which was approved
following certain amendments on june29,2007.
gs&co. underwrote 5,639,200shares of common stock at
a price of $22 per share for a total offering price of
approximately $124million.
a purported shareholder derivative action was filed in the
u.s.district court for the southern district of new york
on november2,2005 on behalf of group inc. against
certain of its officers and directors. the complaint alleges
that the individual defendants breached their fiduciary duties
by failing to ensure that adequate due diligence was conducted
in connection with the refco inc. initial public offering. the
parties subsequently stipulated to the actions dismissal,
and the action was dismissed by the district court by order
dated january7,2009.
gs&co. has, together with other underwriters of the refco
inc. initial public offering, received requests for information
from various governmental agencies and self-regulatory
organizations. gs&co. is cooperating with those requests.
short-selling
litigation
group inc., gs&co. and goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p. are among the numerous financial services firms
that have been named as defendants in a purported class action
filed on april12,2006 in the u.s.district
court for the southern district of new york by customers who
engaged in
short-selling
transactions in equity securities since
april12,2000. the amended complaint generally
alleges that the customers were charged fees in connection with
the short sales but that the applicable securities were not
necessarily borrowed to effect delivery, resulting in failed
deliveries, and that the defendants conspired to set a minimum
threshold borrowing rate for securities designated as hard to
borrow. the complaint asserts a claim under the federal
antitrust laws, as well as claims under the new york business
law and common law, and seeks treble damages as well as
injunctive relief. defendants motion to dismiss the
complaint was granted by a decision dated
december20,2007. on january18,2008,
plaintiffs appealed from this decision.
fannie mae
litigation
gs&co. was added as a defendant in an amended complaint
filed on august14,2006 in a purported class action
pending in the u.s.district court for the district of
columbia. the complaint
table of contents
asserts violations of the federal securities laws generally
arising from allegations concerning fannie maes accounting
practices in connection with certain fannie mae-sponsored remic
transactions that were allegedly arranged by gs&co. the
other defendants include fannie mae, certain of its past and
present officers and directors, and accountants. by a decision
dated may8,2007, the district court granted
gs&co.s motion to dismiss the claim against it. the
time for an appeal will not begin to run until disposition of
the claims against other defendants.
beginning in september2006, group inc.
and/or
gs&co. were added named as defendants in four fannie mae
shareholder derivative actions in the u.s.district court
for the district of columbia. the complaints generally allege
that the goldman sachs defendants aided and abetted a breach of
fiduciary duty by fannie maes directors and officers in
connection with certain fannie mae-sponsored remic transactions
and one of the complaints also asserts a breach of contract
claim. the complaints also name as defendants certain former
officers and directors of fannie mae as well as an outside
accounting firm. the complaints seek, inter alia,
unspecified damages. the goldman sachs defendants were dismissed
without prejudice from the first filed of these actions, and the
remaining claims in that action were dismissed for failure to
make a demand on fannie maes board of directors. that
dismissal has been affirmed on appeal. the remaining three
actions have been stayed by the district court.
general american
litigation
on february13,2007, the liquidators of general
american mutual holding corporation filed a complaint in
missouri circuit court against one of the companys former
officers to assert claims against group inc. and gs&co. the
amended complaint asserted that the goldman sachs defendants
breached certain duties and violated missouri law in the course
of acting as the companys financial advisor during
1998-1999 in
connection with the exploration of a potential demutualization
and initial public offering, and the ensuing sale of certain
company assets. the complaint sought compensatory and punitive
damages. the parties settled the action, with the goldman sachs
defendants paying $99.975million. the settlement was
approved by order dated november6,2008.
executive
compensation litigation
on march16,2007, group inc., its board of directors,
executive officers and members of its management committee were
named as defendants in a purported shareholder derivative action
in the u.s.district court for the eastern district of new
york challenging the sufficiency of the firms
february21,2007 proxy statement and the compensation
of certain employees. the complaint generally alleges that the
proxy statement undervalues stock option awards disclosed
therein, that the recipients received excessive awards because
the proper methodology was not followed, and that the
firms senior management received excessive compensation,
constituting corporate waste. the complaint seeks, among other
things, an injunction against the 2007 annual meeting of
shareholders, the voiding of any election of directors in the
absence of an injunction and an equitable accounting for the
allegedly excessive compensation. on july20,2007,
defendants moved to dismiss the complaint, the motion was
granted by an order dated december18,2008 and
plaintiff appealed on january13,2009.
on january17,2008, group inc., its board of
directors, executive officers and members of its management
committee were named as defendants in a related purported
shareholder derivative action brought by the same plaintiff in
the same court predicting that the firms 2008 proxy
statement will violate the federal securities laws by
undervaluing certain stock option awards and alleging that
senior management received excessive compensation for 2007. the
complaint seeks, among other things, an injunction against the
distribution of the 2008 proxy statement, the voiding of any
election
table of contents
of directors in the absence of an injunction and an equitable
accounting for the allegedly excessive compensation. on
january25,2008, the plaintiff moved for a
preliminary injunction to prevent the 2008 proxy statement from
using options valuations that the plaintiff alleges are
incorrect and to require the amendment of sec form4s filed
by certain of the executive officers named in the complaint to
reflect the stock option valuations alleged by the plaintiff.
plaintiffs motion for a preliminary injunction was denied
by order dated february14,2008, plaintiff appealed
and twice moved to expedite the appeal, with the motions being
denied by orders dated february29,2008 and
april3,2008.
mortgage-related
matters
gs&co. and certain of its affiliates, together with other
financial services firms, have received requests for information
from various governmental agencies and self-regulatory
organizations relating to subprime mortgages, and
securitizations, collateralized debt obligations and synthetic
products related to subprime mortgages. gs&co. and its
affiliates are cooperating with the requests.
gs&co., along with numerous other financial institutions,
is a defendant in an action brought by the city of cleveland
alleging that the defendants activities in connection with
securitizations of subprime mortgages created a public
nuisance in cleveland. the action is pending in the
u.s.district court for the northern district of ohio, and
the complaint seeks, among other things, unspecified
compensatory damages. defendants moved to dismiss on
november24,2008.
gs&co., goldman sachs mortgage company and gs mortgage
securities corp. are among the defendants in a purported class
action commenced on december11, 2008 in the u.s. district
court for the southern district of new york brought on behalf of
purchasers of various mortgage pass-through certificates and
asset-backed certificates issued by various securitization
trusts in 2007 and underwritten by gs&co. the other
defendants include the various issuer trusts that issued the
securities as well as certain officers and directors of certain
of the entity defendants. the complaint generally alleges that
the registration statement and prospectus supplements for the
certificates violated the federal securities laws. the complaint
asserts claims against the issuer trusts and gs&co. under
section11 of the u.s. securities act of 1933 (securities
act), and a related controlling person claim against
the other defendants under section15 of the securities
act, and seeks unspecified compensatory damages and rescission
or recessionary damages.
auction products
matters
on august21,2008, gs&co. entered into a
settlement in principle with the office of attorney general of
the state of new york and the illinois securities department (on
behalf of the north american securities administrators
association) regarding auction rate securities. under the
agreement, goldman sachs agreed, among other things, (i)to
offer to repurchase at par the outstanding auction rate
securities that its private wealth management clients purchased
through the firm prior to february11,2008, with the
exception of those auction rate securities where auctions are
clearing, (ii)to continue to work with issuers and other
interested parties, including regulatory and governmental
entities, to expeditiously provide liquidity solutions for
institutional investors, and (iii)to pay a
$22.5million fine. the settlement, which is subject to
definitive documentation and approval by the various states,
does not resolve any potential regulatory action by the sec.
on august28,2008, a putative shareholder derivative
action was filed in the u.s.district court for the
southern district of new york naming as defendants group inc.,
its board of directors, and certain senior officers. the
complaint alleges generally that the board breached its
fiduciary duties and committed mismanagement in connection with
its oversight of auction rate securities marketing and trading
operations, that certain individual defendants engaged in
insider selling by selling shares of group inc., and that the
firms public filings were false and misleading in
violation of the federal securities laws by failing to
accurately disclose the alleged practices involving auction rate
securities. the complaint seeks damages, injunctive and
declaratory relief, restitution, and an order requiring the firm
to adopt corporate reforms. defendants moved to dismiss on
january23, 2009.
table of contents
on september4,2008, group inc. was named as a
defendant, together with numerous other financial services
firms, in two complaints filed in the u.s.district court
for the southern district of new york alleging that the
defendants engaged in a conspiracy to manipulate the auction
securities market in violation of federal antitrust laws. the
actions were filed, respectively, on behalf of putative classes
of issuers of and investors in auction rate securities and seek,
among other things, treble damages. defendants moved to dismiss
on january15, 2009.
private
equity-sponsored
acquisitions litigation
group inc. and gs capital partners are among
numerous private equity firms and investment banks named as
defendants in a federal antitrust action filed in the
u.s.district court for the district of massachusetts in
december2007. as amended, the complaint generally alleges
that the defendants have colluded to limit competition in
bidding for private
equity-sponsored
acquisitions of public companies, thereby resulting in lower
prevailing bids and, by extension, less consideration for
shareholders of those companies in violation of section1
of the u.s.sherman antitrust act and common law.
defendants moved to dismiss on august27,2008. by an
order dated november19,2008, the district court
dismissed claims relating to certain transactions that were the
subject of releases as part of the settlement of shareholder
actions challenging such transactions, and by an order dated
december15,2008 otherwise denied the motion to
dismiss.
washington mutual
securities litigation
gs&co. is among numerous underwriters named as defendants
in a putative securities class action amended complaint filed on
august5,2008 in the u.s.district court for the
western district of washington. as to the underwriters,
plaintiffs allege that the offering documents in connection with
various securities offerings by washington mutual, inc. failed
to describe accurately the companys exposure to
mortgage-related
activities in violation of the disclosure requirements of the
federal securities laws. the defendants include past and present
directors and officers of washington mutual, the companys
former outside auditors, and numerous underwriters. the
underwriter defendants moved to dismiss on
december8,2008. gs&co. underwrote $788,500,000
principal amount of securities in the offerings at issue.
on september25,2008, the fdic took over the primary
banking operations of washington mutual, inc. and then sold
them. on september27,2008, washington mutual, inc.
filed for chapter11 bankruptcy in the u.s. bankruptcy
court in delaware.
britannia bulk
securities litigation
gs&co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in
numerous putative securities class actions filed beginning on
november6,2008 in the u.s.district court for
the southern district of new york arising from the
june17,2008 $125million initial public
offering of common stock of britannia bulk holdings, inc. the
complaints name as defendants the company, certain of its
directors and officers, and the underwriters for the offering.
plaintiffs allege that the offering materials violated the
disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws and seek
compensatory damages. defendants have yet to respond.
gs&co. underwrote 3.75million shares of common stock
for a total offering price of $56.25million. the principal
operating subsidiary of britannia bulk holdings, inc. is subject
to an insolvency proceeding in the u.k. courts.
item4.
submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
there were no matters submitted to a vote of security holders
during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended
november28,2008.
table of contents
executive
officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
set forth below are the name, age, present title, principal
occupation and certain biographical information as of
january26,2009 for our executive officers. all of
our executive officers have been appointed by and serve at the
pleasure of our board of directors.
lloyd c.
blankfein, 54
mr.blankfein has been our chairman and chief executive
officer since june2006, and a director since
april2003. previously, he had been our president and chief
operating officer since january2004. prior to that, from
april2002 until january2004, he was a vice chairman
of goldman sachs, with management responsibility for goldman
sachs fixed income, currency and commodities division
(ficc) and equities division (equities). prior to becoming a
vice chairman, he had served as co-head of ficc since its
formation in 1997. from 1994 to 1997, he headed or co-headed the
currency and commodities division. mr.blankfein is not on
the board of any public company other than goldman sachs. he is
affiliated with certain
non-profit
organizations, including as a member of the harvard university
committee on university resources, the advisory board of the
tsinghua university school of economics and management and the
governing board of the indian school of business, an overseer of
the weill medical college of cornell university, and a director
of the partnership for new york city and catalyst.
alan m. cohen,
mr.cohen has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our global head of compliance since
february2004. from 1991 until january2004, he was a
partner in the law firm of omelveny& myers llp.
he is affiliated with certain
non-profit
organizations, including as a board member of the new york stem
cell foundation.
gary d. cohn,
mr.cohn has been our president and co-chief operating
officer and a director since june2006. previously, he had
been the co-head of goldman sachs global securities
businesses since january2004. he also had been the co-head
of equities since 2003 and the co-head of ficc since
september2002. from march2002 to
september2002, he served as co-chief operating officer of
ficc. prior to that, beginning in 1999, mr.cohn managed
the ficc macro businesses. from 1996 to 1999, he was the global
head of goldman sachs commodities business. mr.cohn
is not on the board of any public company other than goldman
sachs. he is affiliated with certain
non-profit
organizations, including as a trustee of the gilmour academy,
the nyu child study center, the nyu hospital, the nyu medical
school, the harlem childrens zone and american university.
j. michael evans,
mr.evans has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs since
february2008 and chairman of goldman sachs asia since
2004. prior to becoming a vice chairman, he had served as global
co-head of goldman sachs securities business since 2003.
previously, he had been co-head of the equities division since
2001. mr.evans is a board member of casper (center for
advancement of standards-based physical education reform). he
also serves as a trustee of the bendheim center for finance at
princeton university.
gregory k. palm,
mr.palm has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs since may1999, and our general counsel and head or
co-head of the legal department since may1992.
table of contents
michael s.
sherwood, 43
mr.sherwood has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs
since february2008 and co-chief executive officer of
goldman sachs international since 2005. prior to becoming a vice
chairman, he had served as global co-head of goldman sachs
securities business since 2003. prior to that, he had been head
of the fixed income, currency and commodities division in europe
since 2001.
esta e. stecher,
ms.stecher has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our general counsel and co-head of the legal
department since december2000. from 1994 to 2000, she was
head of the firms tax department, over which she continues
to have senior oversight responsibility. she is also a trustee
of columbia university.
david a. viniar,
mr.viniar has been an executive vice president of goldman
sachs and our chief financial officer since may1999. he
has been the head of operations, technology, finance and
services division since december2002. he was head of the
finance division and co-head of credit risk management and
advisory and firmwide risk from december2001 to
december2002. mr.viniar was co-head of operations,
finance and resources from march1999 to
december2001. he was chief financial officer of the
goldman sachs group, l.p. from march1999 to may1999.
from july1998 until march1999, he was deputy chief
financial officer and from 1994 until july1998, he was
head of finance, with responsibility for controllers and
treasury. from 1992 to 1994, he was head of treasury and prior
to that was in the structured finance department of investment
banking. he also serves on the board of trustees of union
college.
john s. weinberg,
mr.weinberg has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs
since june2006. he has been co-head of goldman sachs
investment banking division since december2002. from
january2002 to december2002, he was co-head of the
investment banking division in the americas. prior to that, he
served as co-head of the investment banking services department
since 1997. he is affiliated with certain
non-profit
organizations, including as a board member at
newyork-presbyterian hospital, the steppingstone foundation, the
greenwich country day school and community anti-drug coalitions
of america. mr.weinberg also serves on the visiting
committee for harvard business school.
jon winkelried,
mr.winkelried has been our president and co-chief
operating officer and a director since june2006.
previously, he had been the co-head of goldman sachs
investment banking division since january2005. from 2000
to 2005, he was co-head of ficc. from 1999 to 2000, he was head
of ficc in europe. from 1995 to 1999, he was responsible for
goldman sachs leveraged finance business.
mr.winkelried is not on the board of any public company
other than goldman sachs. he is also a trustee of the university
of chicago.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities
the principal market on which our common stock is traded is the
nyse. information relating to the high and low sales prices per
share of our common stock, as reported by the consolidated tape
association, for each full quarterly period during fiscal 2007
and 2008 is set forth under the heading supplemental
financial information common stock price range
in partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k.
as of january16,2009, there were 9,909 holders of
record of our common stock.
during fiscal 2008 and 2007, dividends of $0.35 per share of
common stock were declared on december11,2007,
march12,2008, june13,2007,
september19,2007, december17,2007,
march17,2008, june16,2008 and
september15,2008. the holders of our common stock
share proportionately on a per share basis in all dividends and
other distributions on common stock declared by our board of
directors.
the declaration of dividends by goldman sachs is subject to the
discretion of our board of directors. our board of directors
will take into account such matters as general business
conditions, our financial results, capital requirements,
contractual, legal and regulatory restrictions on the payment of
dividends by us to our shareholders or by our subsidiaries to
us, the effect on our debt ratings and such other factors as our
board of directors may deem relevant. see
business regulation in parti,
item1 of our annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of potential regulatory limitations on our
receipt of funds from our regulated subsidiaries and our payment
of dividends to shareholders of group inc.
prior to october28,2011, unless we have redeemed all
the preferred stock issued to the u.s.treasury on
october28,2008 or unless the u.s.treasury has
transferred all the preferred stock to a third party, the
consent of the u.s.treasury will be required for us to
declare or pay any dividend or make any distribution on common
stock other than (i)regular quarterly cash dividends of
not more than $0.35 per share, as adjusted for any stock split,
stock dividend, reverse stock split, reclassification or similar
transaction, (ii)dividends payable solely in shares of
common stock and (iii)dividends or distributions of rights
or junior stock in connection with a stockholders rights
plan.
table of contents
the table below sets forth the information with respect to
purchases made by or on behalf of group inc. or any
affiliated purchaser (as defined in
rule10b-18(a)(3)
under the exchange act), of our common stock during the fourth
quarter of our fiscal year ended november28,2008.
total number of
maximum number
average
shares purchased
of shares that may
total number
price
as part of publicly
yet be purchased
of shares
paid per
announced plans
under the plans or
period
purchased
share
or
programs(2)
programs(2)
month #1
(august30,2008 to september26,2008)
60,859,203
month #2
(september27,2008 to
october31,2008)
2,025
$
121.35
2,025
60,857,178
month #3
(november1,2008 to
november28,2008)
4,700
$
53.31
4,700
60,852,478
total(1)
6,725
$
73.80
6,725
(1)
goldman sachs generally does not
repurchase shares of its common stock as part of the repurchase
program during self-imposed black-out periods, which
run from the last two weeks of a fiscal quarter through and
including the date of the earnings release for such quarter.
(2)
on march21,2000, we
announced that our board of directors had approved a repurchase
program, pursuant to which up to 15million shares of our
common stock may be repurchased. this repurchase program was
increased by an aggregate of 280million shares by
resolutions of our board of directors adopted on
june18,2001, march18,2002,
november20,2002, january30,2004,
january25,2005, september16,2005,
september11,2006 and december17,2007. we
use our share repurchase program to help maintain the
appropriate level of common equity and to substantially offset
increases in share count over time resulting from employee
share-based
compensation. prior to october28,2011, unless we
have redeemed all the preferred stock issued to the
u.s.treasury on october28,2008 or unless the
u.s.treasury has transferred all the preferred stock to a
third party, the consent of the u.s.treasury will be
required for us to repurchase our common stock in an aggregate
amount greater than the increase in the number of diluted shares
outstanding (as reported in our quarterly report on
form10-q
for the three months ended
august29,2008)resulting from the grant,
vesting or exercise of
equity-based
compensation to employees and equitably adjusted for any stock
split, stock dividend, reverse stock split, reclassification or
similar transaction.
the repurchase program is effected
primarily through regular
open-market
purchases, the amounts and timing of which are determined
primarily by our current and projected capital positions
(i.e.,comparisons of our desired level of capital to our
actual level of capital) but which may also be influenced by
general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading
volumes of our common stock, in each case subject to the limit
imposed under the u.s.treasurys tarp capital
purchase program. the total remaining authorization under the
repurchase program was 60,852,478shares as of
january16,2009; the repurchase program has no set
expiration or termination date.
information relating to compensation plans under which our
equity securities are authorized for issuance is set forth in
partiii, item12 of our annual report on
form10-k.
item6.
selected
financial data
the selected financial data table is set forth under
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k.
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
index
page
no.
introduction
executive overview
business environment
certain risk factors that may affect our
businesses
critical accounting policies
fair value
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
use of estimates
results of operations
financial overview
segment operating results
geographic data
off-balance-sheet
arrangements
equity capital
contractual obligations and commitments
risk management
market risk
credit risk
derivatives
liquidity and funding risk
operational risk
recent accounting developments
table of contents
introduction
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc.) is a bank holding
company and a leading global investment banking, securities and
investment management firm that provides a wide range of
services worldwide to a substantial and diversified client base
that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments
and
high-net-worth
individuals.
our activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking.we provide a broad range
of investment banking services to a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals.
trading and principal investments.we
facilitate client transactions with a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals and take proprietary positions
through market making in, trading of and investing in fixed
income and equity products, currencies, commodities and
derivatives on these products. in addition, we engage in
market-making and specialist activities on equities and options
exchanges, and we clear client transactions on major stock,
options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection with our
merchant banking and other investing activities, we make
principal investments directly and through funds that we raise
and manage.
asset management and securities services.we
provide investment advisory and financial planning services and
offer investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
provide prime brokerage services, financing services and
securities lending services to institutional clients, including
hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
unless specifically stated otherwise, all references to 2008,
2007 and 2006 refer to our fiscal years ended, or the dates, as
the context requires, november28,2008,
november30,2007 and november24,2006,
respectively, and any reference to a future year refers to a
fiscal year ending on the last friday in november of that year.
on december15,2008, the board of directors of group
inc. (board) approved a change in our fiscal year-end from the
last friday of november to the last friday of december. the
change is effective for our 2009 fiscal year. the firms
2009 fiscal year began december27,2008 and will end
december25,2009, resulting in a
one-month
transition period that began november29,2008 and
ended december26,2008.
when we use the terms goldman sachs, the
firm, we, us and our,
we mean group inc., a delaware corporation, and its consolidated
subsidiaries. references herein to our annual report on
form10-k
are to our annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november28,2008.
in this discussion, we have included statements that may
constitute forward-looking statements within the
meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the u.s.private
securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking
statements are not historical facts but instead represent only
our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their
nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. these
statements include statements other than historical information
or statements of current condition and may relate to our future
plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may
also include statements about the objectives and effectiveness
of our risk management and liquidity policies, statements about
trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses, statements
about our future status, activities or reporting under
u.s.banking regulation, and statements about our
investment banking transaction backlog. by identifying these
statements for you in this manner, we are alerting you to the
possibility that our actual results and financial condition may
differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results and
financial condition indicated in these forward-looking
statements. important factors that could cause our actual
results and financial condition to differ from those indicated
in these forward-looking statements include, among others, those
discussed below under
certain
risk factors that may affect our businesses as well as
risk factors in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k
and cautionary statement pursuant to the u.s.private
securities litigation reform act of 1995 in parti,
item1 of our annual report on
form10-k.
table of contents
executive
overview
our diluted earnings per common share were $4.47 for 2008,
compared with $24.73 for 2007. return on average tangible common
shareholders equity
(1) was
5.5% and return on average common shareholders equity was
4.9% for 2008. as of november2008, book value per common
share was $98.68, an increase of 9.1% compared with the end of
2007, and our tier1 ratio
(2) was
15.6%. during the fourth quarter of 2008, we raised
$20.75billion in equity, comprised of a $5.75billion
public common stock sale, a $5billion preferred stock and
warrant issuance to berkshire hathaway inc. and certain
affiliates and a $10billion preferred stock and warrant
issuance under the u.s.department of the treasurys
(u.s.treasury) tarp capital purchase program. total assets
were $885billion at the end of the year, a decrease of 21%
compared with the end of 2007. during the fourth quarter of
2008, the firm became a bank holding company regulated by the
board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal
reserve board).
our results for 2008 reflected a particularly difficult
operating environment, including significant asset price
declines, high levels of volatility and reduced levels of
liquidity, particularly in the fourth quarter. in addition,
credit markets experienced significant dislocation between
prices for cash instruments and the related derivative contracts
and between credit indices and underlying single names. net
revenues in trading and principal investments were significantly
lower compared with 2007, reflecting significant declines in
fixed income, currency and commodities (ficc), principal
investments and equities. the decrease in ficc primarily
reflected losses in credit products, which included a loss of
approximately $3.1billion (net of hedges) related to
non-investment-grade
credit origination activities and losses from investments,
including corporate debt and private and public equities.
results in mortgages included net losses of approximately
$1.7billion on residential mortgage loans and securities
and approximately $1.4billion on commercial mortgage loans
and securities. interest rate products, currencies and
commodities each produced particularly strong results and net
revenues were higher compared with 2007. during 2008, although
client-driven activity was generally solid, ficc operated in a
challenging environment characterized by
broad-based
declines in asset values, wider mortgage and corporate credit
spreads, reduced levels of liquidity and
broad-based
investor deleveraging, particularly in the second half of the
year. the decline in principal investments primarily reflected
net losses of $2.53billion from corporate principal
investments and $949million from real estate principal
investments, as well as a $446million loss from our
investment in the ordinary shares of industrial and commercial
bank of china limited (icbc). in equities, the decrease compared
with particularly strong net revenues in 2007 reflected losses
in principal strategies, partially offset by higher net revenues
in our client franchise businesses. commissions were
particularly strong and were higher than 2007. during 2008,
equities operated in an environment characterized by a
significant decline in global equity prices,
broad-based
investor deleveraging and very high levels of volatility,
particularly in the second half of the year.
(1)
return on average tangible common
shareholders equity (rote) is computed by dividing net
earnings applicable to common shareholders by average monthly
tangible common shareholders equity. see
results
of operations financial overview below for
further information regarding our calculation of rote.
(2)
before we became a bank holding
company, we were subject to capital guidelines as a consolidated
supervised entity (cse) that were generally consistent with
those set out in the revised framework for the international
convergence of capital measurement and capital standards issued
by the basel committee on banking supervision (basel ii). we
currently compute and report our consolidated capital ratios in
accordance with the basel ii requirements, as applicable to us
when we were regulated as a cse, for the purpose of assessing
the adequacy of our capital. under the basel ii framework as it
applied to us when we were regulated as a cse, our tier1
ratio equals tier1 capital divided by total
risk-weighted
assets (rwas). we are currently working with the federal reserve
board to put in place the appropriate reporting and compliance
mechanisms and methodologies to allow reporting of the
baseli capital ratios as of the end of march 2009. see
equity
capital below for a further discussion of our tier1
ratio.
table of contents
net revenues in investment banking also declined significantly
compared with 2007, reflecting significantly lower net revenues
in both financial advisory and underwriting. in financial
advisory, the decrease compared with particularly strong net
revenues in 2007 reflected a decline in
industry-wide
completed mergers and acquisitions. the decrease in underwriting
primarily reflected significantly lower net revenues in debt
underwriting, primarily due to a decline in leveraged finance
and
mortgage-related
activity, reflecting difficult market conditions. net revenues
in equity underwriting were slightly lower compared with 2007,
reflecting a decrease in
industry-wide
equity and
equity-related
offerings. our investment banking transaction backlog at the end
of 2008 was significantly lower than it was at the end of 2007.
(3)
net revenues in asset management and securities services
increased compared with 2007. securities services net revenues
were higher, reflecting the impact of changes in the composition
of securities lending customer balances, as well as higher total
average customer balances. asset management net revenues
increased slightly compared with 2007. during the year, assets
under management decreased $89billion to
$779billion, due to $123billion of market
depreciation, primarily in equity assets, partially offset by
$34billion of net inflows.
given the difficult market conditions, and in particular, the
challenging liquidity and funding environment during 2008, we
focused on reducing concentrated risk positions, including our
exposure to leveraged loans and real estate-related loans. we
believe that the strength of our capital position will enable us
to take advantage of market opportunities as they arise in 2009.
our business, by its nature, does not produce predictable
earnings. our results in any given period can be materially
affected by conditions in global financial markets and economic
conditions generally. for a further discussion of the factors
that may affect our future operating results, see
certain
risk factors that may affect our businesses below as well
as risk factors in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k.
(3)our
investment banking transaction backlog represents an estimate of
our future net revenues from investment banking transactions
where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely
than not.
table of contents
business
environment
our financial performance is highly dependent on the environment
in which our businesses operate. during the first half of 2008,
global economic growth slowed as the u.s.entered a
recession. despite the weakness in the u.s.and other major
economies, growth in most emerging markets remained solid, which
contributed to a dramatic increase in commodity prices as well
as increased inflation. however, during the second half of 2008,
the downturn in global economic growth became
broad-based,
which coincided with significant weakness and sharply reduced
liquidity across global financial markets. for a further
discussion of how market conditions affect our businesses, see
certain
risk factors that may affect our businesses below as well
as risk factors in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k.
a further discussion of the business environment in 2008 is set
forth below.
global.growth in the global economy weakened
substantially over the course of 2008, particularly in the major
economies. economic growth in emerging markets also generally
declined in 2008, but remained high relative to the major
economies. fixed income and equity markets experienced high
levels of volatility,
broad-based
declines in asset prices and reduced levels of liquidity,
particularly during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year. in
addition, mortgage and corporate credit spreads widened and
credit markets experienced significant dislocation between
prices for cash instruments and the related derivative contracts
and between credit indices and underlying single names. the
u.s.federal reserve lowered its federal funds target rate
over the course of our fiscal year, while central banks in the
eurozone, united kingdom, japan and china also lowered interest
rates towards the end of the year. oil prices exhibited
significant volatility during our fiscal year, rising to over
$140 per barrel in july before declining to under $60 per barrel
by the end of our fiscal year. in currency markets, the
u.s.dollar initially weakened against most major
currencies, particularly against the euro, but subsequently
recovered as the pace of decline in global economic growth began
to accelerate in the second half of the year. investment banking
activity was generally subdued during our fiscal year,
reflecting a significant decline in
industry-wide
announced and completed mergers and acquisitions and equity and
equity-related
offerings compared with 2007.
united states.real gross domestic product
growth in the u.s.economy slowed to an estimated 1.2% in
calendar year 2008, down from 2.0% in 2007. the economy entered
a recession near the beginning of our fiscal year, with the
downturn intensifying in our fourth quarter. much of the
slowdown was attributable to weakness in credit markets brought
on by the contraction in the housing market and the associated
increase in mortgage delinquencies and defaults. growth in
industrial production slowed from 2007 levels, reflecting
reduced growth in domestic demand and exports. both business and
consumer confidence declined over the course of the year. growth
in consumer expenditure was supported in the first half of the
year by the federal governments stimulus package but
declined thereafter, as the housing market continued to weaken
and the rate of unemployment rose significantly. the rate of
inflation increased during the first half of our fiscal year, as
energy and food prices increased significantly, but declined
sharply towards the end of the year. measures of core inflation,
which remained elevated in the first half of the year, also
declined towards the end of the year as the labor market
continued to weaken and capacity utilization decreased. the
u.s.federal reserve reduced its federal funds target rate
by a total of 350 basis points to 1.00% during our fiscal year,
its lowest level since 2003. u.s.regulatory agencies have
also taken additional measures to address reduced levels of
liquidity in credit markets and the u.s.treasury took
measures to strengthen the capital adequacy of financial
institutions. the yield on the
10-year
u.s.treasury note declined by 104 basis points to 2.93%
during our fiscal year. the dow jones industrial average, the
s&p 500 index and the nasdaq composite index ended our
fiscal year lower by 34%, 39% and 42%, respectively.
europe.real gross domestic product growth in
the eurozone economies slowed to an estimated 0.8% in calendar
year 2008, down from 2.6% in 2007. growth in industrial
production, fixed investment and consumer expenditure weakened
throughout the year. in addition, surveys of business and
consumer confidence declined. although the labor market remained
solid in the first half of the
table of contents
year, the unemployment rate began to increase in the second half
of the year. the rate of inflation increased during the first
three quarters of the year. in response to inflationary
pressures, the european central bank (ecb) raised interest rates
in july, increasing its main refinancing operations rate by 25
basis points to 4.25%. however, during the fourth quarter of our
fiscal year, the ecb lowered its main refinancing operations
rate by a total of 100 basis points to 3.25%, as financial
markets and the outlook for growth weakened considerably and
inflationary pressures appeared to decline. in the united
kingdom, real gross domestic product growth fell to an estimated
0.9% for calendar year 2008, down from 3.0% in 2007. the decline
in growth accelerated in the second half of the year as credit
market conditions deteriorated and the slowdown in the u.k.
housing market intensified. the rate of inflation increased
during the year, although inflationary pressures appeared to
moderate in our fourth quarter. the bank of england lowered its
official bank rate over the course of our fiscal year by a total
of 275 basis points to 3.00%.
long-term
government bond yields in both the eurozone and the u.k. ended
our fiscal year lower. the euro and british pound depreciated by
13% and 25%, respectively, against the u.s.dollar during
our fiscal year. major european equity markets ended our fiscal
year significantly lower.
asia.in japan, real gross domestic product
decreased by an estimated 0.2% in calendar year 2008 compared
with an increase of 2.4% in 2007. measures of investment
activity in the housing sector and growth in consumption
declined during the year. export growth remained solid in the
first half of the year but deteriorated notably towards year-end
as the environment outside of japan worsened. the rate of
inflation increased from the near-zero levels seen in recent
years, but remained moderate. the bank of japan lowered its
target overnight call rate by 20 basis points in october,
bringing it to 0.30%, while the yield on
10-year
japanese government bonds declined by 23 basis points during our
fiscal year. the yen appreciated by 14% against the
u.s.dollar. the nikkei 225 ended our fiscal year down 46%.
in china, real gross domestic product growth declined to an
estimated 9.0% in calendar year 2008 from 13.0% in 2007. export
growth and industrial production decelerated rapidly toward the
end of the year, while consumer spending softened but remained
solid. rising food prices contributed to a higher rate of
inflation in the first half of the year but inflation fell
sharply in the second half of the year. the peoples bank
of china raised its
one-year
benchmark lending rate by 18 basis points to 7.47% at the
beginning of our fiscal year, but reduced the lending rate by
189 basis points during our fourth quarter and took additional
measures to increase liquidity in the financial system. the
chinese government continued to allow the steady appreciation of
its currency against the u.s.dollar in the first half of
the year, after which the exchange rate remained broadly
unchanged. real gross domestic product growth in india slowed to
an estimated 6.7% in calendar year 2008 from 9.0% in 2007. while
export growth remained solid for most of the year, growth in
consumer expenditure and fixed investment declined. the rate of
wholesale inflation increased sharply in the first half of the
year and then subsequently declined. the indian rupee, along
with other currencies in the region, generally depreciated
against the u.s.dollar. equity markets experienced
substantial declines across the region, with the shanghai
composite index down 62%, and markets in hong kong, india and
south korea also ending the year significantly lower.
other markets.real gross domestic product
growth in brazil declined to an estimated 5.4% in calendar year
2008 from 5.7% in 2007. for most of the year, growth was
supported by strong capital inflows, high demand for commodity
exports, and strong domestic demand. towards the end of the
year, however, the economic outlook deteriorated, as the
brazilian currency depreciated against the u.s.dollar and
commodity prices fell. in russia, real gross domestic product
growth declined to an estimated 6.2% in calendar year 2008 from
8.1% in 2007. growth was supported by strong household
consumption and increased capital investment, particularly in
the first half of the year. however, in the fourth quarter, the
pace of growth declined sharply, as capital outflows intensified
and the russian currency depreciated against the
u.s.dollar. brazilian and russian equity prices ended our
fiscal year significantly lower.
table of contents
certain risk
factors that may affect our businesses
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in
our businesses, including market, liquidity, credit,
operational, legal and regulatory risks. for a discussion of how
management seeks to manage some of these risks, see
risk
management below. a summary of the more important factors
that could affect our businesses follows below. for a further
discussion of these and other important factors that could
affect our businesses, see risk factors in
parti, item1a of our annual report on
form10-k.
market conditions and market risk.our
financial performance is highly dependent on the environment in
which our businesses operate. overall, during fiscal 2008, the
business environment has been extremely adverse for many of our
businesses and there can be no assurance that these conditions
will improve in the near term.
a favorable business environment is generally characterized by,
among other factors, high global gross domestic product growth,
transparent, liquid and efficient capital markets, low
inflation, high business and investor confidence, stable
geopolitical conditions and strong business earnings.
unfavorable or uncertain economic and market conditions can be
caused by: declines in economic growth, business activity or
investor or business confidence; limitations on the availability
or increases in the cost of credit and capital; increases in
inflation, interest rates, exchange rate volatility, default
rates or the price of basic commodities; outbreaks of
hostilities or other geopolitical instability; corporate,
political or other scandals that reduce investor confidence in
capital markets; natural disasters or pandemics; or a
combination of these or other factors. our businesses and
profitability have been and may continue to become adversely
affected by market conditions in many ways, including the
following:
many of our businesses, such as our merchant banking businesses,
our mortgages, leveraged loan and credit products businesses in
our ficc segment, and our equity principal strategies business,
have net long positions in debt securities, loans,
derivatives, mortgages, equities (including private equity) and
most other asset classes. in addition, many of our
market-making
and other businesses in which we act as a principal to
facilitate our clients activities, including our
specialist businesses, commit large amounts of capital to
maintain trading positions in interest rate and credit products,
as well as currencies, commodities and equities. because nearly
all of these investing and trading positions are
marked-to-market
on a daily basis, declines in asset values directly and
immediately impact our earnings, unless we have effectively
hedged our exposures to such declines. in certain
circumstances (particularly in the case of leveraged loans and
private equities or other securities that are not freely
tradable or lack established and liquid trading markets), it may
not be possible or economic to hedge such exposures and to the
extent that we do so the hedge may be ineffective or may greatly
reduce our ability to profit from increases in the values of the
assets. sudden declines and significant volatility in the prices
of assets may substantially curtail or eliminate the trading
markets for certain assets, which may make it very difficult to
sell, hedge or value such assets. the inability to sell or
effectively hedge assets reduces our ability to limit losses in
such positions and the difficulty in valuing assets may increase
our
risk-weighted
assets which requires us to maintain additional capital and
increases our funding costs.
our cost of obtaining
long-term
unsecured funding is directly related to our credit spreads.
credit spreads are influenced by market perceptions of our
creditworthiness. widening credit spreads, as well as
significant declines in the availability of credit, have
adversely affected our ability to borrow on a secured and
unsecured basis and may continue to do so. we fund ourselves on
an unsecured basis by issuing commercial paper, promissory notes
and
long-term
debt, or by obtaining bank loans or lines of credit. we seek to
finance many of our assets, including our less liquid assets, on
a secured basis, including by entering into repurchase
agreements. disruptions in the credit markets make it harder and
more expensive to obtain funding for our businesses. if our
available funding is limited or we are forced to fund
table of contents
our operations at a higher cost, these conditions may require us
to curtail our business activities and increase our cost of
funding, both of which could reduce our profitability,
particularly in our businesses that involve investing, lending
and taking principal positions, including market making.
our investment banking business has been and may continue to be
adversely affected by market conditions. poor economic
conditions and other adverse geopolitical conditions can
adversely affect and have adversely affected investor and ceo
confidence, resulting in significant
industry-wide
declines in the size and number of underwritings and of
financial advisory transactions, which could continue to have an
adverse effect on our revenues and our profit margins. in
addition, our clients engaging in mergers and acquisitions often
rely on access to the secured and unsecured credit markets to
finance their transactions. the lack of available credit and the
increased cost of credit can adversely affect the size, volume
and timing of our clients merger and acquisition
transactions particularly large transactions.
because a significant portion of our investment banking revenues
are derived from our participation in large transactions, a
decline in the number of large transactions would adversely
affect our investment banking business.
certain of our trading businesses depend on market volatility to
provide trading and arbitrage opportunities, and decreases in
volatility may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect
the results of these businesses. on the other hand, increased
volatility, while it can increase trading volumes and spreads,
also increases risk as measured by var and may expose us to
increased risks in connection with our
market-making
and proprietary businesses or cause us to reduce the size of
these businesses in order to avoid increasing our var. limiting
the size of our
market-making
positions and investing businesses can adversely affect our
profitability.
we receive
asset-based
management fees based on the value of our clients
portfolios or investment in funds managed by us and, in some
cases, we also receive incentive fees based on increases in the
value of such investments. declines in asset values reduce the
value of our clients portfolios or fund assets, which in
turn reduce the fees we earn for managing such assets. market
uncertainty, volatility and adverse economic conditions, as well
as declines in asset values, may cause our clients to transfer
their assets out of our funds or other products or their
brokerage accounts or affect our ability to attract new clients
or additional assets from existing clients and result in reduced
net revenues, principally in our asset management business. to
the extent that clients do not withdraw their funds, they may
invest them in products that generate less fee income.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant
losses in our
market-making,
proprietary trading, investing, block trading, merchant banking,
underwriting and lending businesses. this risk may increase to
the extent we expand our proprietary trading and investing
businesses or commit capital to facilitate customer-driven
business.
concerns about financial institution profitability and solvency
as a result of general market conditions, particularly in the
credit markets, together with the forced merger or failure of a
number of major commercial and investment banks have at times
caused a number of our clients to reduce the level of business
that they do with us, either because of concerns about the
safety of their assets held by us or simply arising from a
desire to diversify their risk or for other reasons. some
clients have withdrawn some of the funds held at our firm or
transferred them from deposits with gs bank usa to other types
of assets (in many cases leaving those assets in their brokerage
accounts held with us). some counterparties have at times
refused to enter into certain derivatives and other
long-term
transactions with us or have requested additional collateral.
these instances were more prevalent during periods when the lack
of confidence in financial institutions was most widespread and
have become significantly less frequent in recent months.
table of contents
liquidity risk.liquidity is essential to our
businesses. our liquidity may be impaired by an inability to
access secured
and/or
unsecured debt markets, an inability to access funds from our
subsidiaries, an inability to sell assets or redeem our
investments, or unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this
situation may arise due to circumstances that we may be unable
to control, such as a general market disruption or an
operational problem that affects third parties or us, or even by
the perception among market participants that we, or other
market participants, are experiencing greater liquidity risk.
the ongoing liquidity crisis and the loss of confidence in
financial institutions has increased our cost of funding and
limited our access to some of our traditional sources of
liquidity, including both secured and unsecured borrowings. in
particular, in the latter half of 2008, we were unable to raise
significant amounts of
long-term
unsecured debt in the public markets, other than as a result of
the issuance of securities guaranteed by the federal deposit
insurance corporation (fdic) under the fdics temporary
liquidity guarantee program (tlgp). it is unclear when we will
regain access to the public long-term unsecured debt markets on
customary terms or whether any similar program will be available
after the tlgps scheduled june 2009 expiration.
the financial instruments that we hold and the contracts to
which we are a party are increasingly complex, as we employ
structured products to benefit our clients and ourselves, and
these complex structured products often do not have readily
available markets to access in times of liquidity stress. our
investing activities may lead to situations where the holdings
from these activities represent a significant portion of
specific markets, which could restrict liquidity for our
positions. further, our ability to sell assets may be impaired
if other market participants are seeking to sell similar assets
at the same time, as is likely to occur in a liquidity or other
market crisis. in addition, financial institutions with which we
interact may exercise set-off rights or the right to require
additional collateral, including in difficult market conditions,
which could further impair our access to liquidity.
our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a reduction
in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and
competitive position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our
access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under
certain bilateral provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions,
counterparties could be permitted to terminate contracts with
goldman sachs or require us to post additional collateral.
termination of our trading and collateralized financing
contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our
liquidity by requiring us to find other sources of financing or
to make significant cash payments or securities movements. for a
discussion of downgrades to our ratings that occurred in
december2008 and of the potential impact on goldman sachs
of a further reduction in our credit ratings, see
liquidity
and funding risk credit ratings below.
group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of goldman,
sachs& co. (gs&co.), goldman sachs bank usa (gs
bank usa) and goldman sachs bank (europe) plc (gs bank europe),
subject to certain exceptions, and has pledged significant
assets to gs bank usa to support its obligations to gs bank usa.
these guarantees may require group inc. to provide substantial
funds or assets to its subsidiaries or their creditors or
counterparties at a time when group inc. is in need of liquidity
to fund its own obligations.
table of contents
credit risk.the amount and duration of
our credit exposures have been increasing over the past several
years, as have the breadth and size of the entities to which we
have credit exposures. we are exposed to the risk that third
parties that owe us money, securities or other assets will not
perform their obligations. these parties may default on their
obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity,
operational failure or other reasons. a failure of a significant
market participant, or even concerns about a default by such an
institution, could lead to significant liquidity problems,
losses or defaults by other institutions, which in turn could
adversely affect us. we are also subject to the risk that our
rights against third parties may not be enforceable in all
circumstances. in addition, deterioration in the credit quality
of third parties whose securities or obligations we hold could
result in losses
and/or
adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or otherwise use
those securities or obligations for liquidity purposes. a
significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our
counterparties could also have a negative impact on our results.
while in many cases we are permitted to require additional
collateral for counterparties that experience financial
difficulty, disputes may arise as to the amount of collateral we
are entitled to receive and the value of pledged assets. default
rates, downgrades and disputes with counterparties as to the
valuation of collateral increase significantly in times of
market stress and illiquidity.
as part of our clearing business, we finance our client
positions, and we could be held responsible for the defaults or
misconduct of our clients. although we regularly review credit
exposures to specific clients and counterparties and to specific
industries, countries and regions that we believe may present
credit concerns, default risk may arise from events or
circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee,
particularly as new business initiatives lead us to transact
with a broader array of clients and counterparties and expose us
to new asset classes and new markets.
we have experienced, due to competitive factors, pressure to
extend and price credit at levels that may not always fully
compensate us for the risks we take. in particular, corporate
clients sometimes seek to require credit commitments from us in
connection with investment banking and other assignments.
operational risk.our businesses are highly
dependent on our ability to process and monitor, on a daily
basis, a very large number of transactions, many of which are
highly complex, across numerous and diverse markets in many
currencies. these transactions, as well as the information
technology services we provide to clients, often must adhere to
client-specific guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory
standards. despite the resiliency plans and facilities we have
in place, our ability to conduct business may be adversely
impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that supports our
businesses and the communities in which we are located. this may
include a disruption involving electrical, communications,
internet, transportation or other services used by us or third
parties with which we conduct business.
industry consolidation, whether among market participants or
financial intermediaries, increases the risk of operational
failure as disparate complex systems need to be integrated,
often on an accelerated basis. furthermore, the
interconnectivity of multiple financial institutions with
central agents, exchanges and clearing houses increases the risk
that an operational failure at one institution may cause an
industry-wide
operational failure that could materially impact our ability to
conduct business.
table of contents
legal and regulatory risk.we are subject to
extensive and evolving regulation in jurisdictions around the
world. several of our subsidiaries are subject to regulatory
capital requirements and, as a bank holding company, we are
subject to minimum capital standards and a minimum tier1
leverage ratio on a consolidated basis. firms in the financial
services industry have been operating in a difficult regulatory
environment. recent market disruptions have led to numerous
proposals for significant additional regulation of the financial
services industry. these regulations could limit our business
activities, increase compliance costs and, to the extent the
regulations strictly control the activities of financial
services firms, make it more difficult for us to distinguish
ourselves from competitors. substantial legal liability or a
significant regulatory action against us could have material
adverse financial effects or cause significant reputational harm
to us, which in turn could seriously harm our business
prospects. as a bank holding company, we will be subject to
capital requirements based on baseli as opposed to the
requirements based on baselii that applied to us as a cse.
complying with these requirements may require us to liquidate
assets or raise capital in a manner that adversely increases our
funding costs or otherwise adversely affects our shareholders
and creditors. in addition, failure to meet minimum capital
requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly
additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if
undertaken, could have a direct material adverse effect on our
financial condition. our status as a bank holding company and
the operation of our lending and other businesses through gs
bank usa subject us to additional regulation and limitations on
our activities, as described in regulation
banking regulation in parti, item1 of our
annual report on
form10-k,
as well as some regulatory uncertainty as we apply banking
regulations and practices to many of our businesses. the
application of these regulations and practices may present us
and our regulators with new or novel issues. we face significant
legal risks in our businesses, and the volume of claims and
amount of damages and penalties claimed in litigation and
regulatory proceedings against financial institutions remain
high. our experience has been that legal claims by customers and
clients increase in a market downturn. in addition,
employment-related claims typically increase in periods when we
have reduced the total number of employees. for a discussion of
how we account for our legal and regulatory exposures, see
use
of estimates below.
table of contents
critical
accounting policies
fair
value
the use of fair value to measure financial instruments, with
related unrealized gains or losses generally recognized in
trading and principal investments in our
consolidated statements of earnings, is fundamental to our
financial statements and our risk management processes and is
our most critical accounting policy. the fair value of a
financial instrument is the amount that would be received to
sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date
(the exit price). financial assets are marked to bid prices and
financial liabilities are marked to offer prices.
during the fourth quarter of 2008, both the financial accounting
standards board (fasb) and the staff of the sec re-emphasized
the importance of sound fair value measurement in financial
reporting. in october2008, the fasb issued fasb staff
positionno.fas157-3,
determining the fair value of a financial asset when the
market for that asset is not active. this statement
clarifies that determining fair value in an inactive or
dislocated market depends on facts and circumstances and
requires significant management judgment. this statement
specifies that it is acceptable to use inputs based on
management estimates or assumptions, or for management to make
adjustments to observable inputs to determine fair value when
markets are not active and relevant observable inputs are not
available. our fair value measurement policies are consistent
with the guidance in
fspno.fas157-3.
substantially all trading assets and trading liabilities are
reflected in our consolidated statements of financial condition
at fair value, pursuant principally to:
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.115,
accounting for certain investments in debt and equity
securities;
specialized industry accounting for
broker-dealers
and investment companies;
sfasno.133, accounting for derivative
instruments and hedging activities; or
the fair value option under either sfasno.155,
accounting for certain hybrid financial
instruments an amendment of fasb statements
no.133 and 140, or sfasno.159, the
fair value option for financial assets and financial
liabilities (i.e.,the fair value option).
upon becoming a bank holding company in september2008, we
could no longer apply specialized
broker-dealer
industry accounting to those subsidiaries not regulated as
broker-dealers.
therefore, within our
non-broker-dealer
subsidiaries, we designated as held for trading those
instruments within the scope of sfasno.115
(i.e.,debt securities and marketable equity securities),
and elected the fair value option for other cash instruments
(specifically loans, loan commitments and certain private equity
and restricted public equity securities) which we historically
had carried at fair value. these fair value elections were in
addition to previous elections made for certain corporate loans,
loan commitments and certificates of deposit issued by gs bank
usa. there was no impact on earnings from these initial
elections because all of these instruments were already recorded
at fair value in trading assets, at fair value or
trading liabilities, at fair value in the
consolidated statements of financial condition prior to group
inc. becoming a bank holding company.
table of contents
in determining fair value, we separate our trading assets,
at fair value and trading liabilities, at fair
value into two categories: cash instruments and derivative
contracts, as set forth in the following table:
trading
instruments by category
(in
millions)
as of november
trading
trading
trading
trading
assets, at
liabilities, at
assets, at
liabilities, at
fair value
fair value
fair value
fair value
cash trading instruments
$
186,231
$
57,143
$
324,181
$
112,018
icbc
5,496
(1)
6,807
(1)
smfg
1,135
1,134
(4)
4,060
3,627
(4)
other principal investments
15,126
(2)
11,933
(2)
principal investments
21,757
1,134
22,800
3,627
cash instruments
207,988
58,277
346,981
115,645
exchange-traded
6,164
8,347
13,541
12,280
over-the-counter
124,173
109,348
92,073
87,098
derivative contracts
130,337
(3)
117,695
(5)
105,614
(3)
99,378
(5)
total
$
338,325
$
175,972
$
452,595
$
215,023
(1)
includes interests of
$3.48billion and $4.30billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, held by
investment funds managed by goldman sachs. the fair value of our
investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, which trade on the
stock exchange of hong kong, includes the effect of foreign
exchange revaluation for which we maintain an economic currency
hedge.
(2)
the following table sets forth the
principal investments (in addition to our investments in icbc
and sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg)) included
within the principal investments component of our trading and
principal investments segment:
as of november
corporate
real estate
total
corporate
real estate
total
(in millions)
private
$
10,726
$
2,935
$
13,661
$
7,297
$
2,361
$
9,658
public
1,436
1,465
2,208
2,275
total
$
12,162
$
2,964
$
15,126
$
9,505
$
2,428
$
11,933
(3)
net of cash received pursuant to
credit support agreements of $137.16billion and
$59.05billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively.
(4)
represents an economic hedge on the
shares of common stock underlying our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg.
(5)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit
support agreements of $34.01billion and
$27.76billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively.
table of contents
cash instruments.cash instruments include
cash trading instruments, public principal investments and
private principal investments.
cash trading instruments.our cash trading
instruments are generally valued using quoted market prices,
broker or dealer quotations, or alternative pricing sources with
reasonable levels of price transparency. the types of
instruments valued based on quoted market prices in active
markets include most u.s.government and sovereign
obligations, active listed equities and certain money market
securities.
the types of instruments that trade in markets that are not
considered to be active, but are valued based on quoted market
prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative pricing
sources with reasonable levels of price transparency include
most government agency securities,
investment-grade
corporate bonds, certain mortgage products, certain bank loans
and bridge loans, less liquid listed equities, state, municipal
and provincial obligations and certain money market securities
and loan commitments.
certain cash trading instruments trade infrequently and
therefore have little or no price transparency. such instruments
include private equity and real estate fund investments, certain
bank loans and bridge loans (including certain mezzanine
financing, leveraged loans arising from capital market
transactions and other corporate bank debt), less liquid
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations (including
less liquid
high-yield
corporate bonds, distressed debt instruments and collateralized
debt obligations (cdos) backed by corporate obligations), less
liquid mortgage whole loans and securities (backed by either
commercial or residential real estate), and acquired portfolios
of distressed loans. the transaction price is initially used as
the best estimate of fair value. accordingly, when a pricing
model is used to value such an instrument, the model is adjusted
so that the model value at inception equals the transaction
price. this valuation is adjusted only when changes to inputs
and assumptions are corroborated by evidence such as
transactions in similar instruments, completed or pending
third-party transactions in the underlying investment or
comparable entities, subsequent rounds of financing,
recapitalizations and other transactions across the capital
structure, offerings in the equity or debt capital markets, and
changes in financial ratios or cash flows.
for positions that are not traded in active markets or are
subject to transfer restrictions, valuations are adjusted to
reflect illiquidity
and/or
non-transferability.
such adjustments are generally based on available market
evidence. in the absence of such evidence, managements
best estimate is used.
public principal investments.our public
principal investments held within the principal investments
component of our trading and principal investments segment tend
to be large, concentrated holdings resulting from initial public
offerings or other corporate transactions, and are valued based
on quoted market prices. for positions that are not traded in
active markets or are subject to transfer restrictions,
valuations are adjusted to reflect illiquidity
and/or
non-transferability.
such adjustments are generally based on available market
evidence. in the absence of such evidence, managements
best estimate is used.
our most significant public principal investment is our
investment in the ordinary shares of icbc. our investment in
icbc is valued using the quoted market price adjusted for
transfer restrictions. the ordinary shares acquired from icbc
are subject to transfer restrictions that, among other things,
prohibit any sale, disposition or other transfer until
april28,2009. from april28,2009 to
october20,2009, we may transfer up to 50% of the
aggregate ordinary shares of icbc that we owned as of
october20,2006. we may transfer the remaining shares
after october20,2009. a portion of our interest is
held by investment funds managed by goldman sachs.
table of contents
we also have an investment in the convertible preferred stock of
smfg. this investment is valued using a model that is
principally based on smfgs common stock price. during our
second quarter of 2008, we converted
one-third of
our smfg preferred stock investment into smfg common stock, and
delivered the common stock to close out
one-third of
our hedge position. as of november2008, we remained hedged
on the common stock underlying our remaining investment in smfg.
private principal investments.our private
principal investments held within the principal investments
component of our trading and principal investments segment
include investments in private equity, debt and real estate,
primarily held through investment funds. by their nature, these
investments have little or no price transparency. we value such
instruments initially at transaction price and adjust valuations
when evidence is available to support such adjustments. such
evidence includes transactions in similar instruments, completed
or pending third-party transactions in the underlying investment
or comparable entities, subsequent rounds of financing,
recapitalizations and other transactions across the capital
structure, offerings in the equity or debt capital markets, and
changes in financial ratios or cash flows.
derivative contracts.derivative contracts can
be
exchange-traded
or
over-the-counter
(otc). we generally value
exchange-traded
derivatives using models which calibrate to
market-clearing
levels and eliminate timing differences between the closing
price of the
exchange-traded
derivatives and their underlying instruments.
otc derivatives are valued using market transactions and other
market evidence whenever possible, including
market-based
inputs to models, model calibration to
market-clearing
transactions, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative
pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency.
where models are used, the selection of a particular model to
value an otc derivative depends upon the contractual terms of,
and specific risks inherent in, the instrument as well as the
availability of pricing information in the market. we generally
use similar models to value similar instruments. valuation
models require a variety of inputs, including contractual terms,
market prices, yield curves, credit curves, measures of
volatility, prepayment rates and correlations of such inputs.
for otc derivatives that trade in liquid markets, such as
generic forwards, swaps and options, model inputs can generally
be verified and model selection does not involve significant
management judgment.
certain otc derivatives trade in less liquid markets with
limited pricing information, and the determination of fair value
for these derivatives is inherently more difficult. where we do
not have corroborating market evidence to support significant
model inputs and cannot verify the model to market transactions,
the transaction price is initially used as the best estimate of
fair value. accordingly, when a pricing model is used to value
such an instrument, the model is adjusted so that the model
value at inception equals the transaction price. subsequent to
initial recognition, we only update valuation inputs when
corroborated by evidence such as similar market transactions,
third-party
pricing services
and/or
broker or dealer quotations, or other empirical market data. in
circumstances where we cannot verify the model value to market
transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model
could produce a materially different estimate of fair value. see
derivatives below for further
information on our otc derivatives.
when appropriate, valuations are adjusted for various factors
such as liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations.
such adjustments are generally based on available market
evidence. in the absence of such evidence, managements
best estimate is used.
controls over valuation of financial
instruments.a control infrastructure,
independent of the trading and investing functions, is
fundamental to ensuring that our financial instruments are
appropriately valued at
market-clearing
levels (exit price) and that fair value measurements are
reliable and consistently determined.
table of contents
we employ an oversight structure that includes appropriate
segregation of duties. senior management, independent of the
trading and investing functions, is responsible for the
oversight of control and valuation policies and for reporting
the results of these policies to our audit committee. we seek to
maintain the necessary resources to ensure that control
functions are performed appropriately. we employ procedures for
the approval of new transaction types and markets, price
verification, review of daily profit and loss, and review of
valuation models by personnel with appropriate technical
knowledge of relevant products and markets. these procedures are
performed by personnel independent of the trading and investing
functions. for financial instruments where prices or valuations
that require inputs are less observable, we employ, where
possible, procedures that include comparisons with similar
observable positions, analysis of actual to projected cash
flows, comparisons with subsequent sales, reviews of valuations
used for collateral management purposes and discussions with
senior business leaders. see
market
risk and
credit
risk below for a further discussion of how we manage the
risks inherent in our trading and principal investing businesses.
fair value hierarchy
level3.sfasno.157 establishes
a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation
techniques used to measure fair value. the objective of a fair
value measurement is to determine the price that would be
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the
measurement date (the exit price). the hierarchy gives the
highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets
for identical assets or liabilities (level1 measurements)
and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level3
measurements). assets and liabilities are classified in their
entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant
to the fair value measurement.
instruments that trade infrequently and therefore have little or
no price transparency are classified within level3 of the
fair value hierarchy. we determine which instruments are
classified within level3 based on the results of our price
verification process. this process is performed by personnel
independent of our trading and investing functions who
corroborate valuations to external market data
(e.g.,quoted market prices, broker or dealer quotations,
third-party
pricing vendors, recent trading activity and comparative
analyses to similar instruments). when broker or dealer
quotations or third-party pricing vendors are used for valuation
or price verification, greater priority is given to executable
quotes. as part of our price verification process, valuations
based on quotes are corroborated by comparison both to other
quotes and to recent trading activity in the same or similar
instruments. the number of quotes obtained varies by instrument
and depends on the liquidity of the particular instrument. see
notes2 and 3 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding sfasno.157.
recent market conditions, particularly in the fourth quarter of
2008 (characterized by dislocations between asset classes,
elevated levels of volatility, and reduced price transparency),
have increased the level of management judgment required to
value cash trading instruments classified within level3 of
the fair value hierarchy. in particular, managements
judgment is required to determine the appropriate
risk-adjusted
discount rate for cash trading instruments with little or no
price transparency as a result of decreased volumes and lower
levels of trading activity. in such situations, our valuation is
adjusted to approximate rates which market participants would
likely consider appropriate for relevant credit and liquidity
risks.
valuation methodologies for level3
assets.instruments classified within
level3 of the fair value hierarchy are initially valued at
transaction price, which is considered to be the best initial
estimate of fair value. as time passes, transaction price
becomes less reliable as an estimate of fair value and
accordingly, we use other methodologies to determine fair value,
which vary based on the type of instrument, as described below.
regardless of the methodology, valuation inputs and assumptions
are only changed when corroborated by substantive evidence.
senior management in control functions, independent of the
trading and investing functions, reviews all significant
unrealized gains/losses, including the primary drivers of the
change in value. valuations are further corroborated by values
realized upon
table of contents
sales of our level3 assets. an overview of methodologies
used to value our level3 assets subsequent to the
transaction date is as follows:
private equity and real estate fund
investments.investments are generally held at
cost for the first year. recent
third-party
investments or pending transactions are considered to be the
best evidence for any change in fair value. in the absence of
such evidence, valuations are based on third-party independent
appraisals, transactions in similar instruments, discounted cash
flow techniques, valuation multiples and public comparables.
such evidence includes pending reorganizations
(e.g.,merger proposals, tender offers or debt
restructurings); and significant changes in financial metrics
(e.g.,operating results as compared to previous
projections, industry multiples, credit ratings and balance
sheet ratios).
bank loans and bridge loans and corporate debt securities and
other debt obligations. valuations are generally based on
discounted cash flow techniques, for which the key inputs are
the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, market
yields for such instruments and recovery assumptions. inputs are
generally determined based on relative value analyses, which
incorporate comparisons both to credit default swaps that
reference the same underlying credit risk and to other debt
instruments for the same issuer for which observable prices or
broker quotes are available.
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate.
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate are
collateralized by specific assets and are generally tranched
into varying levels of subordination. due to the nature of these
instruments, valuation techniques vary by instrument.
methodologies include relative value analyses across different
tranches, comparisons to transactions in both the underlying
collateral and instruments with the same or substantially the
same underlying collateral, market indices (such as the cmbx
(1)), and
credit default swaps, as well as discounted cash flow techniques.
loans and securities backed by residential real estate.
valuations are based on both proprietary and industry recognized
models (including intex and bloomberg), discounted cash flow
techniques and hypothetical securitization analyses. in the
recent market environment, the most significant inputs to the
valuation of these instruments are rates of delinquency, default
and loss expectations, which are driven in part by housing
prices. inputs are determined based on relative value analyses,
which incorporate comparisons to instruments with similar
collateral and risk profiles, including relevant indices such as
the abx
(1).
loan portfolios.valuations are based on
discounted cash flow techniques, for which the key inputs are
the amount and timing of expected future cash flows and market
yields for such instruments. inputs are determined based on
relative value analyses which incorporate comparisons to recent
auction data for other similar loan portfolios.
derivative contracts.valuation models are
calibrated to initial transaction price. subsequent changes in
valuations are based on observable inputs to the valuation
models (e.g.,interest rates, credit spreads, volatilities,
etc.). inputs are changed only when corroborated by market data.
valuations of less liquid otc derivatives are typically based on
level1 or level2 inputs that can be observed in the
market, as well as unobservable inputs, such as correlations and
volatilities.
total level3 assets were $66.19billion and
$69.15billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. the decrease in level3
assets for the year ended november2008 primarily reflected
(i)unrealized losses on loans and securities backed by
commercial real estate, bank loans and bridge loans, and private
equity and real estate fund investments, and (ii)sales and
paydowns on bank loans and bridge loans and loan portfolios.
these decreases were partially offset by transfers to
level3 of certain loans and securities backed by
commercial real estate due to reduced price transparency.
(1)the
cmbx and abx are indices that track the performance of
commercial mortgage bonds and subprime residential mortgage
bonds, respectively.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the fair values of financial
assets classified as level3 within the fair value
hierarchy:
level3
financial assets at fair value
(in
millions)
as of november
description
private equity and real estate fund
investments(1)
$
16,006
$
18,006
bank loans and bridge
loans(2)
11,957
13,334
corporate debt securities and other debt
obligations(3)
7,596
6,111
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
9,340
7,410
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
2,049
2,484
loan
portfolios(4)
4,118
6,106
cash instruments
51,066
53,451
derivative contracts
15,124
15,700
total level3 assets at fair value
66,190
69,151
level3 assets for which we do not bear economic
exposure(5)
(6,616
)
(14,437
)
level3 assets for which we bear economic exposure
$
59,574
$
54,714
(1)
includes $1.18billion and $7.06billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, of
assets for which we do not bear economic exposure. also includes
$2.62billion and $2.02billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, of real
estate fund investments.
(2)
includes mezzanine financing, leveraged loans arising from
capital market transactions and other corporate bank debt.
(3)
includes $804million and $2.49billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, of cdos
backed by corporate obligations.
(4)
consists of acquired portfolios of distressed loans, primarily
backed by commercial and residential real estate collateral.
(5)
we do not bear economic exposure to these level3 assets as
they are financed by nonrecourse debt, attributable to minority
investors or attributable to employee interests in certain
consolidated funds.
table of contents
loans and securities backed by residential real
estate.we securitize, underwrite and make
markets in various types of residential mortgages, including
prime, alt-a
and subprime. at any point in time, we may use cash instruments
as well as derivatives to manage our long or short risk position
in residential real estate. the following table sets forth the
fair value of our long positions in prime,
alt-a and
subprime mortgage cash instruments:
long positions in
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
(in
millions)
as of november
prime(1)
$
1,494
$
7,135
alt-a
1,845
6,358
subprime(2)
1,906
2,109
total(3)
$
5,245
$
15,602
(1)
excludes u.s.government
agency-issued
collateralized mortgage obligations of $4.27billion and
$7.24billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. also excludes
u.s.government
agency-issued
mortgage-pass
through certificates.
(2)
includes $228million and $316million of cdos backed
by subprime mortgages as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively.
(3)
includes $2.05billion and $2.48billion of financial
instruments (primarily loans and
investment-grade
securities, the majority of which were issued during 2006 and
2007)classified as level3 under the fair value
hierarchy as of november2008 and november2007,
respectively.
loans and securities backed by commercial real
estate.we originate, securitize and syndicate
fixed and floating rate commercial mortgages globally. at any
point in time, we may use cash instruments as well as
derivatives to manage our risk position in the commercial
mortgage market. the following table sets forth the fair value
of our long positions in loans and securities backed by
commercial real estate by geographic region. the decrease in
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate from
november2007 to november2008 was primarily due to
dispositions.
long positions in
loans and securities backed by
commercial real estate by geographic region
(in
millions)
as of november
americas(1)
$
7,433
$
12,361
emea(2)
3,304
6,607
asia
total(3)
$
10,894
(4)
$
19,020
(5)
(1)
substantially all relates to the u.s.
(2)
emea (europe, middle east and africa).
(3)
includes $9.34billion and $7.41billion of financial
instruments classified as level3 under the fair value
hierarchy as of november2008 and november2007,
respectively.
(4)
comprised of loans of $9.23billion and commercial
mortgage-backed
securities of $1.66billion as of november2008, of
which $9.78billion was floating rate and
$1.11billion was fixed rate.
(5)
comprised of loans of $16.27billion and commercial
mortgage-backed
securities of $2.75billion as of november2007, of
which $16.52billion was floating rate and
$2.50billion was fixed rate.
table of contents
other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair
value.in addition to trading assets, at
fair value and trading liabilities, at fair
value, we have elected to account for certain of our other
financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value under
the fair value option. the primary reasons for electing the fair
value option are to reflect economic events in earnings on a
timely basis, to mitigate volatility in earnings from using
different measurement attributes and to address simplification
and
cost-benefit
considerations.
such financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at
fair value include:
certain unsecured
short-term
borrowings, consisting of all promissory notes and commercial
paper and certain hybrid financial instruments;
certain other secured financings, primarily transfers accounted
for as financings rather than sales under
sfasno.140, debt raised through our william street
program and certain other nonrecourse financings;
certain unsecured
long-term
borrowings, including prepaid physical commodity transactions;
resale and repurchase agreements;
securities borrowed and loaned within trading and principal
investments, consisting of our matched book and certain firm
financing activities;
certain corporate loans, loan commitments and certificates of
deposit issued by gs bank usa as well as securities held by gs
bank usa;
receivables from customers and counterparties arising from
transfers accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases
under sfasno.140;
certain insurance and reinsurance contracts; and
in general, investments acquired after the adoption of
sfasno.159 where we have significant influence over
the investee and would otherwise apply the equity method of
accounting. in certain cases, we may apply the equity method of
accounting to new investments that are strategic in nature or
closely related to our principal business activities, where we
have a significant degree of involvement in the cash flows or
operations of the investee, or where
cost-benefit
considerations are less significant.
goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets
as a result of our acquisitions, principally slk llc (slk) in
2000, the ayco company, l.p. (ayco) in 2003 and our variable
annuity and life insurance business in 2006, we have acquired
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. goodwill is the
cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of net
assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the
acquisition date.
goodwill.we test the goodwill in each of our
operating segments, which are components one level below our
three business segments, for impairment at least annually in
accordance with sfasno.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, by comparing the estimated fair value
of each operating segment with its estimated net book value. we
derive the fair value of each of our operating segments based on
valuation techniques we believe market participants would use
for each segment (observable average price-to-earnings multiples
of our competitors in these businesses and price-to-book
multiples). we derive the net book value of our operating
segments by estimating the amount of shareholders equity
required to support the activities of each operating segment.
our last annual impairment test was performed during our 2008
fourth quarter and no impairment was identified. substantially
all of our goodwill is in our equities component of our trading
and principal investments segment and in our asset management
and securities services segment. our asset management and
securities services segment generated record net revenues in
2008 and our equities component of our trading and principal
investments segment had its second best year following its
record net revenues in 2007.
table of contents
during 2008, particularly during the fourth quarter, the
financial services industry and the securities markets generally
were materially and adversely affected by significant declines
in the values of nearly all asset classes and by a serious lack
of liquidity. our stock price, consistent with stock prices in
the broader financial services sector, declined significantly
during this period of time. during the fourth quarter of 2008,
our market capitalization fell below recorded book value,
principally during the last five weeks of the quarter. with
respect to the testing of our goodwill for impairment, we
believe that it is reasonable to consider market capitalization
as an indicator of fair value over a reasonable period of time.
if the current economic market conditions persist and if there
is a prolonged period of weakness in the business environment
and financial markets, our businesses may be adversely affected,
which could result in an impairment of goodwill in the future.
the following table sets forth the carrying value of our
goodwill by operating segment:
goodwill by
operating segment
(in
millions)
as of november
investment banking
underwriting
$
$
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities(1)
2,389
2,381
principal investments
asset management and securities services
asset
management(2)
securities services
total
$
3,523
$
3,321
(1)
primarily related to slk.
(2)
primarily related to ayco.
identifiable intangible assets.we amortize
our identifiable intangible assets over their estimated lives in
accordance with sfasno.142 or, in the case of
insurance contracts, in accordance with sfasno.60,
accounting and reporting by insurance enterprises,
and sfasno.97, accounting and reporting by
insurance enterprises for certain
long-duration
contracts and for realized gains and losses from the sale of
investments. identifiable intangible assets are tested for
impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest
that an assets or asset groups carrying value may
not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144, accounting for the impairment or
disposal of
long-lived
assets, or sfasno.60 and
sfasno.97. an impairment loss, generally calculated
as the difference between the estimated fair value and the
carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the
sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the
asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying
value.
table of contents
the following table sets forth the carrying value and range of
remaining lives of our identifiable intangible assets by major
asset class:
identifiable
intangible assets by asset class
($ in
millions)
as of november
range of estimated
carrying
remaining lives
carrying
value
(in years)
value
customer
lists(1)
$
2-17
$
new york stock exchange (nyse) designated market maker
(dmm)rights
insurance-related
assets(2)
exchange-traded
fund (etf) lead market maker rights
other(3)
1-17
total
$
1,677
$
1,771
(1)
primarily includes our clearance
and execution and nasdaq customer lists related to slk and
financial counseling customer lists related to ayco.
(2)
consists of the value of business
acquired (voba) and deferred acquisition costs (dac). voba
represents the present value of estimated future gross profits
of acquired variable annuity and life insurance businesses. dac
results from commissions paid by goldman sachs to the primary
insurer (ceding company) on life and annuity reinsurance
agreements as compensation to place the business with us and to
cover the ceding companys acquisition expenses. voba and
dac are amortized over the estimated life of the underlying
contracts based on estimated gross profits, and amortization is
adjusted based on actual experience. the
seven-year
estimated life represents the weighted average remaining
amortization period of the underlying contracts (certain of
which extend for approximately 30years).
(3)
primarily includes
marketing-related assets and power contracts.
a prolonged period of weakness in global equity markets and the
trading of securities in multiple markets and on multiple
exchanges could adversely impact our businesses and impair the
value of our identifiable intangible assets. in addition,
certain events could indicate a potential impairment of our
identifiable intangible assets, including (i)changes in
market structure that could adversely affect our specialist
businesses (see discussion below), (ii)an adverse action
or assessment by a regulator, or (iii)adverse actual
experience on the contracts in our variable annuity and life
insurance business.
in october2008, the sec approved the nyses proposal
to create a new market model and redefine the role of nyse dmms.
this new rule set further aligns the nyses model with
investor requirements for speed and efficiency of execution and
establishes specialists as dmms. while dmms still have an
obligation to commit capital, they are now able to trade on
parity with other market participants. in addition, in
november2008 the nyse introduced a reserve order type that
allows for anonymous trade execution, which is expected to allow
the nyse to recapture liquidity and market share from other
venues in which anonymous reserve orders have been available for
some time. the new rule set and the launch of the reserve order
type, in combination with technology improvements to increase
execution speed, are expected to bolster the nyses
competitive position.
table of contents
in 2007, we tested our nyse dmm rights for impairment in
accordance with sfasno.144, accounting for the
impairment or disposal of
long-lived
assets. under sfasno.144, an impairment loss
is recognized if the carrying amount of our nyse dmm rights
exceeds the projected undiscounted cash flows of the business
over the estimated remaining life of our nyse dmm rights.
projected undiscounted cash flows exceeded the carrying amount
of our nyse dmm rights, and accordingly we did not record an
impairment loss. in projecting the undiscounted cash flows of
the business, we made several important assumptions about the
potential beneficial effects of the rule and market structure
changes described above. specifically, we assumed that:
total equity trading volumes in nyse-listed companies will
continue to grow at a rate consistent with recent historical
trends;
the nyse will be able to recapture approximately
one-half of
the market share that it lost in 2007; and
we will increase our market share of the nyse dmm business and,
as a dmm, the profitability of each share traded.
we also assumed that the rule changes would be implemented in
our fiscal fourth quarter of 2008 (as noted above, such rule
changes were approved in october2008)and that
projected cash flow increases related to the implementation of
the rule set would begin in 2009, consistent with the
assumptions above. subsequently, there have been no events or
changes in circumstances indicating that nyse dmm rights
intangible asset may not be recoverable. however, there can be
no assurance that the assumptions, rule or structure changes
described above will result in sufficient cash flows to avoid
impairment of our nyse dmm rights in the future. we will
continue to evaluate the performance of the specialist business
under the new market model. as of november2008, the
carrying value of our nyse dmm rights was $462million. to
the extent that there were to be an impairment in the future, it
could result in a significant writedown in the carrying value of
these dmmrights.
use of
estimates
the use of generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make certain estimates and assumptions. in
addition to the estimates we make in connection with fair value
measurements and the accounting for goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, the use of estimates and assumptions is also
important in determining provisions for potential losses that
may arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings and tax
audits.
we estimate and provide for potential losses that may arise out
of litigation and regulatory proceedings to the extent that such
losses are probable and can be estimated, in accordance with
sfasno.5, accounting for contingencies.
we estimate and provide for potential liabilities that may arise
out of tax audits to the extent that uncertain tax positions
fail to meet the recognition standard of fin48,
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes an
interpretation of fasb statement no.109. see
note16 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information on fin48.
significant judgment is required in making these estimates and
our final liabilities may ultimately be materially different.
our total estimated liability in respect of litigation and
regulatory proceedings is determined on a
case-by-case
basis and represents an estimate of probable losses after
considering, among other factors, the progress of each case or
proceeding, our experience and the experience of others in
similar cases or proceedings, and the opinions and views of
legal counsel. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the
outcome of our litigation and regulatory matters, particularly
in cases or proceedings in which substantial or indeterminate
damages or fines are sought, we cannot estimate losses or ranges
of losses for cases or proceedings where there is only a
reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred. see
legal
proceedings in parti, item3 of our annual
report on
form10-k
for information on our judicial, regulatory and arbitration
proceedings.
table of contents
results of
operations
the composition of our net revenues has varied over time as
financial markets and the scope of our operations have changed.
the composition of net revenues can also vary over the shorter
term due to fluctuations in u.s.and global economic and
market conditions. see
certain
risk factors that may affect our businesses above and
risk factors in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k
for a further discussion of the impact of economic and market
conditions on our results of operations.
financial
overview
the following table sets forth an overview of our financial
results:
financial
overview
($ in
millions, except per share amounts)
year ended november
net revenues
$
22,222
$
45,987
$
37,665
pre-tax
earnings
2,336
17,604
14,560
net earnings
2,322
11,599
9,537
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
2,041
11,407
9,398
diluted earnings per common share
4.47
24.73
19.69
return on average common shareholders
equity(1)
4.9
%
32.7
%
32.8
%
return on average tangible common shareholders
equity(2)
5.5
%
38.2
%
39.8
%
(1)
return on average common
shareholders equity (roe) is computed by dividing net
earnings applicable to common shareholders by average monthly
common shareholders equity.
(2)
tangible common shareholders
equity equals total shareholders equity less preferred
stock, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding
power contracts. identifiable intangible assets associated with
power contracts are not deducted from total shareholders
equity because, unlike other intangible assets, less than 50% of
these assets are supported by common shareholders equity.
we believe that return on average tangible common
shareholders equity (rote) is meaningful because it
measures the performance of businesses consistently, whether
they were acquired or developed internally. rote is computed by
dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by
average monthly tangible common shareholders equity.
the following table sets forth the reconciliation of average
total shareholders equity to average tangible common
shareholders equity:
average for the
year ended november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
47,167
$
37,959
$
31,048
preferred stock
(5,157
)
(3,100
)
(2,400
)
common shareholders equity
42,010
34,859
28,648
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(5,220
)
(4,971
)
(5,013
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$
36,790
$
29,888
$
23,635
table of contents
net
revenues
2008 versus 2007.our net revenues were
$22.22billion in 2008, a decrease of 52% compared with
2007, reflecting a particularly difficult operating environment,
including significant asset price declines, high levels of
volatility and reduced levels of liquidity, particularly in the
fourth quarter. in addition, credit markets experienced
significant dislocation between prices for cash instruments and
the related derivative contracts and between credit indices and
underlying single names. net revenues in trading and principal
investments were significantly lower compared with 2007,
reflecting significant declines in ficc, principal investments
and equities. the decrease in ficc primarily reflected losses in
credit products, which included a loss of approximately
$3.1billion (net of hedges) related to
non-investment-grade
credit origination activities and losses from investments,
including corporate debt and private and public equities.
results in mortgages included net losses of approximately
$1.7billion on residential mortgage loans and securities
and approximately $1.4billion on commercial mortgage loans
and securities. interest rate products, currencies and
commodities each produced particularly strong results and net
revenues were higher compared with 2007. during 2008, although
client-driven activity was generally solid, ficc operated in a
challenging environment characterized by
broad-based
declines in asset values, wider mortgage and corporate credit
spreads, reduced levels of liquidity and
broad-based
investor deleveraging, particularly in the second half of the
year. the decline in principal investments primarily reflected
net losses of $2.53billion from corporate principal
investments and $949million from real estate principal
investments, as well as a $446million loss from our
investment in the ordinary shares of icbc. in equities, the
decrease compared with particularly strong net revenues in 2007
reflected losses in principal strategies, partially offset by
higher net revenues in our client franchise businesses.
commissions were particularly strong and were higher than 2007.
during 2008, equities operated in an environment characterized
by a significant decline in global equity prices,
broad-based
investor deleveraging and very high levels of volatility,
particularly in the second half of the year.
net revenues in investment banking also declined significantly
compared with 2007, reflecting significantly lower net revenues
in both financial advisory and underwriting. in financial
advisory, the decrease compared with particularly strong net
revenues in 2007 reflected a decline in
industry-wide
completed mergers and acquisitions. the decrease in underwriting
primarily reflected significantly lower net revenues in debt
underwriting, primarily due to a decline in leveraged finance
and
mortgage-related
activity, reflecting difficult market conditions. net revenues
in equity underwriting were slightly lower compared with 2007,
reflecting a decrease in
industry-wide
equity and
equity-related
offerings.
net revenues in asset management and securities services
increased compared with 2007. securities services net revenues
were higher, reflecting the impact of changes in the composition
of securities lending customer balances, as well as higher total
average customer balances. asset management net revenues
increased slightly compared with 2007. during the year, assets
under management decreased $89billion to
$779billion, due to $123billion of market
depreciation, primarily in equity assets, partially offset by
$34billion of net inflows.
table of contents
2007 versus 2006.our net revenues were
$45.99billion in 2007, an increase of 22% compared with
2006, reflecting significantly higher net revenues in trading
and principal investments and investment banking, and higher net
revenues in asset management and securities services. the
increase in trading and principal investments reflected higher
net revenues in equities, ficc and principal investments. net
revenues in equities increased 33% compared with 2006,
reflecting significantly higher net revenues in both our client
franchise businesses and principal strategies. during 2007,
equities operated in an environment characterized by strong
client-driven activity, generally higher equity prices and
higher levels of volatility, particularly during the second half
of the year. the increase in ficc reflected significantly higher
net revenues in currencies and interest rate products. in
addition, net revenues in mortgages were higher despite a
significant deterioration in the mortgage market throughout the
year, while net revenues in credit products were strong, but
slightly lower compared with 2006. credit products included
substantial gains from equity investments, including a gain of
approximately $900million related to the disposition of
horizon wind energy l.l.c., as well as a loss of approximately
$1billion (net of hedges) related to
non-investment-grade
credit origination activities. during 2007, ficc operated in an
environment generally characterized by strong client-driven
activity and favorable market opportunities. however, during the
year, the mortgage market experienced significant deterioration
and, in the second half of the year, the broader credit markets
were characterized by wider spreads and reduced levels of
liquidity. the increase in principal investments reflected
strong results in both corporate and real estate investing.
the increase in investment banking reflected a 64% increase in
financial advisory net revenues and a strong performance in our
underwriting business. the increase in financial advisory
primarily reflected growth in
industry-wide
completed mergers and acquisitions. the increase in underwriting
reflected higher net revenues in debt underwriting, as leveraged
finance activity was strong during the first half of our fiscal
year, while net revenues in equity underwriting were strong but
essentially unchanged from 2006.
net revenues in asset management and securities services also
increased. the increase in securities services primarily
reflected significant growth in global customer balances. the
increase in asset management reflected significantly higher
asset management fees, partially offset by significantly lower
incentive fees. during the year, assets under management
increased $192billion, or 28%, to $868billion,
including net inflows of $161billion.
table of contents
operating
expenses
our operating expenses are primarily influenced by compensation,
headcount and levels of business activity. a substantial portion
of our compensation expense represents discretionary bonuses
which are significantly impacted by, among other factors, the
level of net revenues, prevailing labor markets, business mix
and the structure of our
share-based
compensation programs. for 2008, our ratio of compensation and
benefits (excluding severance costs of approximately
$275million in the fourth quarter of 2008)to net
revenues was 48.0%. our ratio of compensation and benefits to
net revenues was 43.9% for 2007.
the following table sets forth our operating expenses and number
of employees:
operating
expenses and employees
($ in
millions)
year ended november
compensation and
benefits(1)
$
10,934
$
20,190
$
16,457
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
2,998
2,758
1,985
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
1,022
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
other
expenses(2)
1,709
1,661
1,538
total
non-compensation
expenses
8,952
8,193
6,648
total operating expenses
$
19,886
$
28,383
$
23,105
employees at
year-end(3)
30,067
30,522
26,467
(1)
compensation and benefits includes
$262million, $168million and $259million for
the years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively, attributable to consolidated
entities held for investment purposes. consolidated entities
held for investment purposes are entities that are held strictly
for capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and are
engaged in activities that are not closely related to our
principal businesses.
(2)
beginning in the first quarter of
2008, cost of power generation was reclassified into
other expenses in the consolidated statements of
earnings. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation.
(3)
excludes 4,671, 4,572 and 3,868
employees as of november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively, of consolidated entities held
for investment purposes (see footnote1 above).
table of contents
the following table sets forth
non-compensation
expenses of consolidated entities held for investment purposes
and our remaining
non-compensation
expenses by line item:
non-compensation
expenses
(in
millions)
year ended november
non-compensation
expenses of consolidated
investments(1)
$
$
$
non-compensation
expenses excluding consolidated investments
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
2,998
2,758
1,985
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
other
expenses(2)
1,451
1,434
1,279
subtotal
8,173
7,747
6,147
total
non-compensation
expenses, as reported
$
8,952
$
8,193
$
6,648
(1)
consolidated entities held for
investment purposes are entities that are held strictly for
capital appreciation, have a defined exit strategy and are
engaged in activities that are not closely related to our
principal businesses. for example, these investments include
consolidated entities that hold real estate assets, such as
hotels, but exclude investments in entities that primarily hold
financial assets. we believe that it is meaningful to review
non-compensation
expenses excluding expenses related to these consolidated
entities in order to evaluate trends in
non-compensation
expenses related to our principal business activities. revenues
related to such entities are included in trading and
principal investments in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
(2)
beginning in the first quarter of
2008, cost of power generation was reclassified into
other expenses in the consolidated statements of
earnings. prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the
current presentation.
2008 versus 2007.operating expenses were
$19.89billion for 2008, 30% lower than 2007. compensation
and benefits expenses (including salaries, bonuses, amortization
of prior year equity awards and other items such as payroll
taxes and benefits) of $10.93billion decreased 46%
compared with 2007, reflecting lower levels of discretionary
compensation due to lower net revenues. for 2008, our ratio of
compensation and benefits (excluding severance costs of
approximately $275million in the fourth quarter of
2008)to net revenues was 48.0%. our ratio of compensation
and benefits to net revenues was 43.9% for 2007. employment
levels decreased 1% compared with november2007, reflecting
an 8% decrease during the fourth quarter.
non-compensation
expenses of $8.95billion for 2008 increased 9% compared
with 2007. excluding consolidated entities held for investment
purposes,
non-compensation
expenses increased 5% compared with 2007. the majority of this
increase was attributable to higher brokerage, clearing,
exchange and distribution fees, principally reflecting higher
activity levels in equities and ficc. the increase in
non-compensation
expenses related to consolidated entities held for investment
purposes primarily reflected the impact of impairment on certain
real estate assets during 2008.
2007 versus 2006.operating expenses were
$28.38billion for 2007, 23% higher than 2006. compensation
and benefits expenses of $20.19billion increased 23%
compared with 2006, reflecting increased discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels. the ratio of
compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2007 was 43.9%
compared with 43.7% for 2006. employment levels increased 15%
compared with november2006.
table of contents
non-compensation
expenses of $8.19billion for 2007 increased 23% compared
with 2006, primarily attributable to higher levels of business
activity and continued geographic expansion.
one-half of
this increase was attributable to brokerage, clearing, exchange
and distribution fees, principally reflecting higher transaction
volumes in equities. professional fees, other expenses and
communications and technology expenses also increased, primarily
due to higher levels of business activity. occupancy and
depreciation and amortization expenses in 2007 included exit
costs of $128million related to our office space.
provision for
taxes
the effective income tax rate was approximately 1% for 2008,
down from 34.1% for 2007. the decrease in the effective income
tax rate was primarily due to an increase in permanent benefits
as a percentage of lower earnings and changes in geographic
earnings mix. the effective income tax rate was 34.1% for 2007,
down from 34.5% for 2006, primarily due to changes in the
geographic mix of earnings.
our effective income tax rate can vary from period to period
depending on, among other factors, the geographic and business
mix of our earnings, the level of our
pre-tax
earnings, the level of our tax credits and the effect of tax
audits. certain of these and other factors, including our
history of
pre-tax
earnings, are taken into account in assessing our ability to
realize our net deferred tax assets. see note16 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8
of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our provision for taxes.
table of contents
segment operating
results
the following table sets forth the net revenues, operating
expenses and
pre-tax
earnings of our segments:
segment operating
results
(in
millions)
year ended november
investment
net revenues
$
5,185
$
7,555
$
5,629
banking
operating expenses
3,143
4,985
4,062
pre-tax earnings
$
2,042
$
2,570
$
1,567
trading and principal
net revenues
$
9,063
$
31,226
$
25,562
investments
operating expenses
11,808
17,998
14,962
pre-tax
earnings/(loss)
$
(2,745
)
$
13,228
$
10,600
asset management and
net revenues
$
7,974
$
7,206
$
6,474
securities services
operating expenses
4,939
5,363
4,036
pre-tax earnings
$
3,035
$
1,843
$
2,438
total
net revenues
$
22,222
$
45,987
$
37,665
operating
expenses(1)
19,886
28,383
23,105
pre-tax
earnings
$
2,336
$
17,604
$
14,560
(1)
operating expenses include net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory proceedings
of $(4) million, $37million and $45million for the
years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively, that have not been allocated
to our segments.
net revenues in our segments include allocations of interest
income and interest expense to specific securities, commodities
and other positions in relation to the cash generated by, or
funding requirements of, such underlying positions. see
note18 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our business segments.
the cost drivers of goldman sachs taken as a whole
compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of our business
segments. compensation and benefits expenses within our segments
reflect, among other factors, the overall performance of goldman
sachs as well as the performance of individual business units.
consequently,
pre-tax
margins in one segment of our business may be significantly
affected by the performance of our other business segments. a
discussion of segment operating results follows.
table of contents
investment
banking
our investment banking segment is divided into two components:
financial advisory.financial advisory
includes advisory assignments with respect to mergers and
acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities,
restructurings and
spin-offs.
underwriting.underwriting includes public
offerings and private placements of a wide range of securities
and other financial instruments.
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
investment banking segment:
investment
banking operating results
(in
millions)
year ended november
financial advisory
$
2,656
$
4,222
$
2,580
equity underwriting
1,353
1,382
1,365
debt underwriting
1,176
1,951
1,684
total underwriting
2,529
3,333
3,049
total net revenues
5,185
7,555
5,629
operating expenses
3,143
4,985
4,062
pre-tax
earnings
$
2,042
$
2,570
$
1,567
the following table sets forth our financial advisory and
underwriting transaction volumes:
goldman sachs
global investment banking volumes
(1)
(in
billions)
year ended november
announced mergers and acquisitions
$
$
1,249
$
1,101
completed mergers and acquisitions
1,443
equity and
equity-related
offerings(2)
debt
offerings(3)
(1)
source: thomson reuters. announced
and completed mergers and acquisitions volumes are based on full
credit to each of the advisors in a transaction. equity and
equity-related
offerings and debt offerings are based on full credit for single
book managers and equal credit for joint book managers.
transaction volumes may not be indicative of net revenues in a
given period. in addition, transaction volumes for prior periods
may vary from amounts previously reported due to the subsequent
withdrawal or a change in the value of a previously announced
transaction.
(2)
includes rule144a and public
common stock offerings, convertible offerings and rights
offerings.
(3)
includes
non-convertible
preferred stock,
mortgage-backed
securities,
asset-backed
securities and taxable municipal debt. includes publicly
registered and rule144a issues.
table of contents
2008 versus 2007. net revenues in investment banking of
$5.19billion for 2008 decreased 31% compared with 2007.
net revenues in financial advisory of $2.66billion
decreased 37% compared with particularly strong net revenues in
2007, primarily reflecting a decline in
industry-wide
completed mergers and acquisitions. net revenues in our
underwriting business of $2.53billion decreased 24%
compared with 2007, principally due to significantly lower net
revenues in debt underwriting. the decrease in debt underwriting
was primarily due to a decline in leveraged finance and
mortgage-related
activity, reflecting difficult market conditions. net revenues
in equity underwriting were slightly lower compared with 2007,
reflecting a decrease in
industry-wide
equity and
equity-related
offerings. our investment banking transaction backlog ended the
year significantly lower than at the end of 2007.
(1)
operating expenses of $3.14billion for 2008 decreased 37%
compared with 2007, due to decreased compensation and benefits
expenses, resulting from lower levels of discretionary
compensation.
pre-tax
earnings of $2.04billion in 2008 decreased 21% compared
with 2007.
2007 versus 2006.net revenues in investment
banking of $7.56billion for 2007 increased 34% compared
with 2006.
net revenues in financial advisory of $4.22billion
increased 64% compared with 2006, primarily reflecting growth in
industry-wide
completed mergers and acquisitions. net revenues in our
underwriting business of $3.33billion increased 9%
compared with 2006, due to higher net revenues in debt
underwriting, primarily reflecting strength in leveraged finance
during the first half of 2007. net revenues in equity
underwriting were also strong, but essentially unchanged from
2006. our investment banking transaction backlog at the end of
2007 was higher than at the end of 2006.
(1)
operating expenses of $4.99billion for 2007 increased 23%
compared with 2006, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses, resulting from higher discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels.
pre-tax
earnings of $2.57billion in 2007 increased 64% compared
with 2006.
trading and
principal investments
our trading and principal investments segment is divided into
three components:
ficc.we make markets in and trade interest
rate and credit products,
mortgage-related
securities and loan products and other
asset-backed
instruments, currencies and commodities, structure and enter
into a wide variety of derivative transactions, and engage in
proprietary trading and investing.
equities.we make markets in and trade
equities and
equity-related
products, structure and enter into equity derivative
transactions and engage in proprietary trading. we generate
commissions from executing and clearing client transactions on
major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide through our
equities client franchise and clearing activities. we also
engage in specialist and insurance activities.
principal investments.we make real estate and
corporate principal investments, including our investment in the
ordinary shares of icbc. we generate net revenues from returns
on these investments and from the increased share of the income
and gains derived from our merchant banking funds when the
return on a funds investments over the life of the fund
exceeds certain threshold returns (typically referred to as an
override).
(1)our
investment banking transaction backlog represents an estimate of
our future net revenues from investment banking transactions
where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely
than not.
table of contents
substantially all of our inventory is
marked-to-market
daily and, therefore, its value and our net revenues are subject
to fluctuations based on market movements. in addition, net
revenues derived from our principal investments, including those
in privately held concerns and in real estate, may fluctuate
significantly depending on the revaluation of these investments
in any given period. we also regularly enter into large
transactions as part of our trading businesses. the number and
size of such transactions may affect our results of operations
in a given period.
net revenues from principal investments do not include
management fees generated from our merchant banking funds. these
management fees are included in the net revenues of the asset
management and securities services segment.
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
trading and principal investments segment:
trading and
principal investments operating results
(in
millions)
year ended november
ficc
$
3,713
$
16,165
$
14,262
equities trading
4,208
6,725
4,965
equities commissions
4,998
4,579
3,518
total equities
9,206
11,304
8,483
icbc
(446
)
gross gains
1,335
3,728
2,061
gross losses
(4,815
)
(943
)
(585
)
net other corporate and real estate investments
(3,480
)
2,785
1,476
overrides
total principal investments
(3,856
)
3,757
2,817
total net revenues
9,063
31,226
25,562
operating expenses
11,808
17,998
14,962
pre-tax
earnings/(loss)
$
(2,745
)
$
13,228
$
10,600
2008 versus 2007.net revenues in trading and
principal investments of $9.06billion for 2008 decreased
71% compared with 2007.
net revenues in ficc of $3.71billion for 2008 decreased
77% compared with 2007, primarily reflecting losses in credit
products, which included a loss of approximately
$3.1billion (net of hedges) related to
non-investment-grade
credit origination activities and losses from investments,
including corporate debt and private and public equities.
results in mortgages included net losses of approximately
$1.7billion on residential mortgage loans and securities
and approximately $1.4billion on commercial mortgage loans
and securities. interest rate products, currencies and
commodities each produced particularly strong results and net
revenues were higher compared with 2007. during 2008, although
client-driven activity was generally solid, ficc operated in a
challenging environment characterized by
broad-based
declines in asset values, wider mortgage and corporate credit
spreads, reduced levels of liquidity and
broad-based
investor deleveraging, particularly in the second half of the
year.
table of contents
net revenues in equities of $9.21billion for 2008
decreased 19% compared with a particularly strong 2007,
reflecting losses in principal strategies, partially offset by
higher net revenues in the client franchise businesses.
commissions were particularly strong and were higher than 2007.
during 2008, equities operated in an environment characterized
by a significant decline in global equity prices,
broad-based
investor deleveraging and very high levels of volatility,
particularly in the second half of the year.
principal investments recorded a net loss of $3.86billion
for 2008. these results included net losses of
$2.53billion from corporate principal investments and
$949million from real estate principal investments, as
well as a $446million loss related to our investment in
the ordinary shares of icbc.
operating expenses of $11.81billion for 2008 decreased 34%
compared with 2007, due to decreased compensation and benefits
expenses, resulting from lower levels of discretionary
compensation. this decrease was partially offset by higher
non-compensation expenses. excluding consolidated entities held
for investment purposes, the majority of this increase was
attributable to higher brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees, principally reflecting higher activity levels
in equities and ficc. the increase in non-compensation expenses
related to consolidated entities held for investment purposes
primarily reflected the impact of impairment on certain real
estate assets during 2008.
pre-tax loss
was $2.75billion in 2008 compared with
pre-tax
earnings of $13.23billion in 2007.
2007 versus 2006.net revenues in trading and
principal investments of $31.23billion for 2007 increased
22% compared with 2006.
net revenues in ficc of $16.17billion for 2007 increased
13% compared with 2006, reflecting significantly higher net
revenues in currencies and interest rate products. in addition,
net revenues in mortgages were higher despite a significant
deterioration in the mortgage market throughout 2007, while net
revenues in credit products were strong, but slightly lower
compared with 2006. credit products included substantial gains
from equity investments, including a gain of approximately
$900million related to the disposition of horizon wind
energy l.l.c., as well as a loss of approximately
$1billion (net of hedges) related to
non-investment-grade
credit origination activities. net revenues in commodities were
also strong but lower compared with 2006. during 2007, ficc
operated in an environment generally characterized by strong
client-driven activity and favorable market opportunities.
however, during 2007, the mortgage market experienced
significant deterioration and, in the second half of the year,
the broader credit markets were characterized by wider spreads
and reduced levels of liquidity.
net revenues in equities of $11.30billion for 2007
increased 33% compared with 2006, reflecting significantly
higher net revenues in both our client franchise businesses and
principal strategies. the client franchise businesses benefited
from significantly higher commission volumes. during 2007,
equities operated in an environment characterized by strong
client-driven activity, generally higher equity prices and
higher levels of volatility, particularly during the second half
of the year.
principal investments recorded net revenues of
$3.76billion for 2007, reflecting gains and overrides from
corporate and real estate principal investments. results in
principal investments included a $495million gain related
to our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc and a
$129million loss related to our investment in the
convertible preferred stock of smfg.
operating expenses of $18.00billion for 2007 increased 20%
compared with 2006, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses, resulting from higher discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels.
non-compensation
expenses increased due to the impact of higher levels of
business activity and continued geographic expansion. the
majority of this increase was in brokerage, clearing, exchange
and distribution fees, which primarily reflected higher
transaction volumes in equities. professional fees also
increased, reflecting increased business activity.
pre-tax
earnings of $13.23billion in 2007 increased 25% compared
with 2006.
table of contents
asset
management and securities services
our asset management and securities services segment is divided
into two components:
asset management.asset management provides
investment advisory and financial planning services and offers
investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
primarily generates revenues in the form of management and
incentive fees.
securities services.securities services
provides prime brokerage services, financing services and
securities lending services to institutional clients, including
hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide, and generates revenues primarily in the
form of interest rate spreads or fees.
assets under management typically generate fees as a percentage
of asset value, which is affected by investment performance and
by inflows and redemptions. the fees that we charge vary by
asset class, as do our related expenses. in certain
circumstances, we are also entitled to receive incentive fees
based on a percentage of a funds return or when the return
on assets under management exceeds specified benchmark returns
or other performance targets. incentive fees are recognized when
the performance period ends and they are no longer subject to
adjustment. we have numerous incentive fee arrangements, many of
which have annual performance periods that end on
december31. for that reason, incentive fees have been
seasonally weighted to our first quarter.
the following table sets forth the operating results of our
asset management and securities services segment:
asset management
and securities services operating results
(in
millions)
year ended november
management and other fees
$
4,321
$
4,303
$
3,332
incentive fees
total asset management
4,552
4,490
4,294
securities services
3,422
2,716
2,180
total net revenues
7,974
7,206
6,474
operating expenses
4,939
5,363
4,036
pre-tax
earnings
$
3,035
$
1,843
$
2,438
assets under management include our mutual funds, alternative
investment funds and separately managed accounts for
institutional and individual investors. substantially all assets
under management are valued as of calendar month-end. assets
under management do not include:
assets in brokerage accounts that generate commissions,
mark-ups and
spreads based on transactional activity,
our own investments in funds that we manage;
or
non-fee-paying
assets, including interest-bearing deposits held through our
depository institution subsidiaries.
table of contents
the following table sets forth our assets under management by
asset class:
assets under
management by asset class
(in
billions)
as of november 30
alternative
investments(1)
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total
non-money
market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
(1)
primarily includes hedge funds, private equity, real estate,
currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
the following table sets forth a summary of the changes in our
assets under management:
changes in assets
under management
(in
billions)
year ended november 30
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
net inflows/(outflows)
alternative investments
equity
(55
)
fixed income
total
non-money
market net inflows/(outflows)
(33
)
(1)
money markets
(2)
total net inflows/(outflows)
(3)
net market appreciation/(depreciation)
(123
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
(1)
includes $7billion in net
asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of
macquarie imm investment management.
(2)
net of the transfer of
$8billion of money market assets under management to
interest-bearing deposits at gs bank usa.
(3)
includes $3billion of net
asset inflows in connection with the acquisition of our variable
annuity and life insurance business.
2008 versus 2007.net revenues in asset
management and securities services of $7.97billion for
2008 increased 11% compared with 2007.
asset management net revenues of $4.55billion for 2008
increased 1% compared with 2007. during 2008, assets under
management decreased $89billion to $779billion, due
to $123billion of market depreciation, primarily in equity
assets, partially offset by $34billion of net inflows. net
inflows reflected inflows in money market, fixed income and
alternative investment assets, partially offset by outflows in
equity assets.
table of contents
securities services net revenues of $3.42billion for 2008
increased 26% compared with 2007, reflecting the impact of
changes in the composition of securities lending customer
balances, as well as higher total average customer balances.
operating expenses of $4.94billion for 2008 decreased 8%
compared with 2007, due to decreased compensation and benefits
expenses, resulting from lower levels of discretionary
compensation.
pre-tax
earnings of $3.04billion in 2008 increased 65% compared
with 2007.
2007 versus 2006.net revenues in asset
management and securities services of $7.21billion for
2007 increased 11% compared with 2006.
asset management net revenues of $4.49billion for 2007
increased 5% compared with 2006, reflecting a 29% increase in
management and other fees, partially offset by significantly
lower incentive fees. incentive fees were $187million for
2007 compared with $962million for 2006. during 2007,
assets under management increased $192billion, or 28%, to
$868billion, reflecting
non-money
market net inflows of $73billion
(1),
primarily in fixed income and equity assets, money market net
inflows of $88billion, and net market appreciation of
$31billion, reflecting appreciation in fixed income and
equity assets, partially offset by depreciation in alternative
investment assets.
securities services net revenues of $2.72billion for 2007
increased 25% compared with 2006, as our prime brokerage
business continued to generate strong results, primarily
reflecting significantly higher customer balances in securities
lending and margin lending.
operating expenses of $5.36billion for 2007 increased 33%
compared with 2006, primarily due to increased compensation and
benefits expenses, resulting from higher discretionary
compensation and growth in employment levels, and higher
distribution fees (included in brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees).
pre-tax
earnings of $1.84billion in 2007 decreased 24% compared
with 2006.
geographic
data
see note18 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for a summary of our total net revenues,
pre-tax
earnings and net earnings by geographic region.
off-balance-sheet
arrangements
we have various types of
off-balance-sheet
arrangements that we enter into in the ordinary course of
business. our involvement in these arrangements can take many
different forms, including purchasing or retaining residual and
other interests in
mortgage-backed
and other
asset-backed
securitization vehicles; holding senior and subordinated debt,
interests in limited and general partnerships, and preferred and
common stock in other nonconsolidated vehicles; entering into
interest rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit
derivatives, including total return swaps; entering into
operating leases; and providing guarantees, indemnifications,
loan commitments, letters of credit and representations and
warranties.
we enter into these arrangements for a variety of business
purposes, including the securitization of commercial and
residential mortgages, home equity and auto loans, government
and corporate bonds, and other types of financial assets. other
reasons for entering into these arrangements include
underwriting client securitization transactions; providing
secondary market liquidity; making investments in performing and
nonperforming debt, equity, real estate and other assets;
providing investors with
credit-linked
and
asset-repackaged
notes; and receiving or providing letters of credit to satisfy
margin requirements and to facilitate the clearance and
settlement process.
(1)includes
$7billion in net asset inflows in connection with our
acquisition of macquarie imm investment management.
table of contents
we engage in transactions with variable interest entities (vies)
and qualifying
special-purpose
entities (qspes). such vehicles are critical to the functioning
of several significant investor markets, including the
mortgage-backed
and other
asset-backed
securities markets, since they offer investors access to
specific cash flows and risks created through the securitization
process. our financial interests in, and derivative transactions
with, such nonconsolidated entities are accounted for at fair
value, in the same manner as our other financial instruments,
except in cases where we apply the equity method of accounting.
we did not have
off-balance-sheet
commitments to purchase or finance any cdos held by structured
investment vehicles as of november2008 or
november2007.
in december2007, the american securitization forum (asf)
issued the streamlined foreclosure and loss avoidance
framework for securitized subprime adjustable rate mortgage
loans (asf framework). the asf framework provides guidance
for servicers to streamline borrower evaluation procedures and
to facilitate the use of foreclosure and loss prevention
measures for securitized subprime residential mortgages that
meet certain criteria. for certain eligible loans as defined in
the asf framework, servicers may presume default is reasonably
foreseeable and apply a
fast-track
loan modification plan, under which the loan interest rate will
be kept at the introductory rate for a period of five years
following the upcoming reset date. mortgage loan modifications
of these eligible loans will not affect our accounting treatment
for qspes that hold the subprime loans.
the following table sets forth where a discussion of
off-balance-sheet
arrangements may be found in partii, items7 and 8 of
our annual report on
form10-k:
type of off-balance-sheet arrangement
disclosure in our annual report on form 10-k
retained interests or contingent interests in assets transferred
by us to nonconsolidated entities
see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii,
item 8 of our annual report on form 10-k.
leases, letters of credit, and loans and other commitments
see
contractual
obligations and commitments below and note 8 to the
consolidated financial statements in part ii, item 8 of our
annual report on form 10-k.
guarantees
see note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii,
item 8 of our annual report on form 10-k.
other obligations, including contingent obligations, arising out
of variable interests we have in nonconsolidated entities
see note4 to the consolidated financial statements in part
ii, item 8 of our annual report on form 10-k.
derivative contracts
see
critical
accounting policies above, and
risk
management and
derivatives
below and notes 3 and 7 to the consolidated financial statements
in part ii, item 8 of our annual report on form 10-k.
in addition, see note2 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of our consolidation policies.
table of contents
equity
capital
the level and composition of our equity capital are principally
determined by our consolidated regulatory capital requirements
but may also be influenced by rating agency guidelines,
subsidiary capital requirements, the business environment,
conditions in the financial markets and assessments of potential
future losses due to extreme and adverse changes in our business
and market environments. as of november2008, our total
shareholders equity was $64.37billion (consisting of
common shareholders equity of $47.90billion and
preferred stock of $16.47billion) compared with total
shareholders equity of $42.80billion as of
november2007 (consisting of common shareholders
equity of $39.70billion and preferred stock of
$3.10billion). in addition to total shareholders
equity, we consider the $5.00billion of junior
subordinated debt issued to trusts (see discussion below) to be
part of our equity capital, as it qualifies as capital for
regulatory and certain rating agency purposes.
consolidated
capital requirements
we are subject to regulatory capital requirements administered
by the u.s. federal banking agencies. our bank depository
institution subsidiaries, including gs bank usa, are subject to
similar capital guidelines. under the federal reserve
boards capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory
framework for prompt corrective action (pca) that is applicable
to gsbank usa, goldmansachs and its bank depository
institution subsidiaries must meet specific capital guidelines
that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and
certain
off-balance-sheet
items as calculated under regulatory reporting practices.
goldmansachs and its bank depository institution
subsidiaries capital amounts, as well as gsbank
usas pca classification, are also subject to qualitative
judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings
and other factors. we anticipate reporting capital ratios as
follows:
before we became a bank holding company, we were subject to
capital guidelines by the sec as a consolidated supervised
entity (cse) that were generally consistent with those set out
in the revised framework for the international convergence of
capital measurement and capital standards issued by the basel
committee on banking supervision (basel ii). we currently
compute and report our firmwide capital ratios in accordance
with the basel ii requirements as applicable to us when we were
regulated as a cse for the purpose of assessing the adequacy of
our capital. under the basel ii framework as it applied to us
when we were regulated as a cse, we evaluate our tier1
capital and total allowable capital as a percentage of rwas. as
of november2008, our total capital ratio (total allowable
capital as a percentage of rwas) was 18.9% and our tier1
ratio (tier1 capital as a percentage of rwas) was 15.6%,
in each case calculated under the basel ii framework as it
applied to us when we were regulated as a cse. see
consolidated capital ratios below for
further information. we expect to continue to report to
investors for a period of time our baselii capital ratios
as applicable to us when we were regulated as acse.
the regulatory capital guidelines currently applicable to bank
holding companies are based on the capital accord of the basel
committee on banking supervision (basel i), with basel ii to be
phased in over time. we are currently working with the federal
reserve board to put in place the appropriate reporting and
compliance mechanisms and methodologies to allow reporting of
the basel i capital ratios as of the end of march 2009.
in addition, we are currently working to implement the basel ii
framework as applicable to us as a bank holding company (as
opposed to as a cse). u.s.banking regulators have
incorporated the basel ii framework into the existing
risk-based
capital requirements by requiring that internationally active
banking organizations, such as group inc., transition to basel
ii over the next several years.
the federal reserve board also has established minimum leverage
ratio guidelines. we were not subject to these guidelines before
becoming a bank holding company and, accordingly, we are
currently working with the federal reserve board to finalize our
methodology for calculating this ratio.
table of contents
the tier1 leverage ratio is defined as tier1 capital
(as applicable to us as a bank holding company) divided by
adjusted average total assets (which includes adjustments for
disallowed goodwill and certain intangible assets). the minimum
tier1 leverage ratio is 3% for bank holding companies that
have received the highest supervisory rating under federal
reserve board guidelines or that have implemented the federal
reserve boards
risk-based
capital measure for market risk. other bank holding companies
must have a minimum leverage ratio of 4%. bank holding companies
may be expected to maintain ratios well above the minimum
levels, depending upon their particular condition, risk profile
and growth plans. as of november2008, our estimated
tier1 leverage ratio was 6.1%. this ratio represents a
preliminary estimate and may be revised in subsequent filings as
we continue to work with the federal reserve board to finalize
the methodology for the calculation.
consolidated
capital ratios
the following table sets forth additional information on our
capital ratios as of november2008 calculated in the same
manner (generally consistent with basel ii)as when the
firm was regulated by the sec as a cse:
as of
november
($ in millions)
i. tier1 and total allowable capital
common shareholders equity
$
47,898
preferred stock
16,471
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
5,000
less: goodwill
(3,523
)
less: disallowable intangible assets
(1,386
)
less: other
deductions(1)
(1,823
)
tier1 capital
62,637
other components of total allowable capital
qualifying subordinated
debt(2)
13,703
less: other
deductions(1)
(690
)
total allowable capital
$
75,650
ii.
risk-weighted
assets
market risk
$
176,646
credit risk
184,055
operational risk
39,675
total
risk-weighted
assets
$
400,376
iii. tier1 ratio
15.6
%
iv. total capital ratio
18.9
%
(1)
principally included investments in
regulated insurance entities and certain financial service
entities (50% was deducted from both tier1 capital and
total allowable capital).
(2)
substantially all of our existing
subordinated debt qualified as total allowable capital for cse
purposes.
our rwas are driven by the amount of market risk, credit risk
and operational risk associated with our business activities in
a manner generally consistent with methodologies set out in
basel ii. the methodologies used to compute rwas for each of
market risk, credit risk and operational risk are closely
aligned with our risk management practices. see
market
risk and credit risk below for a
discussion of how we manage risks in our trading and principal
investing businesses. further details on the methodologies used
to calculate rwas are set forth below.
table of contents
risk-weighted
assets for market risk
for positions captured in var, rwas are calculated using var and
other
model-based
measures, including requirements for incremental default risk
and other event risks. var is the potential loss in value of
trading positions due to adverse market movements over a defined
time horizon with a specified confidence level. market risk rwas
are calculated consistent with the specific conditions set out
in the basel ii framework (based on var calibrated to a 99%
confidence level, over a
10-day
holding period, multiplied by a factor). additional rwas are
calculated with respect to incremental default risk and other
event risks, in a manner generally consistent with our internal
risk management methodologies.
for positions not included in var because var is not the most
appropriate measure of risk, we calculate rwas based on
alternative methodologies, including sensitivity analyses.
risk-weighted
assets for credit risk
rwas for credit risk are calculated for on- and
off-balance-sheet exposures that are not captured in our market
risk rwas, with the exception of otc derivatives for which both
market risk and credit risk rwas are calculated. the
calculations are consistent with the advanced internal ratings
based (airb) approach and the internal models method
(imm)of basel ii, and were based on exposure at default
(ead), which is an estimate of the amount that would be owed to
us at the time of a default, multiplied by each
counterpartys risk weight.
under the basel ii airb approach, a counterpartys risk
weight is generally derived from a combination of the
probability of default (pd), the loss given default (lgd) and
the maturity of the trade or portfolio of trades, where:
pd is an estimate of the probability that an obligor will
default over a
one-year
horizon. pd is derived from the use of internally determined
equivalents of public rating agency ratings.
lgd is an estimate of the economic loss rate if a default occurs
during economic downturn conditions. lgd is determined based on
industry data.
for otc derivatives and funding trades (such as repurchase and
reverse repurchase transactions), we use the basel ii imm
approach, which allows ead to be calculated using
model-based
measures to determine potential exposure, consistent with models
and methodologies that we use for internal risk management
purposes. for commitments, ead is calculated as a percentage of
the outstanding notional balance. for other credit exposures,
ead is generally the carrying value of the exposure.
risk-weighted
assets for operational risk
rwas for operational risk are calculated using a
risk-based
methodology consistent with the qualitative and quantitative
criteria for the advanced measurement approach (ama), as defined
in basel ii. the methodology incorporates internal loss events,
relevant external loss events, results of scenario analyses and
managements assessment of our business environment and
internal controls. we estimate capital requirements for both
expected and unexpected losses, seeking to capture the major
drivers of operational risk over a
one-year
time horizon, at a 99.9% confidence level. operational risk
capital is allocated among our businesses and is regularly
reported to senior management and key risk and oversight
committees.
rating agency
guidelines
the credit rating agencies assign credit ratings to the
obligations of group inc., which directly issues or guarantees
substantially all of the firms senior unsecured
obligations. the level and composition of our equity capital are
among the many factors considered in determining our credit
ratings. each agency has its own definition of eligible capital
and methodology for evaluating capital
table of contents
adequacy, and assessments are generally based on a combination
of factors rather than a single calculation. see
liquidity
and funding risk credit ratings below for
further information regarding our credit ratings.
subsidiary
capital requirements
many of our subsidiaries are subject to separate regulation and
capital requirements in the
u.s.and/or
elsewhere. gs&co. and goldman sachs execution&
clearing, l.p. are registered
u.s.broker-dealers
and futures commissions merchants, and are subject to regulatory
capital requirements, including those imposed by the sec, the
commodity futures trading commission, the chicago board of
trade, the financial industry regulatory authority, inc. (finra)
and the national futures association.
our depository institution subsidiary, gs bank usa, a new york
state-chartered bank and a member of the federal reserve system
and the fdic, is regulated by the federal reserve board and the
new york state banking department and is subject to minimum
capital requirements that (subject to certain exceptions) are
similar to those applicable to bank holding companies. gs bank
usa was formed in november2008 through the merger of our
existing utah industrial bank (named gs bank usa) into our new
york limited purpose trust company, with the surviving company
taking the name gs bank usa. as of november 2007, gsbank
usas predecessor was a wholly owned industrial bank
regulated by the utah department of financial institutions, was
a member of the fdic and was subject to minimum capital
requirements. we compute the capital ratios for gs bank usa in
accordance with the basel i framework for purposes of assessing
the adequacy of its capital. in order to be considered a
well capitalized depository institution under the
federal reserve board guidelines, gs bank usa must maintain a
tier1 capital ratio of at least 6%, a total capital ratio
of at least 10%, and a tier1 leverage ratio of at least
5%. in connection with the november 2008 asset transfer
described below, gsbank usa agreed with the federal
reserve board to minimum capital ratios in excess of these
well capitalized levels. accordingly, for a period
of time, gs bank usa is expected to maintain a tier1
capital ratio of at least 8%, a total capital ratio of at least
11% and a tier 1 leverage ratio of at least 6%. in
november2008, we contributed subsidiaries with an
aggregate of $117.16billion of assets into gsbank
usa (which brought total assets in gsbank usa to
$145.06billion as of november 2008). as a result, we are
currently working with the federal reserve board to finalize our
methodology for the baseli calculations. as of november
2008, under baseli, gsbank usas estimated
tier1 capital ratio was 8.9% and estimated total capital
ratio was 11.6%. in addition, gsbank usas estimated
tier1 leverage ratio was 9.1%.
group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of
gs&co., gs bank usa and gs bank europe, subject to certain
exceptions. in november2008, as noted above, we
contributed subsidiaries, with an aggregate of
$117.16billion of assets, into gs bank usa and group inc.
agreed to guarantee certain losses, including
credit-related
losses, relating to assets held by the contributed entities. in
connection with this guarantee, group inc. also agreed to pledge
to gs bank usa certain collateral, including interests in
subsidiaries and other illiquid assets.
gs bank europe, our regulated irish bank, is subject to minimum
capital requirements imposed by the irish financial services
regulatory authority. several other subsidiaries of goldman
sachs are regulated by securities, investment advisory, banking,
insurance, and other regulators and authorities around the
world. goldman sachs international (gsi), our regulated u.k.
broker-dealer,
is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by the
financial services authority (fsa). goldman sachs japan co.,
ltd., our regulated japanese
broker-dealer,
is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by
japans financial services agency. as of november2008
and november2007, these subsidiaries were in compliance
with their local capital requirements.
as discussed above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to
regulatory capital requirements in jurisdictions throughout the
world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold
capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency
requirements (for entities with assigned credit ratings) or
table of contents
internal policies, including policies concerning the minimum
amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based on its
underlying level of risk. see
liquidity
and funding risk conservative liability
structure below for a discussion of our potential
inability to access funds from our subsidiaries.
equity investments in subsidiaries are generally funded with
parent company equity capital. as of november2008, group
inc.s equity investment in subsidiaries was
$51.70billion compared with its total shareholders
equity of $64.37billion.
our capital invested in
non-u.s.subsidiaries
is generally exposed to foreign exchange risk, substantially all
of which is managed through a combination of derivative
contracts and
non-u.s.denominated
debt. in addition, we generally manage the
non-trading
exposure to foreign exchange risk that arises from transactions
denominated in currencies other than the transacting
entitys functional currency.
see note17 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our regulated subsidiaries.
equity capital
management
our objective is to maintain a sufficient level and optimal
composition of equity capital. we manage our capital through
repurchases of our common stock, as permitted, and issuances of
common and preferred stock, junior subordinated debt issued to
trusts and other subordinated debt. we manage our capital
requirements principally by setting limits on balance sheet
assets
and/or
limits on risk, in each case at both the consolidated and
business unit levels. we attribute capital usage to each of our
business units based upon our regulatory capital framework and
manage the levels of usage based upon the balance sheet and risk
limits established.
share repurchase program.subject to the
limitations of the u.s.treasurys tarp capital
purchase program described below under
equity
capital equity capital management
preferred stock, we seek to use our share repurchase
program to substantially offset increases in share count over
time resulting from employee
share-based
compensation. the repurchase program is effected primarily
through regular
open-market
purchases, the amounts and timing of which are determined
primarily by our current and projected capital positions
(i.e.,comparisons of our desired level of capital to our
actual level of capital) but which may also be influenced by
general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading
volumes of our common stock, in each case subject to the limit
imposed under the u.s.treasurys tarp capital
purchase program. see
equity
capital equity capital management
preferred stock below for information regarding
restrictions on our ability to repurchase common stock.
the following table sets forth the level of share repurchases
for the years ended november2008 and november2007:
as of november
(in millions, except
per share amounts)
number of shares repurchased
10.54
41.22
total cost
$
2,037
$
8,956
average cost per share
$
193.18
$
217.29
as of november2008, we were authorized to repurchase up to
60.9million additional shares of common stock pursuant to
our repurchase program. see market for registrants
common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases
of equity securities in partii, item5 of our
annual report on
form10-k
for additional information on our repurchase program.
stock offerings.in september2008, we
completed a public offering of 46.7million shares of
common stock at $123.00 per share for proceeds of
$5.75billion.
table of contents
in october2008, we issued to berkshire hathaway inc. and
certain affiliates 50,000shares of 10% cumulative
perpetual preferred stock, seriesg (seriesg
preferred stock), and a five-year warrant to purchase up to
43.5million shares of common stock at an exercise price of
$115.00 per share, for aggregate proceeds of $5.00billion.
the allocated carrying values of the warrant and the
seriesg preferred stock on the date of issuance (based on
their relative fair values) were $1.14billion and
$3.86billion, respectively. the warrant is exercisable at
any time until october1,2013 and the number of
shares of common stock underlying the warrant and the exercise
price are subject to adjustment for certain dilutive events.
in october2008, under the u.s.treasurys tarp
capital purchase program, we issued to the u.s.treasury
10.0million shares of fixed rate cumulative perpetual
preferred stock, seriesh (seriesh preferred stock),
and a
10-year
warrant to purchase up to 12.2million shares of common
stock at an exercise price of $122.90 per share, for aggregate
proceeds of $10.00billion. the allocated carrying values
of the warrant and the seriesh preferred stock on the date
of issuance (based on their relative fair values) were
$490million and $9.51billion, respectively.
cumulative dividends on the seriesh preferred stock are
payable at 5% per annum through november14,2013 and
at a rate of 9% per annum thereafter. the seriesh
preferred stock will be accreted to the redemption price of
$10.00billion over five years. the warrant is exercisable
at any time until october28,2018 and the number of
shares of common stock underlying the warrant and the exercise
price are subject to adjustment for certain dilutive events. if,
on or prior to december31,2009, we receive aggregate
gross cash proceeds of at least $10billion from sales of
tier1 qualifying perpetual preferred stock or common
stock, the number of shares of common stock issuable upon
exercise of the warrant will be reduced by
one-half of
the original number of shares of common stock.
preferred stock.as of november2008,
goldman sachs had 10.2million shares of perpetual
preferred stock issued and outstanding as set forth in the
following table:
preferred stock
by series
dividend
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
preference
issued
authorized
dividend rate
redemption date
(in millions)
a
non-cumulative
30,000
50,000
3 month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 3.75% per annum
april25,2010
$
b
non-cumulative
32,000
50,000
6.20% per annum
october31,2010
c
non-cumulative
8,000
25,000
3 month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 4.00% per annum
october31,2010
d
non-cumulative
54,000
60,000
3 month libor + 0.67%,
with floor of 4.00% per annum
may24,2011
1,350
g
cumulative
50,000
50,000
10.00% per annum
date of issuance
5,500
h
cumulative
10,000,000
10,000,000
5.00% per annum through
november14,2013 and
9.00% per annum thereafter
date of issuance
10,000
10,174,000
10,235,000
$
18,600
each share of
non-cumulative
preferred stock issued and outstanding has a par value of $0.01,
has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is represented by 1,000
depositary shares and is redeemable at our option, subject to
the approval of the federal reserve board, at a redemption price
equal to $25,000 plus declared and unpaid dividends.
each share of seriesg preferred stock issued and
outstanding has a par value of $0.01, has a liquidation
preference of $100,000 and is redeemable at our option, subject
to the approval of the federal reserve board, at a redemption
price equal to $110,000 plus accrued and unpaid dividends.
each share of seriesh preferred stock issued and
outstanding has a par value of $0.01, has a liquidation
preference of $1,000 and is redeemable at our option, subject to
the approval of the
table of contents
federal reserve board, at a redemption price equal to $1,000
plus accrued and unpaid dividends, provided that through
november14,2011 the seriesh preferred stock is
redeemable only in an amount up to the aggregate net cash
proceeds received from sales of tier1 qualifying perpetual
preferred stock or common stock, and only once such sales have
resulted in aggregate gross proceeds of at least
$2.5billion.
all series of preferred stock are pari passu and have a
preference over our common stock upon liquidation. dividends on
each series of preferred stock, if declared, are payable
quarterly in arrears. our ability to declare or pay dividends
on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, our common stock
is subject to certain restrictions in the event that we fail to
pay or set aside full dividends on our preferred stock for the
latest completed dividend period. in addition, pursuant to the
u.s.treasurys tarp capital purchase program, until
the earliest of october28,2011, the redemption of
all of the seriesh preferred stock or transfer by the
u.s.treasury of all of the seriesh preferred stock
to third parties, we must obtain the consent of the
u.s.treasury to raise our common stock dividend or to
repurchase any shares of common stock or other preferred stock,
with certain exceptions (including repurchases of our common
stock under our share repurchase program to offset dilution from
equity-based
compensation). for as long as the seriesh preferred stock
remains outstanding, due to the limitations pursuant to the u.s.
treasurys tarp capital purchase program, we will
repurchase our common stock through our share repurchase program
only for the purpose of offsetting dilution from
equity-based
compensation, to the extent permitted.
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts in connection with
normal automatic preferred enhanced capital
securities.in 2007, we issued $1.75billion
of fixed rate junior subordinated debt to goldman sachs capital
ii and $500million of floating rate junior subordinated
debt to goldman sachs capital iii, delaware statutory trusts
that, in turn, issued $2.25billion of guaranteed perpetual
automatic preferred enhanced capital securities (apex) to third
parties and a de minimis amount of common securities to goldman
sachs. the junior subordinated debt is included in
unsecured
long-term
borrowings in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. in connection with the apex issuance, we entered into
stock purchase contracts with goldman sachs capital ii and iii
under which we will be obligated to sell and these entities will
be obligated to purchase $2.25billion of perpetual
non-cumulative
preferred stock that we will issue in the future. goldman sachs
capital ii and iii are required to remarket the junior
subordinated debt in order to fund their purchase of the
preferred stock, but in the event that a remarketing is
unsuccessful, they will relinquish the subordinated debt to us
in exchange for the preferred stock. because of certain
characteristics of the junior subordinated debt (and the
associated apex), including its
long-term
nature, the future issuance of perpetual
non-cumulative
preferred stock under the stock purchase contracts, our ability
to defer payments due on the debt and the subordinated nature of
the debt in our capital structure, it qualifies as tier1
and total allowable capital and is included as part of our
equity capital.
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust in connection with
trustpreferred securities.we issued
$2.84billion of junior subordinated debentures in 2004 to
goldman sachs capital i, a delaware statutory trust that, in
turn, issued $2.75billion of guaranteed preferred
beneficial interests to third parties and $85million of
common beneficial interests to goldman sachs. the junior
subordinated debentures are included in unsecured
long-term
borrowings in the consolidated statements of financial
condition. because of certain characteristics of the junior
subordinated debt (and the associated trust preferred
securities), including its
long-term
nature, our ability to defer coupon interest for up to ten
consecutive
semi-annual
periods and the subordinated nature of the debt in our capital
structure, it qualifies as tier1 and total allowable
capital and is included as part of our equity capital.
subordinated debt.in addition to junior
subordinated debt issued to trusts, we had other subordinated
debt outstanding of $14.17billion as of
november2008. although not part of our shareholders
equity, substantially all of our subordinated debt qualifies as
total allowable capital.
table of contents
other capital
ratios and metrics
the following table sets forth information on our assets,
shareholders equity, leverage ratios and book value per
common share:
as of november
($ in millions, except
per share amounts)
total assets
$
884,547
$
1,119,796
adjusted
assets(1)
528,161
745,700
total shareholders equity
64,369
42,800
tangible equity
capital(2)
64,186
42,728
leverage
ratio(3)
13.7
x
26.2
x
adjusted leverage
ratio(4)
8.2
x
17.5
x
debt to equity
ratio(5)
2.6
x
3.8
x
common shareholders equity
$
47,898
$
39,700
tangible common shareholders
equity(6)
42,715
34,628
book value per common
share(7)
$
98.68
$
90.43
tangible book value per common
share(8)
88.00
78.88
(1)
adjusted assets excludes
(i)low-risk
collateralized assets generally associated with our matched book
and securities lending businesses and federal funds sold,
(ii)cash and securities we segregate for regulatory and
other purposes and (iii)goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, excluding power contracts. we do not deduct
identifiable intangible assets associated with power contracts
from total assets in order to be consistent with the calculation
of tangible equity capital and the adjusted leverage ratio (see
footnote 2 below).
the following table sets forth the reconciliation of total
assets to adjusted assets:
as of november
(in millions)
total assets
$
884,547
$
1,119,796
deduct:
securities borrowed
(180,795
)
(277,413
)
securities purchased under agreements to resell, at fair value
and federal funds sold
(122,021
)
(87,317
)
add:
trading liabilities, at fair value
175,972
215,023
less derivative liabilities
(117,695
)
(99,378
)
subtotal
58,277
115,645
deduct:
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(106,664
)
(119,939
)
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(5,183
)
(5,072
)
adjusted assets
$
528,161
$
745,700
(2)
tangible equity capital equals
total shareholders equity and junior subordinated debt
issued to trusts less goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets, excluding power contracts. we do not deduct identifiable
intangible assets associated with power contracts from total
shareholders equity because, unlike other intangible
assets, less than 50% of these assets are supported by common
shareholders equity. we consider junior subordinated debt
issued to trusts to be a component of our tangible equity
capital base due to certain characteristics of the debt,
including its
long-term
nature, our ability to defer payments due on the debt and the
subordinated nature of the debt in our capital structure.
the following table sets forth the reconciliation of total
shareholders equity to tangible equity capital:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
64,369
$
42,800
add:
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
5,000
5,000
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(5,183
)
(5,072
)
tangible equity capital
$
64,186
$
42,728
table of contents
(3)
the leverage ratio equals total
assets divided by total shareholders equity. this ratio is
different from the tier1 leverage ratios included in
equity
capital consolidated capital requirements and
equity capital subsidiary capital
requirements above.
(4)
the adjusted leverage ratio equals
adjusted assets divided by tangible equity capital. we believe
that the adjusted leverage ratio is a more meaningful measure of
our capital adequacy than the leverage ratio because it excludes
certain
low-risk
collateralized assets that are generally supported with little
or no capital and reflects the tangible equity capital deployed
in our businesses.
(5)
the debt to equity ratio equals
unsecured
long-term
borrowings divided by total shareholders equity.
(6)
tangible common shareholders
equity equals total shareholders equity less preferred
stock, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding
power contracts. we do not deduct identifiable intangible assets
associated with power contracts from total shareholders
equity because, unlike other intangible assets, less than 50% of
these assets are supported by common shareholders equity.
the following table sets forth the reconciliation of total
shareholders equity to tangible common shareholders
equity:
as of november
(in millions)
total shareholders equity
$
64,369
$
42,800
deduct:
preferred stock
(16,471
)
(3,100
)
common shareholders equity
47,898
39,700
deduct:
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, excluding power
contracts
(5,183
)
(5,072
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$
42,715
$
34,628
(7)
book value per common share is
based on common shares outstanding, including restricted stock
units granted to employees with no future service requirements,
of 485.4million and 439.0million as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
(8)
tangible book value per common
share is computed by dividing tangible common shareholders
equity by the number of common shares outstanding, including
restricted stock units granted to employees with no future
service requirements.
table of contents
contractual
obligations and commitments
goldman sachs has contractual obligations to make future
payments related to our unsecured
long-term
borrowings, secured
long-term
financings,
long-term
noncancelable lease agreements and purchase obligations and has
commitments under a variety of commercial arrangements.
the following table sets forth our contractual obligations by
fiscal maturity date as of november2008:
contractual
obligations
(in
millions)
2010-
2012-
2014-
thereafter
total
unsecured
long-term
borrowings(1)(2)(3)
$
$
25,122
$
38,750
$
104,348
$
168,220
secured
long-term
financings(1)(2)(4)
6,735
4,417
6,306
17,458
contractual interest
payments(5)
8,145
14,681
11,947
34,399
69,172
insurance
liabilities(6)
4,879
7,263
minimum rental payments
1,664
3,493
purchase obligations
(1)
obligations maturing within one
year of our financial statement date or redeemable within one
year of our financial statement date at the option of the holder
are excluded from this table and are treated as
short-term
obligations. see note3 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our secured financings.
(2)
obligations that are repayable
prior to maturity at the option of goldman sachs are reflected
at their contractual maturity dates. obligations that are
redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holder are
reflected at the dates such options become exercisable.
(3)
includes $17.45billion
accounted for at fair value under sfasno.155 or sfas
no.159, primarily consisting of hybrid financial
instruments and prepaid physical commodity transactions.
(4)
these obligations are reported
within other secured financings in the consolidated
statements of financial condition and include $7.85billion
accounted for at fair value under sfasno.159.
(5)
represents estimated future
interest payments related to unsecured
long-term
borrowings and secured
long-term
financings based on applicable interest rates as of
november2008. includes stated coupons, if any, on
structured notes.
(6)
represents estimated undiscounted
payments related to future benefits and unpaid claims arising
from policies associated with our insurance activities,
excluding separate accounts and estimated recoveries under
reinsurance contracts.
as of november2008, our unsecured
long-term
borrowings were $168.22billion, with maturities extending
to 2043, and consisted principally of senior borrowings. see
note7 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our unsecured
long-term
borrowings.
as of november2008, our future minimum rental payments,
net of minimum sublease rentals, under noncancelable leases were
$3.49billion. these lease commitments, principally for
office space, expire on various dates through 2069. certain
agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for
increases in real estate taxes and other charges. see
note8 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our leases.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office
space held in excess of our current requirements. this excess
space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is
being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied
space that we may exit in the future. we regularly evaluate our
current and future space capacity in relation to current and
projected staffing levels. in 2008, we incurred exit costs of
$80million related to our office space (included in
table of contents
occupancy and depreciation and
amortization in the consolidated statement of earnings).
we may incur exit costs in the future to the extent we
(i)reduce our space capacity or (ii)commit to, or
occupy, new properties in the locations in which we operate and,
consequently, dispose of existing space that had been held for
potential growth. these exit costs may be material to our
results of operations in a given period.
as of november2008, included in purchase obligations was
$483million of
construction-related
obligations. our
construction-related
obligations include commitments of $388million related to
our new headquarters in new york city, which is expected to cost
between $2.1billion and $2.3billion. we have
partially financed this construction project with
$1.65billion of
tax-exempt
liberty bonds.
due to the uncertainty of the timing and amounts that will
ultimately be paid, our liability for unrecognized tax benefits
has been excluded from the above contractual obligations table.
see note16 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information on fin48.
the following table sets forth our commitments as of
november2008:
commitments
(in
millions)
commitment amount by fiscal period of expiration
2010-
2012-
2014-
thereafter
total
commitments to extend credit
commercial lending:
investment-grade
$
3,587
$
2,705
$
1,538
$
$
8,007
non-investment-grade
1,188
1,767
5,708
9,318
william street program
3,300
6,715
12,178
22,610
warehouse financing
1,101
total commitments to extend
credit(1)
8,679
11,684
19,424
1,249
41,036
forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements
61,455
61,455
forward starting repurchase and securities lending agreements
6,948
6,948
commitments under letters of credit issued by banks to
counterparties
6,953
7,251
investment commitments
6,398
7,144
14,266
underwriting commitments
total
$
90,674
$
18,929
$
19,722
$
1,872
$
131,197
(1)
commitments to extend credit are
net of amounts syndicated to third parties.
our commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to
counterparties that have fixed termination dates and are
contingent on the satisfaction of all conditions to borrowing
set forth in the contract. in connection with our lending
activities, we had outstanding commitments to extend credit of
$41.04billion as of november2008. since these
commitments may expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the
counterpartys request, the total commitment amount does
not necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow
requirements. our commercial lending commitments are generally
extended in connection with contingent acquisition financing and
other types of corporate lending as well as commercial real
estate financing. we may seek to reduce our credit risk on these
commitments by syndicating all or substantial portions of
commitments to other investors in the future. in addition,
table of contents
commitments that are extended for contingent acquisition
financing are often intended to be
short-term
in nature, as borrowers often seek to replace them with other
funding sources.
included within
non-investment-grade
commitments as of november2008 was $2.07billion of
exposure to leveraged lending capital market transactions,
$164million related to commercial real estate transactions
and $7.09billion arising from other unfunded credit
facilities. including funded loans, our total exposure to
leveraged lending capital market transactions was
$7.97billion as of november2008.
the following table sets forth our exposure to leveraged lending
capital market transactions by geographic region:
leveraged lending
capital market exposure by geographic region
(in
millions)
as of november 2008
funded
unfunded
total
americas(1)
$
3,036
$
1,735
$
4,771
emea(2)
2,294
2,553
asia
total
$
5,898
$
2,067
$
7,965
(1)
substantially all relates to the
u.s.
(2)
emea (europe, middle east and
africa).
substantially all of the commitments provided under the william
street credit extension program are to
investment-grade
corporate borrowers. commitments under the program are
principally extended by william street commitment corporation
(commitment corp.), a consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of gs
bank usa, and also by william street credit corporation, gs bank
usa or goldman sachs credit partners l.p. the commitments
extended by commitment corp. are supported, in part, by funding
raised by william street funding corporation (funding corp.),
another consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of gs bank usa. the
assets and liabilities of commitment corp. and funding corp. are
legally separated from other assets and liabilities of the firm.
with respect to most of the william street commitments, smfg
provides us with credit loss protection that is generally
limited to 95% of the first loss we realize on approved loan
commitments, up to a maximum of $1.00billion. in addition,
subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, upon our
request, smfg will provide protection for 70% of additional
losses on such commitments, up to a maximum of
$1.13billion, of which $375million of protection has
been provided as of november2008. we also use other
financial instruments to mitigate credit risks related to
certain william street commitments not covered by smfg.
our commitments to extend credit also include financing for the
warehousing of financial assets. these arrangements are secured
by the warehoused assets, primarily consisting of commercial
mortgages as of november2008.
see note8 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our commitments, contingencies
and guarantees.
table of contents
risk
management
management believes that effective risk management is of primary
importance to the success of goldman sachs. accordingly, we have
a comprehensive risk management process to monitor, evaluate and
manage the principal risks we assume in conducting our
activities. these risks include market, credit, liquidity,
operational, legal and reputational exposures.
risk management
structure
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a
variety of separate but complementary financial, credit,
operational, compliance and legal reporting systems. in
addition, a number of committees are responsible for monitoring
risk exposures and for general oversight of our risk management
process, as described further below. these committees (including
their subcommittees), meet regularly and consist of senior
members of both our revenue-producing units and departments that
are independent of our revenue-producing units.
segregation of duties and management oversight are fundamental
elements of our risk management process. in addition to the
committees described below, functions that are independent of
the revenue-producing units, such as compliance, finance, legal,
management controls (internal audit) and operations, perform
risk management functions, which include monitoring, analyzing
and evaluating risk.
management committee.all risk control
functions ultimately report to our management committee. through
both direct and delegated authority, the management committee
approves all of our operating activities and trading risk
parameters.
risk committees.the firmwide risk committee
reviews the activities of existing trading businesses, approves
new businesses and products, approves firmwide market risk
limits, reviews business unit market risk limits, approves
market risk limits for selected sovereign markets and business
units, approves sovereign credit risk limits and credit risk
limits by ratings group, and reviews scenario analyses based on
abnormal or catastrophic market movements.
the securities divisional risk committee sets market risk limits
for our trading activities subject to overall firmwide risk
limits, based on a number of measures, including var, stress
tests and scenario analyses.
business unit risk limits are established by the appropriate
risk committee and may be further allocated by the business unit
managers to individual trading desks. trading desk managers have
the first line of responsibility for managing risk within
prescribed limits. these managers have
in-depth
knowledge of the primary sources of risk in their respective
markets and the instruments available to hedge their exposures.
market risk limits are monitored by the finance division and are
reviewed regularly by the appropriate risk committee. limit
violations are reported to the appropriate risk committee and
business unit managers and addressed, as necessary. credit risk
limits are also monitored by the finance division and reviewed
by the appropriate risk committee.
the asset management divisional risk committee oversees various
risk, valuation and credit issues related to our asset
management business.
business practices committee.the business
practices committee assists senior management in its oversight
of compliance and operational risks and related reputational
concerns, seeks to ensure the consistency of our policies,
practices and procedures with our business principles, and makes
recommendations on ways to mitigate potential risks.
table of contents
firmwide capital committee.the firmwide
capital committee reviews and approves transactions involving
commitments of our capital. such capital commitments include,
but are not limited to, extensions of credit, alternative
liquidity commitments, certain bond underwritings and certain
distressed debt and principal finance activities. the firmwide
capital committee is also responsible for establishing business
and reputational standards for capital commitments and seeking
to ensure that they are maintained on a global basis.
commitments committee.the commitments
committee reviews and approves underwriting and distribution
activities, primarily with respect to offerings of equity and
equity-related
securities, and sets and maintains policies and procedures
designed to ensure that legal, reputational, regulatory and
business standards are maintained in conjunction with these
activities. in addition to reviewing specific transactions, the
commitments committee periodically conducts strategic reviews of
industry sectors and products and establishes policies in
connection with transaction practices.
credit policy committee.the credit policy
committee establishes and reviews broad credit policies and
parameters that are implemented by the credit department.
finance committee.the finance committee
establishes and oversees our liquidity policies, sets certain
inventory position limits and has oversight responsibility for
liquidity risk, the size and composition of our balance sheet
and capital base, and our credit ratings. the finance committee
regularly reviews our funding position and capitalization and
makes adjustments in light of current events, risks and
exposures.
new products committee.the new products
committee, under the oversight of the firmwide risk committee,
is responsible for reviewing and approving new products and
businesses globally.
operational risk committee.the operational
risk committee provides oversight of the ongoing development and
implementation of our operational risk policies, framework and
methodologies, and monitors the effectiveness of operational
risk management.
structured products committee.the structured
products committee reviews and approves structured product
transactions entered into with our clients that raise legal,
regulatory, tax or accounting issues or present reputational
risk to goldman sachs.
market
risk
the potential for changes in the market value of our trading and
investing positions is referred to as market risk. such
positions result from
market-making,
proprietary trading, underwriting, specialist and investing
activities. substantially all of our inventory positions are
marked-to-market
on a daily basis and changes are recorded in net revenues.
categories of market risk include exposures to interest rates,
equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. a
description of each market risk category is set forth below:
interest rate risks primarily result from exposures to changes
in the level, slope and curvature of the yield curve, the
volatility of interest rates, mortgage prepayment speeds and
credit spreads.
equity price risks result from exposures to changes in prices
and volatilities of individual equities, equity baskets and
equity indices.
currency rate risks result from exposures to changes in spot
prices, forward prices and volatilities of currency rates.
commodity price risks result from exposures to changes in spot
prices, forward prices and volatilities of commodities, such as
electricity, natural gas, crude oil, petroleum products, and
precious and base metals.
table of contents
we seek to manage these risks by diversifying exposures,
controlling position sizes and establishing economic hedges in
related securities or derivatives. for example, we may seek to
hedge a portfolio of common stocks by taking an offsetting
position in a related
equity-index
futures contract. the ability to manage an exposure may,
however, be limited by adverse changes in the liquidity of the
security or the related hedge instrument and in the correlation
of price movements between the security and related hedge
instrument.
in addition to applying business judgment, senior management
uses a number of quantitative tools to manage our exposure to
market risk for trading assets, at fair value and
trading liabilities, at fair value in the
consolidated statements of financial condition. these tools
include:
risk limits based on a summary measure of market risk exposure
referred to as var;
scenario analyses, stress tests and other analytical tools that
measure the potential effects on our trading net revenues of
various market events, including, but not limited to, a large
widening of credit spreads, a substantial decline in equity
markets and significant moves in selected emerging markets; and
inventory position limits for selected business units.
var
var is the potential loss in value of trading positions due to
adverse market movements over a defined time horizon with a
specified confidence level.
for the var numbers reported below, a
one-day time
horizon and a 95% confidence level were used. this means that
there is a 1 in 20 chance that daily trading net revenues will
fall below the expected daily trading net revenues by an amount
at least as large as the reported var. thus, shortfalls from
expected trading net revenues on a single trading day greater
than the reported var would be anticipated to occur, on average,
about once a month. shortfalls on a single day can exceed
reported var by significant amounts. shortfalls can also occur
more frequently or accumulate over a longer time horizon such as
a number of consecutive trading days.
the modeling of the risk characteristics of our trading
positions involves a number of assumptions and approximations.
while we believe that these assumptions and approximations are
reasonable, there is no standard methodology for estimating var,
and different assumptions
and/or
approximations could produce materially different var estimates.
we use historical data to estimate our var and, to better
reflect current asset volatilities, we generally weight
historical data to give greater importance to more recent
observations. given its reliance on historical data, var is most
effective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which there
are no sudden fundamental changes or shifts in market
conditions. an inherent limitation of var is that the
distribution of past changes in market risk factors may not
produce accurate predictions of future market risk. different
var methodologies and distributional assumptions could produce a
materially different var. moreover, var calculated for a
one-day time
horizon does not fully capture the market risk of positions that
cannot be liquidated or offset with hedges within one day.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the daily var:
average daily var
(1)
(in
millions)
year ended november
risk categories
interest rates
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification
effect(2)
(108
)
(96
)
(71
)
total
$
$
$
(1)
certain portfolios and individual
positions are not included in var, where var is not the most
appropriate measure of risk (e.g.,due to transfer
restrictions
and/or
illiquidity). see
other
market risk measures below.
(2)
equals the difference between total
var and the sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this
effect arises because the four market risk categories are not
perfectly correlated.
our average daily var increased to $180million in 2008
from $138million in 2007, principally due to increases in
the interest rate, commodity price and currency rate categories,
partially offset by a decrease in the equity price category. the
increase in interest rates was primarily due to higher levels of
volatility and wider spreads, partially offset by position
reductions, and the increases in commodity prices and currency
rates were primarily due to higher levels of volatility. the
decrease in equity prices was principally due to position
reductions, partially offset by higher levels of volatility.
our average daily var increased to $138million in 2007
from $101million in 2006. the increase was primarily due
to higher levels of exposure and volatility in interest rates
and equity prices.
var excludes the impact of changes in counterparty and our own
credit spreads on derivatives as well as changes in our own
credit spreads on unsecured borrowings for which the fair value
option was elected. the estimated sensitivity of our net
revenues to a one basis point increase in credit spreads
(counterparty and our own) on derivatives was $1million as
of november2008. in addition, the estimated sensitivity of
our net revenues to a one basis point increase in our own credit
spreads on unsecured borrowings for which the fair value option
was elected was $1million (including hedges) as of
november2008.
daily var
(1)
(in
millions)
year ended
as of november
november 2008
risk categories
high
low
interest rates
$
$
$
$
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification
effect(2)
(91
)
(121
)
total
$
$
$
$
(1)
certain portfolios and individual
positions are not included in var, where var is not the most
appropriate measure of risk (e.g.,due to transfer
restrictions
and/or
illiquidity). see
other
market risk measures below.
(2)
equals the difference between total
var and the sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this
effect arises because the four market risk categories are not
perfectly correlated.
table of contents
our daily var increased to $244million as of
november2008 from $134million as of
november2007, primarily due to an increase in the interest
rate category and a reduction in the diversification benefit
across risk categories, partially offset by a decrease in the
equity price category. the increase in interest rates was
principally due to higher levels of volatility and wider
spreads, partially offset by position reductions. the decrease
in equity prices was primarily due to position reductions,
partially offset by higher levels of volatility.
the following chart presents our daily var during 2008:
daily var
($ in millions)
table of contents
trading net
revenues distribution
the following chart sets forth the frequency distribution of our
daily trading net revenues for substantially all inventory
positions included in var for the year ended november2008:
daily trading net
revenues
($ in millions)
as part of our overall risk control process, daily trading net
revenues are compared with var calculated as of the end of the
prior business day. trading losses incurred on a single day
exceeded our 95%
one-day var
on 13 and 10 occasions during 2008 and 2007, respectively.
other market
risk measures
certain portfolios and individual positions are not included in
var, where var is not the most appropriate measure of risk
(e.g.,due to transfer restrictions
and/or
illiquidity). the market risk related to our investment in the
ordinary shares of icbc, excluding interests held by investment
funds managed by goldman sachs, is measured by estimating the
potential reduction in net revenues associated with a 10%
decline in the icbc ordinary share price. the market risk
related to the remaining positions is measured by estimating the
potential reduction in net revenues associated with a 10%
decline in asset values.
the sensitivity analyses for equity and debt positions in our
trading portfolio and equity, debt (primarily mezzanine
instruments) and real estate positions in our
non-trading
portfolio are measured by the impact of a decline in the asset
values (including the impact of leverage in the underlying
investments for real estate positions in our
non-trading
portfolio) of such positions. the fair value of the underlying
positions may be impacted by factors such as transactions in
similar instruments, completed or pending
third-party
transactions in the underlying investment or comparable
entities, subsequent rounds of financing, recapitalizations and
other transactions across the capital structure, offerings in
the equity or debt capital markets, and changes in financial
ratios or cash flows.
table of contents
the following table sets forth market risk for positions not
included in var. these measures do not reflect diversification
benefits across asset categories and, given the differing
likelihood of the potential declines in asset categories, these
measures have not been aggregated:
10% sensitivity
amountasofnovember
asset categories
10% sensitivity measure
(in millions)
trading risk
(1)
equity(2)
underlying asset value
$
$
1,325
debt(3)
underlying asset value
1,020
non-trading
risk
icbc
icbc ordinary share price
other
equity(4)
underlying asset value
1,155
1,054
debt(5)
underlying asset value
real
estate(6)
underlying asset value
1,330
1,108
(1)
in addition to the positions in
these portfolios, which are accounted for at fair value, we make
investments accounted for under the equity method and we also
make direct investments in real estate, both of which are
included in other assets in the consolidated
statements of financial condition. direct investments in real
estate are accounted for at cost less accumulated depreciation.
see note12 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for information on other assets.
(2)
relates to private and restricted
public equity securities held within the ficc and equities
components of our trading and principal investments segment.
(3)
relates to acquired portfolios of
distressed loans (primarily backed by commercial and residential
real estate collateral), bank loans and bridge loans, and loans
backed by commercial real estate and held within the ficc
component of our trading and principal investments segment.
(4)
primarily relates to interests in
our merchant banking funds that invest in corporate equities.
(5)
primarily relates to interests in
our merchant banking funds that invest in corporate mezzanine
debt instruments.
(6)
primarily relates to interests in
our merchant banking funds that invest in real estate. such
funds typically employ leverage as part of the investment
strategy. this sensitivity measure is based on our percentage
ownership of the underlying asset values in the funds and
unfunded commitments to the funds.
the decrease in our 10% sensitivity measures as of
november2008 from november2007 for equity and debt
positions in our trading portfolio was due to dispositions and a
decrease in the fair value of the portfolio, partially offset by
new investments. the increase in our 10% sensitivity measures as
of november2008 from november2007 for our
non-trading
portfolio (excluding icbc) was due to new investments, partially
offset by a decrease in the fair value of the portfolio.
in addition to the positions included in var and the other risk
measures described above, as of november2008, we held
approximately $10.39billion of financial instruments in
our bank and insurance subsidiaries, primarily consisting of
$3.08billion of u.s.government, federal agency and
sovereign obligations, $2.87billion of corporate debt
securities and other debt obligations, $2.86billion of
money market instruments, and $1.22billion of mortgage and
other
asset-backed
loans and securities. as of november2007, we held
approximately $10.58billion of financial instruments in
our bank and insurance subsidiaries, primarily consisting of
$4.70billion of mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities, $2.93billion of corporate debt
securities and other debt obligations and $2.77billion of
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations.
in addition, as of november2008 and november2007, we
held commitments and loans under the william street credit
extension program. see
contractual
obligations and commitments commitments above
for information on our william street program.
table of contents
credit
risk
credit risk represents the loss that we would incur if a
counterparty or an issuer of securities or other instruments we
hold fails to perform under its contractual obligations to us,
or upon a deterioration in the credit quality of third parties
whose securities or other instruments, including otc
derivatives, we hold. our exposure to credit risk principally
arises through our trading, investing and financing activities.
to reduce our credit exposures, we seek to enter into netting
agreements with counterparties that permit us to offset
receivables and payables with such counterparties. in addition,
we attempt to further reduce credit risk with certain
counterparties by (i)entering into agreements that enable
us to obtain collateral from a counterparty on an upfront or
contingent basis, (ii)seeking
third-party
guarantees of the counterpartys obligations,
and/or
(iii)transferring our credit risk to third parties using
credit derivatives
and/or other
structures and techniques.
to measure and manage our credit exposures, we use a variety of
tools, including credit limits referenced to both current
exposure and potential exposure. potential exposure is an
estimate of exposure, within a specified confidence level, that
could be outstanding over the life of a transaction based on
market movements. in addition, as part of our market risk
management process, for positions measured by changes in credit
spreads, we use var and other sensitivity measures. to
supplement our primary credit exposure measures, we also use
scenario analyses, such as credit spread widening scenarios,
stress tests and other quantitative tools.
our global credit management systems monitor credit exposure to
individual counterparties and on an aggregate basis to
counterparties and their affiliates. these systems also provide
management, including the firmwide risk and credit policy
committees, with information regarding credit risk by product,
industry sector, country and region.
while our activities expose us to many different industries and
counterparties, we routinely execute a high volume of
transactions with counterparties in the financial services
industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial banks and
investment funds, resulting in significant credit concentration
with respect to this industry. in the ordinary course of
business, we may also be subject to a concentration of credit
risk to a particular counterparty, borrower or issuer.
as of november2008 and november2007, we held
$53.98billion (6% of total assets) and $45.75billion
(4% of total assets), respectively, of u.s.government and
federal agency obligations included in trading assets, at
fair value and cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes in the consolidated
statements of financial condition. as of november2008 and
november2007, we held $21.13billion (2% of total
assets) and $31.65billion (3% of total assets),
respectively, of other sovereign obligations, principally
consisting of securities issued by the governments of japan and
the united kingdom. in addition, as of november2008 and
november2007, $126.27billion and
$144.92billion of our securities purchased under
agreements to resell and securities borrowed (including those in
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other
purposes), respectively, were collateralized by
u.s.government and federal agency obligations. as of
november2008 and november2007, $65.37billion
and $41.26billion of our securities purchased under
agreements to resell and securities borrowed, respectively, were
collateralized by other sovereign obligations. as of
november2008 and november2007, we did not have
credit exposure to any other counterparty that exceeded 2% of
our total assets. however, over the past several years, the
amount and duration of our credit exposures with respect to otc
derivatives has been increasing, due to, among other factors,
the growth of our otc derivative activities and market evolution
toward longer-dated transactions. a further discussion of our
derivative activities follows below.
table of contents
derivatives
derivative contracts are instruments, such as futures, forwards,
swaps or option contracts, that derive their value from
underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a combination of
these factors. derivative instruments may be privately
negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
substantially all of our derivative transactions are entered
into to facilitate client transactions, to take proprietary
positions or as a means of risk management. in addition to
derivative transactions entered into for trading purposes, we
enter into derivative contracts to manage currency exposure on
our net investment in
non-u.s.operations
and to manage the interest rate and currency exposure on our
long-term
borrowings and certain
short-term
borrowings.
derivatives are used in many of our businesses, and we believe
that the associated market risk can only be understood relative
to all of the underlying assets or risks being hedged, or as
part of a broader trading strategy. accordingly, the market risk
of derivative positions is managed together with our
nonderivative positions.
the fair value of our derivative contracts is reflected net of
cash paid or received pursuant to credit support agreements and
is reported on a
net-by-counterparty
basis in our consolidated statements of financial condition when
we believe a legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable
netting agreement. for an otc derivative, our credit exposure is
directly with our counterparty and continues until the maturity
or termination of such contract.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the fair values of our otc
derivative assets and liabilities by product and by remaining
contractual maturity:
otc
derivatives
(in
millions)
assets
as of november 2008
0-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
16,220
$
43,864
$
35,050
$
40,649
$
135,783
credit derivatives
10,364
45,596
20,110
13,788
89,858
currencies
28,056
12,191
5,980
4,137
50,364
commodities
13,660
12,717
1,175
1,681
29,233
equities
17,830
4,742
3,927
1,061
27,560
netting across contract
types(1)
(6,238
)
(9,160
)
(3,515
)
(3,802
)
(22,715
)
subtotal
$
79,892
(4)
$
109,950
$
62,727
$
57,514
$
310,083
cross maturity
netting(2)
(48,750
)
cash collateral
netting(3)
(137,160
)
total
$
124,173
liabilities
0-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
8,004
$
16,152
$
17,456
$
26,399
$
68,011
credit derivatives
6,591
20,958
10,301
13,610
51,460
currencies
29,130
13,755
4,109
2,051
49,045
commodities
12,685
10,391
1,575
25,478
equities
14,016
4,741
1,751
20,828
netting across contract
types(1)
(6,238
)
(9,160
)
(3,515
)
(3,802
)
(22,715
)
subtotal
$
64,188
(4)
$
56,837
$
31,677
$
39,405
$
192,107
cross maturity
netting(2)
(48,750
)
cash collateral
netting(3)
(34,009
)
total
$
109,348
(1)
represents the netting of
receivable balances with payable balances for the same
counterparty across contract types within a maturity category,
pursuant to credit support agreements.
(2)
represents the netting of
receivable balances with payable balances for the same
counterparty across maturity categories, pursuant to credit
support agreements.
(3)
represents the netting of cash
collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis pursuant
to credit support agreements.
(4)
includes fair values of otc
derivative assets and liabilities, maturing within six months,
of $56.72billion and $51.26billion, respectively.
table of contents
otc
derivatives
(in
millions)
assets
as of november 2007
0-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
8,703
$
10,965
$
17,176
$
28,388
$
65,232
credit derivatives
11,168
13,006
6,501
20,163
50,838
currencies
20,586
9,275
5,106
2,127
37,094
commodities
6,264
12,064
1,766
20,993
equities
13,845
5,312
4,273
1,603
25,033
netting across contract
types(1)
(3,355
)
(5,665
)
(3,132
)
(2,066
)
(14,218
)
subtotal
$
57,211
(4)
$
44,957
$
31,690
$
51,114
$
184,972
cross maturity
netting(2)
(33,849
)
cash collateral
netting(3)
(59,050
)
total
$
92,073
liabilities
0-12
1-5
5-10
10years
contract type
months
years
years
or greater
total
interest rates
$
10,234
$
10,802
$
9,816
$
10,287
$
41,139
credit derivatives
7,085
11,842
5,084
16,077
40,088
currencies
16,560
9,815
1,446
1,772
29,593
commodities
8,752
9,690
2,757
21,705
equities
17,460
7,723
3,833
1,382
30,398
netting across contract
types(1)
(3,355
)
(5,665
)
(3,132
)
(2,066
)
(14,218
)
subtotal
$
56,736
(4)
$
44,207
$
19,804
$
27,958
$
148,705
cross maturity
netting(2)
(33,849
)
cash collateral
netting(3)
(27,758
)
total
$
87,098
(1)
represents the netting of
receivable balances with payable balances for the same
counterparty across contract types within a maturity category,
pursuant to credit support agreements.
(2)
represents the netting of
receivable balances with payable balances for the same
counterparty across maturity categories, pursuant to credit
support agreements.
(3)
represents the netting of cash
collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis pursuant
to credit support agreements.
(4)
includes fair values of otc
derivative assets and liabilities, maturing within six months,
of $41.80billion and $41.12billion, respectively.
in the tables above, for option contracts that require
settlement by delivery of an underlying derivative instrument,
the remaining contractual maturity is generally classified based
upon the maturity date of the underlying derivative instrument.
in those instances where the underlying instrument does not have
a maturity date or either counterparty has the right to settle
in cash, the remaining contractual maturity is generally based
upon the option expiration date.
table of contents
the following tables set forth the distribution, by credit
rating, of our exposure with respect to otc derivatives by
remaining contractual maturity, both before and after
consideration of the effect of collateral and netting
agreements. the categories shown reflect our internally
determined public rating agency equivalents:
otc derivative
credit exposure
(in
millions)
as of november 2008
exposure
credit rating
0-12
1-5
5-10
10years
net of
equivalent
months
years
years
or greater
total
netting(2)
exposure
collateral
aaa/aaa
$
5,700
$
7,000
$
4,755
$
2,726
$
20,181
$
(6,765
)
$
13,416
$
12,328
aa/aa2
26,040
37,378
30,293
18,084
111,795
(78,085
)
33,710
29,438
a/a2
22,374
34,796
15,317
20,498
92,985
(58,744
)
34,241
28,643
bbb/baa2
11,844
19,200
7,635
13,302
51,981
(29,791
)
22,190
16,155
bb/ba2 or lower
13,161
10,403
4,035
2,711
30,310
(12,515
)
17,795
11,212
unrated
1,173
2,831
(10
)
2,821
1,550
total
$
79,892
(1)
$
109,950
$
62,727
$
57,514
$
310,083
$
(185,910
)
$
124,173
$
99,326
as of november 2007
exposure
credit rating
0-12
1-5
5-10
10years
net of
equivalent
months
years
years
or greater
total
netting(2)
exposure
collateral
aaa/aaa
$
6,018
$
3,354
$
2,893
$
7,875
$
20,140
$
(3,600
)
$
16,540
$
14,453
aa/aa2
19,331
14,339
13,184
22,708
69,562
(40,661
)
28,901
24,758
a/a2
14,491
13,380
10,012
15,133
53,016
(32,453
)
20,563
16,010
bbb/baa2
4,059
5,774
1,707
2,777
14,317
(4,437
)
9,880
6,542
bb/ba2 or lower
6,854
5,676
3,347
2,541
18,418
(4,834
)
13,584
7,366
unrated
6,458
2,434
9,519
(6,914
)
2,605
1,280
total
$
57,211
(1)
$
44,957
$
31,690
$
51,114
$
184,972
$
(92,899
)
$
92,073
$
70,409
(1)
includes fair values of otc derivative assets, maturing within
six months, of $56.72billion and $41.80billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
(2)
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable
balances for the same counterparty across maturity categories
and the netting of cash collateral received, pursuant to credit
support agreements. receivable and payable balances with the
same counterparty in the same maturity category are netted
within such maturity category, where appropriate.
derivative transactions may also involve legal risks including
the risk that they are not authorized or appropriate for a
counterparty, that documentation has not been properly executed
or that executed agreements may not be enforceable against the
counterparty. we attempt to minimize these risks by obtaining
advice of counsel on the enforceability of agreements as well as
on the authority of a counterparty to effect the derivative
transaction. in addition, certain derivative transactions
(e.g.,credit derivative contracts) involve the risk that
we may have difficulty obtaining, or be unable to obtain, the
underlying security or obligation in order to satisfy any
physical settlement requirement.
table of contents
liquidity and
funding risk
liquidity is of critical importance to companies in the
financial services sector. most failures of financial
institutions have occurred in large part due to insufficient
liquidity resulting from adverse circumstances. accordingly,
goldman sachs has in place a comprehensive set of liquidity and
funding policies that are intended to maintain significant
flexibility to address both goldman sachs-specific and broader
industry or market liquidity events. our principal objective is
to be able to fundgoldman sachs and to enable our core
businesses to continue to generate revenues, even under adverse
circumstances.
we have implemented a number of policies according to the
following liquidity risk management framework:
excess liquidity we maintain substantial excess
liquidity to meet a broad range of potential cash outflows in a
stressed environment, including financing obligations.
asset-liability
management we seek to maintain secured and unsecured
funding sources that are sufficiently
long-term in
order to withstand a prolonged or severe liquidity-stressed
environment without having to rely on asset sales.
conservative liability structure we seek to access
funding across a diverse range of markets, products and
counterparties, emphasize less
credit-sensitive
sources of funding and conservatively manage the distribution of
funding across our entity structure.
crisis planning we base our liquidity and funding
management on
stress-scenario
planning and maintain a crisis plan detailing our response to a
liquidity-threatening event.
excess
liquidity
our most important liquidity policy is to
pre-fund
what we estimate will be our likely cash needs during a
liquidity crisis and hold such excess liquidity in the form of
unencumbered, highly liquid securities that may be sold or
pledged to provide
same-day
liquidity. this global core excess is intended to
allow us to meet immediate obligations without needing to sell
other assets or depend on additional funding from
credit-sensitive
markets. we believe that this pool of excess liquidity provides
us with a resilient source of funds and gives us significant
flexibility in managing through a difficult funding environment.
our global core excess reflects the following principles:
the first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most
critical to a companys survival.
focus must be maintained on all potential cash and collateral
outflows, not just disruptions to financing flows. goldman
sachs businesses are diverse, and its cash needs are
driven by many factors, including market movements, collateral
requirements and client commitments, all of which can change
dramatically in a difficult funding environment.
during a liquidity crisis,
credit-sensitive
funding, including unsecured debt and some types of secured
financing agreements, may be unavailable, and the terms or
availability of other types of secured financing may change.
as a result of our policy to
pre-fund
liquidity that we estimate may be needed in a crisis, we hold
more unencumbered securities and have larger unsecured debt
balances than our businesses would otherwise require. we believe
that our liquidity is stronger with greater balances of highly
liquid unencumbered securities, even though it increases our
unsecured liabilities and our funding costs.
table of contents
the size of our global core excess is based on an internal
liquidity model together with a qualitative assessment of the
condition of the financial markets and of goldman sachs. our
liquidity model identifies and estimates cash and collateral
outflows over a
short-term
horizon in a liquidity crisis, including, but not limited to:
upcoming maturities of unsecured debt and letters of credit;
potential buybacks of a portion of our outstanding negotiable
unsecured debt and potential withdrawals of client deposits;
adverse changes in the terms or availability of secured funding;
derivatives and other margin and collateral outflows, including
those due to market moves;
potential cash outflows associated with our prime brokerage
business;
additional collateral that could be called in the event of a
two-notch
downgrade in our credit ratings;
draws on our unfunded commitments not supported by william
street funding
corporation(1);
and
upcoming cash outflows, such as tax and other large payments.
the following table sets forth the average loan value (the
estimated amount of cash that would be advanced by
counterparties against these securities), as well as overnight
cash deposits, of our global core excess:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.dollar-denominated
$
78,048
$
52,115
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
18,677
11,928
total global core excess
(2)
$
96,725
$
64,043
the
u.s.dollar-denominated
excess is comprised of only unencumbered u.s.government
securities, u.s.agency securities and highly liquid
u.s.agency
mortgage-backed
securities, all of which are eligible as collateral in federal
reserve open market operations, as well as overnight cash
deposits. our
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
excess is comprised of only unencumbered french, german, united
kingdom and japanese government bonds and overnight cash
deposits in highly liquid currencies. we strictly limit our
global core excess to this narrowly defined list of securities
and cash because we believe they are highly liquid, even in a
difficult funding environment. we do not believe other potential
sources of excess liquidity, such as lower-quality unencumbered
securities or committed credit facilities, are as reliable in a
liquidity crisis.
we maintain our global core excess to enable us to meet current
and potential liquidity requirements of our parent company,
group inc., and all of its subsidiaries. the amount of our
global core excess is driven by our assessment of potential cash
and collateral outflows, regulatory obligations and the currency
and timing requirements of our global business model. in
addition, we recognize that our global core excess held in a
regulated entity may not be available to our parent company or
other subsidiaries and therefore may only be available to meet
the potential liquidity requirements of that entity.
(1)the
global core excess excludes liquid assets of $4.40billion
held separately by william street funding corporation. see
contractual
obligations and commitments above for a further discussion
of the william street credit extension program.
(2)beginning
in 2008, our global core excess as presented includes the global
core excess of gs bank usa and gs bank europe. the 2007 amounts
include $3.48billion of global core excess at gs bank usa.
table of contents
in addition to our global core excess, we have a significant
amount of other unencumbered securities as a result of our
business activities. these assets, which are located in the u.
s., europe and asia, include other government bonds,
high-grade
money market securities, corporate bonds and marginable
equities. we do not include these securities in our global core
excess.
we maintain our global core excess and other unencumbered assets
in an amount that, if pledged or sold, would provide the funds
necessary to replace at least 110% of our unsecured obligations
that are scheduled to mature (or where holders have the option
to redeem) within the next 12months. we assume
conservative loan values that are based on
stress-scenario
borrowing capacity and we regularly review these assumptions
asset class by asset class. the estimated aggregate loan value
of our global core excess, as well as overnight cash deposits,
and our other unencumbered assets averaged $163.41billion
and $156.74billion for the fiscal years ended
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
asset-liability
management
we seek to maintain a highly liquid balance sheet and
substantially all of our inventory is
marked-to-market
daily. we utilize aged inventory limits for certain financial
instruments as a disincentive to our businesses to hold
inventory over longer periods of time. we believe that these
limits provide a complementary mechanism for ensuring
appropriate balance sheet liquidity in addition to our standard
position limits. although our balance sheet fluctuates due to
client activity, market conventions and periodic market
opportunities in certain of our businesses, our total assets and
adjusted assets at financial statement dates are typically not
materially different from those occurring within our reporting
periods.
we seek to manage the maturity profile of our secured and
unsecured funding base such that we should be able to liquidate
our assets prior to our liabilities coming due, even in times of
prolonged or severe liquidity stress. we do not rely on
immediate sales of assets (other than our global core excess) to
maintain liquidity in a distressed environment, although we
recognize orderly asset sales may be prudent or necessary in a
severe or persistent liquidity crisis.
in order to avoid reliance on asset sales, our goal is to ensure
that we have sufficient total capital (unsecured
long-term
borrowings plus total shareholders equity) to fund our
balance sheet for at least one year. the target amount of our
total capital is based on an internal liquidity model, which
incorporates, among other things, the following
long-term
financing requirements:
the portion of trading assets that we believe could not be
funded on a secured basis in periods of market stress, assuming
conservative loan values;
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, property, leasehold
improvements and equipment, and other illiquid assets;
derivative and other margin and collateral requirements;
anticipated draws on our unfunded loan commitments; and
capital or other forms of financing in our regulated
subsidiaries that are in excess of their
long-term
financing requirements. see
conservative
liability structure below for a further discussion of how
we fund our subsidiaries.
table of contents
certain financial instruments may be more difficult to fund on a
secured basis during times of market stress. accordingly, we
generally hold higher levels of total capital for these assets
than more liquid types of financial instruments. the following
table sets forth our aggregate holdings in these categories of
financial instruments:
as of november
(in millions)
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
$
22,393
$
46,436
(6)
bank loans and bridge
loans(1)
21,839
49,154
emerging market debt securities
2,827
3,343
high-yield
and other debt obligations
9,998
12,807
private equity and real estate fund
investments(2)
18,171
16,244
emerging market equity securities
2,665
8,014
icbc ordinary
shares(3)
5,496
6,807
smfg convertible preferred
stock(4)
1,135
4,060
other restricted public equity securities
3,455
other investments in
funds(5)
2,714
3,437
(1)
includes funded commitments and
inventory held in connection with our origination and secondary
trading activities.
(2)
includes interests in our merchant
banking funds. such amounts exclude assets related to
consolidated investment funds of $1.16billion and
$8.13billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, for which goldman sachs does
not bear economic exposure.
(3)
includes interests of
$3.48billion and $4.30billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, held by
investment funds managed by goldman sachs.
(4)
during our second quarter of 2008,
we converted
one-third of
our smfg preferred stock investment into smfg common stock, and
delivered the common stock to close out
one-third of
our hedge position.
(5)
includes interests in other
investment funds that we manage.
(6)
excludes $7.64billion as of
november2007 of mortgage whole loans that were transferred
to securitization vehicles where such transfers were accounted
for as secured financings rather than sales under
sfasno.140. we distributed to investors the
securities that were issued by the securitization vehicles and
therefore did not bear economic exposure to the underlying
mortgage whole loans.
a large portion of these assets are funded through secured
funding markets or nonrecourse financing. we focus on funding
these assets on a secured basis with long contractual maturities
to reduce refinancing risk in periods of market stress.
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in
partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding the financial instruments we
hold.
conservative
liability structure
we seek to structure our liabilities conservatively to reduce
refinancing risk and the risk that we may be required to redeem
or repurchase certain of our borrowings prior to their
contractual maturity.
we fund a substantial portion of our inventory on a secured
basis, which we believe provides goldman sachs with a more
stable source of liquidity than unsecured financing, as it is
less sensitive to changes in our credit due to the underlying
collateral. however, we recognize that the terms or availability
of secured funding, particularly overnight funding, can
deteriorate rapidly in a difficult environment. to help mitigate
this risk, we raise the majority of our funding for durations
longer than overnight. we seek longer terms for secured funding
collateralized by lower-quality assets, as we believe these
funding transactions may pose greater refinancing risk. the
weighted average life of our secured funding, excluding funding
collateralized by highly liquid securities, such as u.s.,
french, german, united kingdom and japanese government bonds,
and u.s.agency securities, exceeded 100days as of
november2008.
table of contents
our liquidity also depends to an important degree on the
stability of our
short-term
unsecured financing base. accordingly, we prefer the use of
promissory notes (in which goldman sachs does not make a market)
over commercial paper, which we may repurchase prior to maturity
through the ordinary course of business as a market maker. as of
november2008 and november2007, our unsecured
short-term
borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured
long-term
borrowings, were $52.66billion and $71.56billion,
respectively. see note6 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of our annual report on
form10-k
for further information regarding our unsecured
short-term
borrowings.
we issue
long-term
borrowings as a source of total capital in order to meet our
long-term
financing requirements. the following table sets forth our
quarterly unsecured
long-term
borrowings maturity profile through 2014:
unsecured
long-term
borrowings maturity profile
($ in millions)
the weighted average maturity of our unsecured
long-term
borrowings as of november2008 was approximately eight
years. to mitigate refinancing risk, we seek to limit the
principal amount of debt maturing on any one day or during any
week or year. we swap a substantial portion of our
long-term
borrowings into u.s.dollar obligations with
short-term
floating interest rates in order to minimize our exposure to
interest rates and foreign exchange movements.
we issue substantially all of our unsecured debt without
provisions that would, based solely upon an adverse change in
our credit ratings, financial ratios, earnings, cash flows or
stock price, trigger a requirement for an early payment,
collateral support, change in terms, acceleration of maturity or
the creation of an additional financial obligation.
as of november2008, our bank depository institution
subsidiaries had $27.64billion in customer deposits,
including $19.15billion of deposits from our bank sweep
programs and $8.49billion of brokered certificates of
deposit with a weighted average maturity of threeyears. in
addition, we are pursuing a number of strategies to raise
additional deposits as a source of funding for the firm. as of
table of contents
september2008, gs bank usa has access to funding through
the federal reserve bank discount window. while we do not rely
on funding through the federal reserve bank discount window in
our liquidity modeling and stress testing, we maintain policies
and procedures necessary to access this funding.
we seek to maintain broad and diversified funding sources
globally for both secured and unsecured funding. we make
extensive use of the repurchase agreement and securities lending
markets, as well as other secured funding markets. in addition,
we issue debt through syndicated u.s.registered offerings,
u.s.registered and 144a
medium-term
note programs, offshore
medium-term
note offerings and other bond offerings, u.s.and
non-u.s.commercial
paper and promissory note issuances and other methods. we also
arrange for letters of credit to be issued on our behalf.
we seek to distribute our funding products through our own sales
force to a large, diverse global creditor base and we believe
that our relationships with our creditors are critical to our
liquidity. our creditors include banks, governments, securities
lenders, pension funds, insurance companies, mutual funds and
individuals. we access funding in a variety of markets in the
americas, europe and asia. we have imposed various internal
guidelines on creditor concentration, including the amount of
our commercial paper and promissory notes that can be owned and
letters of credit that can be issued by any single creditor or
group of creditors.
in the latter half of 2008, we were unable to raise significant
amounts of long-term unsecured debt in the public markets, other
than as a result of the issuance of securities guaranteed by the
fdic under the tlgp. it is unclear when we will regain access to
the public long-term unsecured debt markets on customary terms
or whether any similar program will be available after the
tlgps scheduled june 2009 expiration. however, we continue
to have access to short-term funding and to a number of sources
of secured funding, both in the private markets and through
various government and central bank sponsored initiatives.
over the past year, a number of u.s.regulatory agencies
have taken steps to enhance the liquidity support available to
financial services companies such as group inc., gs&co.,
gsi and gs bank usa. some of these steps include:
the federal reserve bank of new york established the primary
dealer credit facility in march2008 to provide overnight
funding to primary dealers in exchange for a specified range of
collateral. in september2008, the eligible collateral was
expanded to include all collateral eligible in tri-party
repurchase arrangements with the major clearing banks, and the
facility was made available to gsi. this facility is scheduled
to expire on april30,2009.
the federal reserve board introduced a new term securities
lending facility (tslf) in march2008, which extended the
term for which the federal reserve board will lend treasury
securities to primary dealers from overnight to 28days
and, in september2008, expanded the types of assets that
can be used as collateral under the tslf to include all
investment-grade
debt securities (rather than just treasury, agency and certain
aaa-rated asset-backed securities). this facility is scheduled
to expire on april30,2009.
in october2008, the federal reserve board established the
commercial paper funding facility (cpff) to serve as a funding
backstop to facilitate the issuance of term commercial paper by
eligible issuers. through the cpff, the federal reserve bank of
new york will finance the purchase of unsecured and
asset-backed
highly rated,
u.s.dollar-denominated,
three-month
commercial paper from eligible issuers through its primary
dealers. the facility is scheduled to expire on
april30,2009. our available funding under the cpff
is approximately $11billion, of which a de minimis amount
was utilized as of january22,2009.
table of contents
the fdics tlgp, which was established in
october2008, provides a guarantee of certain newly issued
senior unsecured debt issued by eligible entities, including
group inc. and gs bank usa, as well as funds over $250,000 in
non-interest-bearing
transaction deposit accounts held by fdic-insured banks (such as
gs bank usa). the debt guarantee is available, subject to
limitations, for debt issued through june30,2009 and
the deposit coverage lasts through december31,2009.
we are able to have outstanding approximately $35billion
of debt under the tlgp that is issued prior to
june30,2009. as of november2008 and
january22, 2009, we had outstanding $4.18billion of
senior unsecured
short-term
borrowings and $25.54billion of senior unsecured debt
(comprised of $11.57 billion of short-term and $13.97 billion of
long-term), respectively, under the tlgp.
see
certain
risk factors that may affect our businesses above, and
risk factors in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of factors that could impair our ability to
access the capital markets.
subsidiary funding policies.substantially all
of our unsecured funding is raised by our parent company, group
inc. the parent company then lends the necessary funds to its
subsidiaries, some of which are regulated, to meet their asset
financing and capital requirements. in addition, the parent
company provides its regulated subsidiaries with the necessary
capital to meet their regulatory requirements. the benefits of
this approach to subsidiary funding include enhanced control and
greater flexibility to meet the funding requirements of our
subsidiaries. funding is also raised at the subsidiary level
through secured funding and deposits.
our intercompany funding policies are predicated on an
assumption that, unless legally provided for, funds or
securities are not freely available from a subsidiary to its
parent company or other subsidiaries. in particular, many of our
subsidiaries are subject to laws that authorize regulatory
bodies to block or limit the flow of funds from those
subsidiaries to group inc. regulatory action of that kind could
impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on
obligations, including debt obligations. as such, we assume that
capital or other financing provided to our regulated
subsidiaries is not available to our parent company or other
subsidiaries until the maturity of such financing. in addition,
we recognize that the global core excess held in our regulated
entities may not be available to our parent company or other
subsidiaries and therefore may only be available to meet the
potential liquidity requirements of those entities.
we also manage our liquidity risk by requiring senior and
subordinated intercompany loans to have maturities equal to or
shorter than the maturities of the aggregate borrowings of the
parent company. this policy ensures that the subsidiaries
obligations to the parent company will generally mature in
advance of the parent companys
third-party
borrowings. in addition, many of our subsidiaries and affiliates
maintain unencumbered assets to cover their unsecured
intercompany borrowings (other than subordinated debt) in order
to mitigate parent company liquidity risk.
group inc. has provided substantial amounts of equity and
subordinated indebtedness, directly or indirectly, to its
regulated subsidiaries; for example, as of november2008,
group inc. had $26.01billion of such equity and
subordinated indebtedness invested in gs&co., its principal
u.s.registered
broker-dealer;
$22.06billion invested in gsi, a regulated u.k.
broker-dealer;
$2.48billion invested in goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p., a u.s.registered
broker-dealer;
$3.79billion invested in goldman sachs japan co., ltd., a
regulated japanese
broker-dealer;
and $17.32billion invested in gs bank usa, a regulated new
york state-chartered bank. group inc. also had
$62.81billion of unsubordinated loans to these entities as
of november2008, as well as significant amounts of capital
invested in and loans to its other regulated subsidiaries.
table of contents
crisis
planning
in order to be prepared for a liquidity event, or a period of
market stress, we base our liquidity risk management framework
and our resulting funding and liquidity policies on conservative
stress-scenario
assumptions. our planning incorporates several
market-based
and operational stress scenarios. we also periodically conduct
liquidity crisis drills to test our lines of communication and
backup funding procedures.
in addition, we maintain a liquidity crisis plan that specifies
an approach for analyzing and responding to a
liquidity-threatening event. the plan provides the framework to
estimate the likely impact of a liquidity event on goldman sachs
based on some of the risks identified above and outlines which
and to what extent liquidity maintenance activities should be
implemented based on the severity of the event.
credit
ratings
we rely upon the
short-term
and
long-term
debt capital markets to fund a significant portion of our
day-to-day
operations. the cost and availability of debt financing is
influenced by our credit ratings. credit ratings are important
when we are competing in certain markets and when we seek to
engage in longer-term transactions, including otc derivatives.
we believe our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit
rating agencies assessment of our liquidity, market,
credit and operational risk management practices, the level and
variability of our earnings, our capital base, our franchise,
reputation and management, our corporate governance and the
external operating environment. see
certain
risk factors that may affect our businesses above, and
risk factors in parti, item1a of our
annual report on
form10-k
for a discussion of the risks associated with a reduction in our
credit ratings.
on december16,2008, moodys investors service
affirmed group inc.s
short-term
debt rating and lowered group inc.s ratings on
long-term
debt (from aa3 to a1), subordinated debt (from a1 to a2) and
preferred stock (from a2 to a3), and retained its outlook of
negative. also on december16,2008,
dominion bond rating service limited affirmed group inc.s
credit ratings but revised its outlook from negative
to under review with negative implications. on
december17,2008, rating and investment information,
inc. affirmed group inc.s
short-term
debt rating at
a-1+,
lowered group inc.s
long-term
debt ratings from aa to aa- and retained its outlook of
negative. on december19,2008,
standard& poors ratings services lowered group
inc.s ratings on
short-term
debt (from
a-1+ to
a-1),
long-term
debt (from aa- to a), subordinated debt (from a+ to a-) and
preferred stock (from a to bbb) and retained its outlook of
negative. on january23, 2009, dominion bond
rating service limited lowered group inc.s ratings on
long-term debt (from aa (low) to a (high)), subordinated debt
(from a(high) to a) and preferred stock (from a to
a(low)).
the following table sets forth our unsecured credit ratings as
of january23,2009:
short-term debt
long-term debt
subordinated debt
preferred stock
dominion bond rating service limited
r-1(middle)
a (high)
a
a(low)
fitch, inc.
f1+
aa-
a+
a+
moodys investors service
p-1
a1
a2
a3
standard& poors ratings services
a-1
a
a-
bbb
rating and investment information, inc.
a-1+
aa-
notapplicable
notapplicable
table of contents
based on our credit ratings as of november2008, additional
collateral or termination payments pursuant to bilateral
agreements with certain counterparties of approximately
$1.11billion and $1.51billion would have been
required in the event of a
one-notch
and
two-notch
reduction, respectively, in our
long-term
credit ratings. based on our credit ratings reflected in the
above table, additional collateral or termination payments
pursuant to bilateral agreements with certain counterparties of
approximately $897million and $2.14billion would
have been required in the event of a one-notch and two-notch
reduction, respectively, in our long-term credit ratings as of
december26, 2008. in evaluating our liquidity
requirements, we consider additional collateral or termination
payments that would be required in the event of a
two-notch
reduction in our
long-term
credit ratings, as well as collateral that has not been called
by counterparties, but is available to them.
cash
flows
as a global financial institution, our cash flows are complex
and interrelated and bear little relation to our net earnings
and net assets and, consequently, we believe that traditional
cash flow analysis is less meaningful in evaluating our
liquidity position than the excess liquidity and
asset-liability
management policies described above. cash flow analysis may,
however, be helpful in highlighting certain macro trends and
strategic initiatives in our business.
year ended november2008.our cash and
cash equivalents increased by $5.46billion to
$15.74billion at the end of 2008. we raised
$9.80billion in net cash from operating and financing
activities, primarily from common and preferred stock issuances
and deposits, partially offset by repayments of
short-term
borrowings. we used net cash of $4.34billion in our
investing activities.
year ended november2007.our cash and
cash equivalents increased by $4.34billion to
$10.28billion at the end of 2007. we raised
$73.79billion in net cash from financing and investing
activities, primarily through the issuance of unsecured
borrowings, partially offset by common stock repurchases. we
used net cash of $69.45billion in our operating
activities, primarily to capitalize on trading and investing
opportunities for our clients and ourselves.
operational
risk
operational risk relates to the risk of loss arising from
shortcomings or failures in internal processes, people or
systems, or from external events. operational risk can arise
from many factors ranging from routine processing errors to
potentially costly incidents related to, for example, major
systems failures. operational risk may also cause reputational
harm. thus, efforts to identify, manage and mitigate operational
risk must be equally sensitive to the risk of reputational
damage as well as the risk of financial loss.
we manage operational risk through the application of
long-standing,
but continuously evolving, firmwide control standards which are
supported by the training, supervision and development of our
people; the active participation and commitment of senior
management in a continuous process of identifying and mitigating
key operational risks across goldman sachs; and a framework of
strong and independent control departments that monitor
operational risk on a daily basis. together, these elements form
a strong firmwide control culture that serves as the foundation
of our efforts to minimize operational risk exposure.
operational risk management& analysis, a risk
management function independent of our revenue-producing units,
is responsible for developing and implementing a formalized
framework to identify, measure, monitor, and report operational
risks to support active risk management across goldman sachs.
this framework, which evolves with the changing needs of our
businesses and regulatory guidance, incorporates analysis of
internal and external operational risk events, business
environment and internal control factors, and scenario analysis.
the framework also provides regular reporting of our operational
risk exposures to our board, risk committees and senior
management. for a further discussion of operational risk see
certain
risk factors that may affect our businesses above, and
risk
factors in parti, item1a of our annual report
on
form10-k.
table of contents
recent accounting
developments
eitf issue
no.06-11.in
june2007, the emerging issues task force (eitf) reached
consensus on issue
no.06-11,
accounting for income tax benefits of dividends on
share-based
payment awards. eitf issue
no.06-11
requires that the tax benefit related to dividend equivalents
paid on restricted stock units, which are expected to vest, be
recorded as an increase to additional
paid-in
capital. we currently account for this tax benefit as a
reduction to income tax expense. eitf issue
no.06-11
is to be applied prospectively for tax benefits on dividends
declared in fiscal years beginning after
december15,2007. we do not expect the adoption of
eitf issue
no.06-11
to have a material effect on our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
fasb staff position no.fas
140-3.in
february2008, the fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp)
no.fas140-3,
accounting for transfers of financial assets and
repurchase financing transactions.
fspno.fas140-3
requires an initial transfer of a financial asset and a
repurchase financing that was entered into contemporaneously or
in contemplation of the initial transfer to be evaluated as a
linked transaction under sfasno.140 unless certain
criteria are met, including that the transferred asset must be
readily obtainable in the marketplace.
fspno.fas140-3
is effective for fiscal years beginning after
november15,2008, and is applicable to new
transactions entered into after the date of adoption. early
adoption is prohibited. we do not expect adoption of
fspno.fas140-3
to have a material effect on our financial condition and cash
flows. adoption of
fspno.fas140-3
will have no effect on our results of operations.
sfasno.161.in march2008,
the fasb issued sfasno.161, disclosures about
derivative instruments and hedging activities an
amendment of fasb statement no.133.
sfasno.161 requires enhanced disclosures about an
entitys derivative and hedging activities, and is
effective for financial statements issued for reporting periods
beginning after november15,2008, with early
application encouraged. since sfasno.161 requires
only additional disclosures concerning derivatives and hedging
activities, adoption of sfasno.161 will not affect
our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
fasb staff position no.eitf
03-6-1.in
june2008, the fasb issued fsp no.eitf
03-6-1,
determining whether instruments granted in
share-based
payment transactions are participating securities. the fsp
addresses whether instruments granted in
share-based
payment transactions are participating securities prior to
vesting and therefore need to be included in the earnings
allocation in calculating earnings per share under the two-class
method described in sfasno.128, earnings per
share. the fsp requires companies to treat unvested
share-based
payment awards that have
non-forfeitable
rights to dividend or dividend equivalents as a separate class
of securities in calculating earnings per share. the fsp is
effective for fiscal years beginning after
december15,2008; earlier application is not
permitted. we do not expect adoption of fsp
no.eitf03-6-1
to have a material effect on our results of operations or
earnings per share.
fasb staff position
no.fas133-1
and
fin45-4.in
september2008, the fasb issued
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4,
disclosures about credit derivatives and certain
guarantees: an amendment of fasb statement no.133 and fasb
interpretation no.45; and clarification of the effective
date of fasb statement no.161.
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4
requires enhanced disclosures about credit derivatives and
guarantees and amends fin45, guarantors
accounting and disclosure requirements for guarantees, including
indirect guarantees of indebtedness of others to exclude
credit derivative instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.133. the fsp is effective for financial
statements issued for reporting periods ending after
november15,2008. since
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4
only requires additional disclosures concerning credit
derivatives and guarantees, adoption of
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4
did not have an effect on our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
table of contents
fasb staff position
no.fas157-3.in
october2008, the fasb issued
fspno.fas157-3,
determining the fair value of a financial asset when the
market for that asset is not active.
fspno.fas157-3
clarifies the application of sfasno.157 in an
inactive market, without changing its existing principles. the
fsp was effective immediately upon issuance. the adoption of
fspno.fas157-3
did not have an effect on our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
sfasno.141(r).in
december2007, the fasb issued a revision to
sfasno.141, business combinations.
sfasno.141(r) requires changes to the accounting for
transaction costs, certain contingent assets and liabilities,
and other balances in a business combination. in addition, in
partial acquisitions, when control is obtained, the acquiring
company must measure and record all of the targets assets
and liabilities, including goodwill, at fair value as if the
entire target company had been acquired. we will apply the
provisions of sfasno.141(r) to business combinations
occurring after december26,2008. adoption of
sfasno.141(r) will not affect our financial
condition, results of operations or cash flows, but may have an
effect on accounting for future business combinations.
sfasno.160.in december2007,
the fasb issued sfasno.160, noncontrolling
interests in consolidated financial statements an
amendment of arb no.51. sfasno.160
requires that ownership interests in consolidated subsidiaries
held by parties other than the parent (noncontrolling interests)
be accounted for and presented as equity, rather than as a
liability or mezzanine equity. sfasno.160 is
effective for fiscal years beginning on or after
december15,2008, but the presentation and disclosure
requirements are to be applied retrospectively. we do not expect
adoption of the statement to have a material effect on our
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
fasb staff position
no.fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8.in december2008, the
fasb issued
fspno.fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8, disclosures by public entities
(enterprises) about transfers of financial assets and interests
in variable interest entities.
fspno.fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8 requires enhanced disclosures about
transfers of financial assets and interests in variable interest
entities. the fsp is effective for interim and annual periods
ending after december15,2008. since the fsp requires
only additional disclosures concerning transfers of financial
assets and interests in variable interest entities, adoption of
the fsp will not affect our financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
eitf issue
no.07-5.in
june2008, the eitf reached consensus on issue
no.07-5,
determining whether an instrument (or embedded feature) is
indexed to an entitys own stock. eitf issue
no.07-5
provides guidance about whether an instrument (such as our
outstanding common stock warrants) should be classified as
equity and not marked to market for accounting purposes. eitf
issue
no.07-5
is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2008. adoption of eitf issue
no.07-5
will not affect our financial condition, results of operations
or cash flows.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk
quantitative and qualitative disclosure about market risk is set
forth under managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations risk
management in partii, item7 of our annual
report on
form10-k.
table of contents
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
index
page
no.
managements report on internal control over
financial reporting
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
consolidated statements of comprehensive
income
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1 description of
business
note2 significant accounting
policies
note3 financial instruments
note4 securitization activities
and variable interest entities
note5 deposits
note6
short-term
borrowings
note7
long-term
borrowings
note8 commitments,
contingencies and guarantees
note9 shareholders
equity
note10 earnings per common
share
note11 goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets
note12 other assets and other
liabilities
note13 employee benefit
plans
note14 employee incentive
plans
note15 transactions with
affiliated funds
note16 income taxes
note17 regulation
note18 business segments
note19 interest income and
interest expense
note20 parent company
note21 subsequent events
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
selected financial data
statistical disclosures
table of contents
managements
report on internal control over
financial reporting
management of the goldman sachs group, inc., together with its
consolidated subsidiaries (the firm), is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting. the firms internal control over
financial reporting is a process designed under the supervision
of the firms principal executive and principal financial
officers to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the
firms financial statements for external reporting purposes
in accordance with u.s.generally accepted accounting
principles.
as of the end of the firms 2008 fiscal year, management
conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of the firms
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework
established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this
assessment, management has determined that the firms
internal control over financial reporting as of
november28,2008 was effective.
our internal control over financial reporting includes policies
and procedures that pertain to the maintenance of records that,
in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect transactions
and dispositions of assets; provide reasonable assurances that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with u.s.generally
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and the directors of the firm; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the
firms assets that could have a material effect on our
financial statements.
the firms internal control over financial reporting as of
november28,2008 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing on
page130, which expresses an unqualified opinion on the
effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial
reporting as of november28,2008.
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and the shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in
the accompanying index present fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of the goldman sachs group, inc. and its
subsidiaries (the company) at november28,2008 and
november30,2007, and the results of its operations
and its cash flows for each of the three fiscal years in the
period ended november28,2008 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. also in our opinion, the company maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of november28,2008, based on criteria
established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the
companys management is responsible for these financial
statements, for maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness
of internal control over financial reporting, included in
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting appearing on page129. our responsibility is to
express opinions on these financial statements and on the
companys internal control over financial reporting based
on our integrated audits. we conducted our audits in accordance
with the standards of the public company accounting oversight
board (united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement and
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. our audits of the financial
statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of
internal control based on the assessed risk. our audits also
included performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
as discussed in note2 to the consolidated financial
statements, as of the beginning of 2007 the company adopted
sfasno.157, fair value measurements and
sfasno.159, the fair value option for
financial assets and financial liabilities.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
january22,2009
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions, except per
share amounts)
revenues
investment banking
$
5,179
$
7,555
$
5,613
trading and principal investments
8,095
29,714
24,027
asset management and securities services
4,672
4,731
4,527
interest income
35,633
45,968
35,186
total revenues
53,579
87,968
69,353
interest expense
31,357
41,981
31,688
revenues, net of interest expense
22,222
45,987
37,665
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
10,934
20,190
16,457
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees
2,998
2,758
1,985
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
1,022
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
occupancy
professional fees
other expenses
1,709
1,661
1,538
total
non-compensation
expenses
8,952
8,193
6,648
total operating expenses
19,886
28,383
23,105
pre-tax
earnings
2,336
17,604
14,560
provision for taxes
6,005
5,023
net earnings
2,322
11,599
9,537
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
2,041
$
11,407
$
9,398
earnings per common share
basic
$
4.67
$
26.34
$
20.93
diluted
4.47
24.73
19.69
average common shares outstanding
basic
437.0
433.0
449.0
diluted
456.2
461.2
477.4
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of financial
condition
as of november
(in millions, except share
and per share amounts)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
15,740
$
10,282
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(includes $78,830 and $94,018 at fair value as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively)
106,664
119,939
collateralized agreements:
securities purchased under agreements to resell, at fair value,
and federal funds sold (includes $116,671 and $85,717 at fair
value as of november2008 and november2007,
respectively)
122,021
87,317
securities borrowed (includes $59,810 and $83,277 at fair value
as of november2008 and november2007, respectively)
180,795
277,413
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
25,899
19,078
receivables from customers and counterparties (includes $1,598
and $1,950 at fair value as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively)
64,665
129,105
trading assets, at fair value (includes $26,313 and $46,138
pledged as collateral as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively)
338,325
452,595
other assets
30,438
24,067
total assets
$
884,547
$
1,119,796
liabilities and shareholders equity
deposits (includes $4,224 and $463 at fair value as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively)
$
27,643
$
15,370
collateralized financings:
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, at fair value
62,883
159,178
securities loaned (includes $7,872 and $5,449 at fair value as
of november2008 and november2007, respectively)
17,060
28,624
other secured financings (includes $20,249 and $33,581 at fair
value as of november2008 and november2007,
respectively)
38,683
65,710
payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
8,585
8,335
payables to customers and counterparties
245,258
310,118
trading liabilities, at fair value
175,972
215,023
unsecured
short-term
borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured
long-term
borrowings (includes $23,075 and $48,331 at fair value as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively)
52,658
71,557
unsecured
long-term
borrowings (includes $17,446 and $15,928 at fair value as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively)
168,220
164,174
other liabilities and accrued expenses (includes $978 at fair
value as of november2008)
23,216
38,907
total liabilities
820,178
1,076,996
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share; aggregate
liquidation preference of $18,100 and $3,100 as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively
16,471
3,100
common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
4,000,000,000shares authorized, 680,953,836 and
618,707,032shares issued as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, and 442,537,317 and
390,682,013shares outstanding as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
9,284
9,302
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01 per share;
200,000,000shares authorized, no shares issued and
outstanding
additional
paid-in
capital
31,071
22,027
retained earnings
39,913
38,642
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(202
)
(118
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost, par value $0.01 per
share; 238,416,519 and 228,025,019shares as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively
(32,175
)
(30,159
)
total shareholders equity
64,369
42,800
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
884,547
$
1,119,796
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity
year ended november
(in millions, except per share amounts)
preferred stock
balance, beginning of year
$
3,100
$
3,100
$
1,750
issued
13,367
1,350
preferred stock accretion
balance, end of year
16,471
3,100
3,100
common stock, par value $0.01 per share
balance, beginning of year
issued
balance, end of year
restricted stock units and employee stock options
balance, beginning of year
9,302
6,290
3,415
issuance and amortization of restricted stock units and employee
stock options
2,254
4,684
3,787
delivery of common stock underlying restricted stockunits
(1,995
)
(1,548
)
(781
)
forfeiture of restricted stock units and employee stock options
(274
)
(113
)
(129
)
exercise of employee stock options
(3
)
(11
)
(2
)
balance, end of year
9,284
9,302
6,290
additional
paid-in
capital
balance, beginning of year
22,027
19,731
17,159
issuance of common stock warrants
1,633
issuance of common stock, including the delivery of common stock
underlying restricted stock units and proceeds from the exercise
of employee stock options
8,081
2,338
2,432
cancellation of restricted stock units in satisfaction of
withholding tax requirements
(1,314
)
(929
)
(375
)
stock purchase contract fee related to automatic preferred
enhanced capital securities
(20
)
preferred and common stock issuance costs
(1
)
(1
)
excess net tax benefit related to
share-based
compensation
cash settlement of
share-based
compensation
(1
)
(137
)
balance, end of year
31,071
22,027
19,731
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year, as previously reported
38,642
27,868
19,085
cumulative effect of adjustment from adoption of fin48
(201
)
cumulative effect of adjustment from adoption of
sfasno.157, net of tax
cumulative effect of adjustment from adoption of
sfasno.159, net of tax
(45
)
balance, beginning of year, after cumulative effect of
adjustments
38,441
27,874
19,085
net earnings
2,322
11,599
9,537
dividends and dividend equivalents declared on common stock and
restricted stockunits
(642
)
(639
)
(615
)
dividends declared on preferred stock
(204
)
(192
)
(139
)
preferred stock accretion
(4
)
balance, end of year
39,913
38,642
27,868
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
balance, beginning of year
(118
)
adjustment from adoption of sfasno.158, net of tax
(194
)
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(98
)
pension and postretirement liability adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
net gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges, net of tax
(2
)
(7
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on
available-for-sale
securities, net of tax
(55
)
(12
)
reclassification to retained earnings from adoption of
sfasno.159,net of tax
(8
)
balance, end of year
(202
)
(118
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost
balance, beginning of year
(30,159
)
(21,230
)
(13,413
)
repurchased
(2,037
)
(8,956
)
(7,817
)
reissued
balance, end of year
(32,175
)
(30,159
)
(21,230
)
total shareholders equity
$
64,369
$
42,800
$
35,786
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
2,322
$
11,599
$
9,537
non-cash
items included in net earnings
depreciation and amortization
1,385
amortization of identifiable intangible assets
deferred income taxes
(1,763
)
(1,505
)
share-based
compensation
1,611
4,465
3,654
changes in operating assets and liabilities
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
12,995
(39,079
)
(21,044
)
net receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
(6,587
)
(3,811
)
(1,794
)
net payables to customers and counterparties
(50
)
53,857
9,823
securities borrowed, net of securities loaned
85,054
(51,655
)
(28,666
)
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, net of
securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal
funds sold
(130,999
)
6,845
5,825
trading assets, at fair value
97,723
(118,864
)
(48,479
)
trading liabilities, at fair value
(39,051
)
57,938
6,384
other, net
(20,986
)
7,962
12,823
net cash provided by/(used for) operating activities
1,894
(69,447
)
(52,447
)
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(2,027
)
(2,130
)
(1,744
)
proceeds from sales of property, leasehold improvements and
equipment
business acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(2,613
)
(1,900
)
(1,661
)
proceeds from sales of investments
4,294
2,114
purchase of
available-for-sale
securities
(3,851
)
(872
)
(12,922
)
proceeds from sales of
available-for-sale
securities
3,409
4,396
net cash provided by/(used for) investing activities
(4,337
)
(9,748
)
cash flows from financing activities
unsecured
short-term
borrowings, net
(19,295
)
12,262
(4,031
)
other secured financings
(short-term),
net
(8,727
)
2,780
16,856
proceeds from issuance of other secured financings
(long-term)
12,509
21,703
14,451
repayment of other secured financings
(long-term),
including the current portion
(20,653
)
(7,355
)
(7,420
)
proceeds from issuance of unsecured
long-term
borrowings
37,758
57,516
48,839
repayment of unsecured
long-term
borrowings, including the current portion
(25,579
)
(14,823
)
(13,510
)
derivative contracts with a financing element, net
4,814
3,494
deposits, net
12,273
4,673
10,697
common stock repurchased
(2,034
)
(8,956
)
(7,817
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock,
preferred stock and restricted stockunits
(850
)
(831
)
(754
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
6,105
1,613
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
13,366
1,349
proceeds from issuance of common stock warrants
1,633
excess tax benefit related to
share-based
compensation
cash settlement of
share-based
compensation
(1
)
(137
)
net cash provided by financing activities
7,901
73,390
64,094
net increase in cash and cash equivalents
5,458
4,339
1,899
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
10,282
5,943
4,044
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
15,740
$
10,282
$
5,943
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were
$32.37billion, $40.74billion and $30.98billion
for the years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were
$3.47billion, $5.78billion and $4.56billion
for the years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively.
non-cash
activities:
the firm assumed $790million, $409million and
$498million of debt in connection with business
acquisitions for the years ended november2008,
november2007 and november2006, respectively.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of comprehensive
income
year ended november
(in millions)
net earnings
$
2,322
$
11,599
$
9,537
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(98
)
pension and postretirement liability adjustment, net of tax
(27
)
net gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges, net of tax
(2
)
(7
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on
available-for-sale
securities,
net of tax
(55
)
(12
)
comprehensive income
$
2,238
$
11,662
$
9,558
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these
consolidated financial statements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto consolidated financial
statements
note1.
description
of business
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc.), a delaware
corporation, is a bank holding company and, together with its
consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the firm), a leading
global investment banking, securities and investment management
firm that provides a wide range of services worldwide to a
substantial and diversified client base that includes
corporations, financial institutions, governments and
high-net-worth
individuals.
the firms activities are divided into three segments:
investment banking.the firm provides a broad range
of investment banking services to a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals.
trading and principal investments.the firm
facilitates client transactions with a diverse group of
corporations, financial institutions, investment funds,
governments and individuals and takes proprietary positions
through market making in, trading of and investing in fixed
income and equity products, currencies, commodities and
derivatives on these products. in addition, the firm engages in
market-making and specialist activities on equities and options
exchanges, and the firm clears client transactions on major
stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide. in connection
with the firms merchant banking and other investing
activities, the firm makes principal investments directly and
through funds that the firm raises and manages.
asset management and securities services.the firm
provides investment advisory and financial planning services and
offers investment products (primarily through separately managed
accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and
private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a
diverse group of institutions and individuals worldwide and
provides prime brokerage services, financing services and
securities lending services to institutional clients, including
hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and to
high-net-worth
individuals worldwide.
note2.
significant
accounting policies
basis of
presentation
these consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
group inc. and all other entities in which the firm has a
controlling financial interest. all material intercompany
transactions and balances have been eliminated.
the firm determines whether it has a controlling financial
interest in an entity by first evaluating whether the entity is
a voting interest entity, a variable interest entity (vie) or a
qualifying
special-purpose
entity (qspe) under generally accepted accounting principles.
voting interest entities.voting interest entities
are entities in which (i)the total equity investment at
risk is sufficient to enable the entity to finance its
activities independently and (ii)the equity holders have
the obligation to absorb losses, the right to receive residual
returns and the right to make decisions about the entitys
activities. voting interest entities are consolidated in
accordance with accounting research bulletin no.51,
consolidated financial statements, as amended. the
usual condition for a controlling financial interest in an
entity is ownership of a majority voting interest. accordingly,
the firm consolidates voting interest entities in which it has a
majority voting interest.
variable interest entities.vies are entities that
lack one or more of the characteristics of a voting interest
entity. a controlling financial interest in a vie is present
when an enterprise has a variable interest, or a combination of
variable interests, that will absorb a majority of the
vies expected losses, receive a majority of the vies
expected residual returns, or both. the
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
enterprise with a controlling financial interest, known as the
primary beneficiary, consolidates the vie. in accordance with
financial accounting standards board (fasb) interpretation
(fin)46-r,
consolidation of variable interest entities, the
firm consolidates vies for which it is the primary beneficiary.
the firm determines whether it is the primary beneficiary of a
vie by first performing a qualitative analysis of the vies
expected losses and expected residual returns. this analysis
includes a review of, among other factors, the vies
capital structure, contractual terms, which interests create or
absorb variability, related party relationships and the design
of the vie. where qualitative analysis is not conclusive, the
firm performs a quantitative analysis. for purposes of
allocating a vies expected losses and expected residual
returns to its variable interest holders, the firm utilizes the
top down method. under that method, the firm
calculates its share of the vies expected losses and
expected residual returns using the specific cash flows that
would be allocated to it, based on contractual arrangements
and/or the
firms position in the capital structure of the vie, under
various probability-weighted scenarios. the firm reassesses its
initial evaluation of an entity as a vie and its initial
determination of whether the firm is the primary beneficiary of
a vie upon the occurrence of certain reconsideration events as
defined in
fin46-r.
qspes.qspes are passive entities that are commonly
used in mortgage and other securitization transactions.
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.140,
accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets
and extinguishments of liabilities, sets forth the
criteria an entity must satisfy to be a qspe. these criteria
include the types of assets a qspe may hold, limits on asset
sales, the use of derivatives and financial guarantees, and the
level of discretion a servicer may exercise in attempting to
collect receivables. these criteria may require management to
make judgments about complex matters, such as whether a
derivative is considered passive and the level of discretion a
servicer may exercise, including, for example, determining when
default is reasonably foreseeable. in accordance with
sfasno.140 and
fin46-r,
the firm does not consolidate qspes.
equity-method
investments.when the firm does not have a controlling
financial interest in an entity but exerts significant influence
over the entitys operating and financial policies
(generally defined as owning a voting interest of 20% to 50%)
and has an investment in common stock or
in-substance
common stock, the firm accounts for its investment either in
accordance with accounting principles board opinion (apb)
no.18, the equity method of accounting for
investments in common stock or at fair value in accordance
with sfas no.159, the fair value option for
financial assets and financial liabilities. in general,
the firm accounts for investments acquired subsequent to the
adoption of sfas no.159 at fair value. in certain cases,
the firm may apply the equity method of accounting to new
investments that are strategic in nature or closely related to
the firms principal business activities, where the firm
has a significant degree of involvement in the cash flows or
operations of the investee, or where
cost-benefit
considerations are less significant. see
revenue
recognition other financial assets and financial
liabilities at fair value below for a discussion of the
firms application of sfasno.159.
other.if the firm does not consolidate an entity or
apply the equity method of accounting, the firm accounts for its
investment at fair value. the firm also has formed numerous
nonconsolidated investment funds with
third-party
investors that are typically organized as limited partnerships.
the firm acts as general partner for these funds and generally
does not hold a majority of the economic interests in these
funds. the firm has generally provided the
third-party
investors with rights to terminate the funds or to remove the
firm as the general partner. as a result, the firm does not
consolidate these funds. these fund investments are included in
trading assets, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
unless otherwise stated herein, all references to 2008, 2007 and
2006 refer to the firms fiscal years ended, or the dates,
as the context requires, november28,2008,
november30,2007 and november24,2006,
respectively. certain reclassifications have been made to
previously reported amounts to conform to the current
presentation.
use of
estimates
these consolidated financial statements have been prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that
require management to make certain estimates and assumptions.
the most important of these estimates and assumptions relate to
fair value measurements, the accounting for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets and the provision for potential
losses that may arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings
and tax audits. although these and other estimates and
assumptions are based on the best available information, actual
results could be materially different from these estimates.
revenue
recognition
investment banking.underwriting revenues and fees
from mergers and acquisitions and other financial advisory
assignments are recognized in the consolidated statements of
earnings when the services related to the underlying transaction
are completed under the terms of the engagement. expenses
associated with such transactions are deferred until the related
revenue is recognized or the engagement is otherwise concluded.
underwriting revenues are presented net of related expenses.
expenses associated with financial advisory transactions are
recorded as
non-compensation
expenses, net of client reimbursements.
trading assets and trading
liabilities.substantially all trading assets and
trading liabilities are reflected in the consolidated statements
of financial condition at fair value, pursuant principally to:
sfasno.115, accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities;
specialized industry accounting for
broker-dealers
and investment companies;
sfasno.133, accounting for derivative
instruments and hedging activities; or
the fair value option under either sfasno.155,
accounting for certain hybrid financial
instruments an amendment of fasb statements
no.133 and 140, or sfasno.159, the
fair value option for financial assets and financial
liabilities, (i.e.,the fair value option).
related unrealized gains or losses are generally recognized in
trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
upon becoming a bank holding company in september2008, the
firm could no longer apply specialized
broker-dealer
industry accounting to those subsidiaries not regulated as
broker-dealers.
therefore, within the firms
non-broker-dealer
subsidiaries, the firm designated as held for trading those
instruments within the scope of sfasno.115 (i.e.,
debt securities and marketable equity securities), and elected
the fair value option for other cash instruments (specifically
loans, loan commitments and certain private equity and
restricted public equity securities) which the firm historically
had carried at fair value. these fair value elections were in
addition to previous elections made for certain corporate loans,
loan commitments and certificates of deposit issued by goldman
sachs bank usa (gs bank usa). there was no impact on earnings
from these initial elections because all of these instruments
were already recorded at fair value in trading assets, at
fair value or trading liabilities, at fair
value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition prior to group inc. becoming a bank holding company.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair
value.in addition to trading assets, at fair
value and trading liabilities, at fair value,
the firm has elected to account for certain of its other
financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value under
the fair value option. the primary reasons for electing the fair
value option are to reflect economic events in earnings on a
timely basis, to mitigate volatility in earnings from using
different measurement attributes and to address simplification
and
cost-benefit
considerations.
such financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at
fair value include:
certain unsecured
short-term
borrowings, consisting of all promissory notes and commercial
paper and certain hybrid financial instruments;
certain other secured financings, primarily transfers accounted
for as financings rather than sales under
sfasno.140, debt raised through the firms
william street program and certain other nonrecourse financings;
certain unsecured
long-term
borrowings, including prepaid physical commodity transactions;
resale and repurchase agreements;
securities borrowed and loaned within trading and principal
investments, consisting of the firms matched book and
certain firm financing activities;
certain corporate loans, loan commitments and certificates of
deposit issued by gs bank usa as well as securities held by gs
bank usa;
receivables from customers and counterparties arising from
transfers accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases
under sfasno.140;
certain insurance and reinsurance contracts; and
in general, investments acquired after the adoption of
sfasno.159 where the firm has significant influence
over the investee and would otherwise apply the equity method of
accounting.
fair value measurements.the fair value of a
financial instrument is the amount that would be received to
sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date
(the exit price). financial assets are marked to bid prices and
financial liabilities are marked to offer prices. fair value
measurements do not include transaction costs.
the firm adopted sfasno.157, fair value
measurements, as of the beginning of 2007.
sfasno.157 establishes a fair value hierarchy that
prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure
fair value. the hierarchy gives the highest priority to
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets
or liabilities (level1 measurements) and the lowest
priority to unobservable inputs (level3 measurements). the
three levels of the fair value hierarchy under
sfasno.157 are described below:
basis of fair value
measurement
level1
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible
at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or
liabilities;
level2
quoted prices in markets that are not considered to be active or
financial instruments for which all significant inputs are
observable, either directly or indirectly;
level3
prices or valuations that require inputs that are both
significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
a financial instruments level within the fair value
hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is
significant to the fair value measurement.
the firm defines active markets for equity instruments based on
the average daily trading volume both in absolute terms and
relative to the market capitalization for the instrument. the
firm defines active markets for debt instruments based on both
the average daily trading volume and the number of days with
trading activity.
during the fourth quarter of 2008, both the fasb and the staff
of the sec re-emphasized the importance of sound fair value
measurement in financial reporting. in october2008, the
fasb issued fasb staff position
no.fas157-3,
determining the fair value of a financial asset when the
market for that asset is not active. this statement
clarifies that determining fair value in an inactive or
dislocated market depends on facts and circumstances and
requires significant management judgment. this statement
specifies that it is acceptable to use inputs based on
management estimates or assumptions, or for management to make
adjustments to observable inputs to determine fair value when
markets are not active and relevant observable inputs are not
available. the firms fair value measurement policies are
consistent with the guidance in
fspno.fas157-3.
credit risk is an essential component of fair value. cash
products (e.g., bonds and loans) and derivative instruments
(particularly those with significant future projected cash
flows) trade in the market at levels which reflect credit
considerations. the firm calculates the fair value of derivative
assets by discounting future cash flows at a rate which
incorporates counterparty credit spreads and the fair value of
derivative liabilities by discounting future cash flows at a
rate which incorporates the firms own credit spreads. in
doing so, credit exposures are adjusted to reflect mitigants,
namely collateral agreements which reduce exposures based on
triggers and contractual posting requirements. the firm manages
its exposure to credit risk as it does other market risks and
will price, economically hedge, facilitate and intermediate
trades which involve credit risk. the firm records liquidity
valuation adjustments to reflect the cost of exiting
concentrated risk positions, including exposure to the
firms own credit spreads.
in determining fair value, the firm separates its trading
assets, at fair value and its trading liabilities,
at fair value into two categories: cash instruments and
derivative contracts.
cash instruments.the firms cash instruments
are generally classified within level1 or level2 of
the fair value hierarchy because they are valued using quoted
market prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative
pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency.
the types of instruments valued based on quoted market prices in
active markets include most u.s. government and sovereign
obligations, active listed equities and certain money market
securities. such instruments are generally classified within
level1 of the fair value hierarchy. in accordance with
sfasno.157, the firm does not adjust the quoted
price for such instruments, even in situations where the firm
holds a large position and a sale could reasonably impact the
quoted price.
the types of instruments that trade in markets that are not
considered to be active, but are valued based on quoted market
prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative pricing
sources with reasonable levels of price transparency include
most government agency securities,
investment-grade
corporate bonds, certain mortgage products, certain bank loans
and bridge loans, less liquid listed equities, state, municipal
and provincial obligations and certain money market securities
and loan commitments. such instruments are generally classified
within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
certain cash instruments are classified within level3 of
the fair value hierarchy because they trade infrequently and
therefore have little or no price transparency. such instruments
include private equity and real estate fund investments, certain
bank loans and bridge loans (including
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
certain mezzanine financing, leveraged loans arising from
capital market transactions and other corporate bank debt), less
liquid corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
(including less liquid
high-yield
corporate bonds, distressed debt instruments and collateralized
debt obligations (cdos) backed by corporate obligations), less
liquid mortgage whole loans and securities (backed by either
commercial or residential real estate), and acquired portfolios
of distressed loans. the transaction price is initially used as
the best estimate of fair value. accordingly, when a pricing
model is used to value such an instrument, the model is adjusted
so that the model value at inception equals the transaction
price. this valuation is adjusted only when changes to inputs
and assumptions are corroborated by evidence such as
transactions in similar instruments, completed or pending
third-party
transactions in the underlying investment or comparable
entities, subsequent rounds of financing, recapitalizations and
other transactions across the capital structure, offerings in
the equity or debt capital markets, and changes in financial
ratios or cash flows.
for positions that are not traded in active markets or are
subject to transfer restrictions, valuations are adjusted to
reflect illiquidity
and/or
non-transferability.
such adjustments are generally based on available market
evidence. in the absence of such evidence, managements
best estimate is used.
recent market conditions, particularly in the fourth quarter of
2008 (characterized by dislocations between asset classes,
elevated levels of volatility, and reduced price transparency),
have increased the level of management judgment required to
value cash trading instruments classified within level3 of
the fair value hierarchy. in particular, managements
judgment is required to determine the appropriate
risk-adjusted
discount rate for cash trading instruments with little or no
price transparency as a result of decreased volumes and lower
levels of trading activity. in such situations, the firms
valuation is adjusted to approximate rates which market
participants would likely consider appropriate for relevant
credit and liquidity risks.
derivative contracts.derivative contracts can be
exchange-traded
or
over-the-counter
(otc).
exchange-traded
derivatives typically fall within level1 or level2
of the fair value hierarchy depending on whether they are deemed
to be actively traded or not. the firm generally values
exchange-traded
derivatives using models which calibrate to
market-clearing
levels and eliminate timing differences between the closing
price of the
exchange-traded
derivatives and their underlying instruments. in such cases,
exchange-traded
derivatives are classified within level2 of the fair value
hierarchy.
otc derivatives are valued using market transactions and other
market evidence whenever possible, including
market-based
inputs to models, model calibration to
market-clearing
transactions, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative
pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency.
where models are used, the selection of a particular model to
value an otc derivative depends upon the contractual terms of,
and specific risks inherent in, the instrument as well as the
availability of pricing information in the market. the firm
generally uses similar models to value similar instruments.
valuation models require a variety of inputs, including
contractual terms, market prices, yield curves, credit curves,
measures of volatility, prepayment rates and correlations of
such inputs. for otc derivatives that trade in liquid markets,
such as generic forwards, swaps and options, model inputs can
generally be verified and model selection does not involve
significant management judgment. otc derivatives are classified
within level2 of the fair value hierarchy when all of the
significant inputs can be corroborated to market evidence.
certain otc derivatives trade in less liquid markets with
limited pricing information, and the determination of fair value
for these derivatives is inherently more difficult. such
instruments
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
are classified within level3 of the fair value hierarchy.
where the firm does not have corroborating market evidence to
support significant model inputs and cannot verify the model to
market transactions, the transaction price is initially used as
the best estimate of fair value. accordingly, when a pricing
model is used to value such an instrument, the model is adjusted
so that the model value at inception equals the transaction
price. the valuations of these less liquid otc derivatives are
typically based on level1
and/or
level2 inputs that can be observed in the market, as well
as unobservable level3 inputs. subsequent to initial
recognition, the firm updates the level1 and level2
inputs to reflect observable market changes, with resulting
gains and losses reflected within level3. level3
inputs are only changed when corroborated by evidence such as
similar market transactions,
third-party
pricing services
and/or
broker or dealer quotations, or other empirical market data. in
circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model value to
market transactions, it is possible that a different valuation
model could produce a materially different estimate of fair
value.
when appropriate, valuations are adjusted for various factors
such as liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations.
such adjustments are generally based on available market
evidence. in the absence of such evidence, managements
best estimate is used.
collateralized agreements and
financings.collateralized agreements consist of resale
agreements and securities borrowed. collateralized financings
consist of repurchase agreements, securities loaned and other
secured financings. interest on collateralized agreements and
collateralized financings is recognized in interest
income and interest expense, respectively,
over the life of the transaction.
resale and repurchase agreements.securities
purchased under agreements to resell and securities sold under
agreements to repurchase, principally u.s.government,
federal agency and
investment-grade
sovereign obligations, represent collateralized financing
transactions. the firm receives securities purchased under
agreements to resell, makes delivery of securities sold under
agreements to repurchase, monitors the market value of these
securities on a daily basis and delivers or obtains additional
collateral as appropriate. as noted above, resale and repurchase
agreements are carried in the consolidated statements of
financial condition at fair value under sfasno.159.
resale and repurchase agreements are generally valued based on
inputs with reasonable levels of price transparency and are
classified within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
resale and repurchase agreements are presented on a
net-by-counterparty
basis when the requirements of fin41, offsetting of
amounts related to certain repurchase and reverse repurchase
agreements, or fin39, offsetting of amounts
related to certain contracts, are satisfied.
securities borrowed and loaned.securities borrowed
and loaned are generally collateralized by cash, securities or
letters of credit. the firm receives securities borrowed, makes
delivery of securities loaned, monitors the market value of
securities borrowed and loaned, and delivers or obtains
additional collateral as appropriate. securities borrowed and
loaned within securities services, relating to both customer
activities and, to a lesser extent, certain firm financing
activities, are recorded based on the amount of cash collateral
advanced or received plus accrued interest. as these
arrangements generally can be terminated on demand, they exhibit
little, if any, sensitivity to changes in interest rates. as
noted above, securities borrowed and loaned within trading and
principal investments, which are related to the firms
matched book and certain firm financing activities, are recorded
at fair value under sfasno.159. these securities
borrowed and loaned transactions are generally valued based on
inputs with reasonable levels of price transparency and are
classified within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
other secured financings.in addition to repurchase
agreements and securities loaned, the firm funds assets through
the use of other secured financing arrangements and pledges
financial instruments and other assets as collateral in these
transactions. as noted above, the firm has elected to apply
sfasno.159 to transfers accounted for as financings
rather than sales under sfasno.140, debt raised
through the firms william street program and certain other
nonrecourse financings, for which the use of fair value
eliminates
non-economic
volatility in earnings that would arise from using different
measurement attributes. these other secured financing
transactions are generally valued based on inputs with
reasonable levels of price transparency and are generally
classified within level2 of the fair value hierarchy.
other secured financings that are not recorded at fair value are
recorded based on the amount of cash received plus accrued
interest. see note3 for further information regarding
other secured financings.
hybrid financial instruments.hybrid financial
instruments are instruments that contain bifurcatable embedded
derivatives under sfasno.133 and do not require
settlement by physical delivery of
non-financial
assets (e.g.,physical commodities). if the firm elects to
bifurcate the embedded derivative, it is accounted for at fair
value and the host contract is accounted for at amortized cost,
adjusted for the effective portion of any fair value hedge
accounting relationships. if the firm does not elect to
bifurcate, the entire hybrid financial instrument is accounted
for at fair value under sfasno.155. see notes3
and 6 for further information regarding hybrid financial
instruments.
transfers of financial assets.in general, transfers
of financial assets are accounted for as sales under
sfasno.140 when the firm has relinquished control
over the transferred assets. for transfers accounted for as
sales, any related gains or losses are recognized in net
revenues. transfers that are not accounted for as sales are
accounted for as collateralized financings, with the related
interest expense recognized in net revenues over the life of the
transaction.
commissions.commission revenues from executing and
clearing client transactions on stock, options and futures
markets are recognized in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings on
a trade-date
basis.
insurance activities.certain of the firms
insurance and reinsurance contracts are accounted for at fair
value under sfasno.159, with changes in fair value
included in trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
revenues from variable annuity and life insurance and
reinsurance contracts not accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.159 generally consist of fees assessed on
contract holder account balances for mortality charges, policy
administration fees and surrender charges, and are recognized
within trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings in the period that services
are provided.
interest credited to variable annuity and life insurance and
reinsurance contracts account balances and changes in reserves
are recognized in other expenses in the consolidated
statements of earnings.
premiums earned for underwriting property catastrophe
reinsurance are recognized within trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings
over the coverage period, net of premiums ceded for the cost of
reinsurance. expenses for liabilities related to property
catastrophe reinsurance claims, including estimates of losses
that have been incurred but not reported, are recognized within
other expenses in the consolidated statements of
earnings.
merchant banking overrides.the firm is entitled to
receive merchant banking overrides (i.e.,an increased
share of a funds income and gains) when the return on the
funds investments
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
exceeds certain threshold returns. overrides are based on
investment performance over the life of each merchant banking
fund, and future investment underperformance may require amounts
of override previously distributed to the firm to be returned to
the funds. accordingly, overrides are recognized in the
consolidated statements of earnings only when all material
contingencies have been resolved. overrides are included in
trading and principal investments in the
consolidated statements of earnings.
asset management.management fees are recognized
over the period that the related service is provided based upon
average net asset values. in certain circumstances, the firm is
also entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of
a funds return or when the return on assets under
management exceeds specified benchmark returns or other
performance targets. incentive fees are generally based on
investment performance over a
12-month
period and are subject to adjustment prior to the end of the
measurement period. accordingly, incentive fees are recognized
in the consolidated statements of earnings when the measurement
period ends. asset management fees and incentive fees are
included in asset management and securities services
in the consolidated statements of earnings.
share-based
compensation
the firm accounts for
share-based
compensation in accordance with
sfasno.123-r,
share-based
payment. the cost of employee services received in
exchange for a
share-based
award is generally measured based on the grant-date fair value
of the award.
share-based
awards that do not require future service (i.e.,vested
awards, including awards granted to retirement-eligible
employees) are expensed immediately.
share-based
employee awards that require future service are amortized over
the relevant service period. expected forfeitures are included
in determining
share-based
employee compensation expense. in the first quarter of 2006, the
firm adopted
sfasno.123-r
under the modified prospective adoption method. under that
method of adoption, the provisions of
sfasno.123-r
are generally applied only to
share-based
awards granted subsequent to adoption.
share-based
awards held by employees that were retirement-eligible on the
date of adoption of
sfasno.123-r
must continue to be amortized over the stated service period of
the award (and accelerated if the employee actually retires).
the firm pays cash dividend equivalents on outstanding
restricted stock units. dividend equivalents paid on restricted
stock units are generally charged to retained earnings. dividend
equivalents paid on restricted stock units expected to be
forfeited are included in compensation expense. the tax benefit
related to dividend equivalents paid on restricted stock units
is accounted for as a reduction of income tax expense. see
recent
accounting developments for a discussion of emerging
issues task force (eitf) issue
no.06-11,
accounting for income tax benefits of dividends on
share-based
payment awards.
in certain cases, primarily related to the death of an employee
or conflicted employment (as outlined in the applicable award
agreements), the firm may cash settle
share-based
compensation awards. for awards accounted for as equity
instruments, additional
paid-in
capital is adjusted to the extent of the difference
between the current value of the award and the grant-date value
of the award.
goodwill
goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair
value of identifiable net assets at acquisition date. in
accordance with sfasno.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, goodwill is tested at least annually
for impairment. an impairment loss is recognized if the
estimated fair value of an operating segment, which is a
component one level below the firms three business
segments, is
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
less than its estimated net book value. such loss is calculated
as the difference between the estimated fair value of goodwill
and its carrying value.
identifiable
intangible assets
identifiable intangible assets, which consist primarily of
customer lists, designated market maker (dmm)rights and
the value of business acquired (voba) and deferred acquisition
costs (dac) in the firms insurance subsidiaries, are
amortized over their estimated lives in accordance with
sfasno.142 or, in the case of insurance contracts,
in accordance with sfasno.60, accounting and
reporting by insurance enterprises, and
sfasno.97, accounting and reporting by
insurance enterprises for certain
long-duration
contracts and for realized gains and losses from the sale of
investments. identifiable intangible assets are tested for
impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest
that an assets or asset groups carrying value may
not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144, accounting for the impairment or
disposal of
long-lived
assets, or sfasno.60 and
sfasno.97. an impairment loss, generally calculated
as the difference between the estimated fair value and the
carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the
sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the
asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying
value.
property,
leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and equipment, net of
accumulated depreciation and amortization, are recorded at cost
and included in other assets in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
substantially all property and equipment are depreciated on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset. leasehold
improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
useful life of the improvement or the term of the lease,
whichever is shorter. certain costs of software developed or
obtained for internal use are capitalized and amortized on a
straight-line basis over the useful life of the software.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment are tested for
impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest
that an assets or asset groups carrying value may
not be fully recoverable in accordance with
sfasno.144. an impairment loss, calculated as the
difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying
value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the sum of
the expected undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or
asset group is less than the corresponding carrying value.
the firms operating leases include office space held in
excess of current requirements. rent expense relating to space
held for growth is included in occupancy in the
consolidated statements of earnings. in accordance with
sfasno.146, accounting for costs associated
with exit or disposal activities, the firm records a
liability, based on the fair value of the remaining lease
rentals reduced by any potential or existing sublease rentals,
for leases where the firm has ceased using the space and
management has concluded that the firm will not derive any
future economic benefits. costs to terminate a lease before the
end of its term are recognized and measured at fair value upon
termination.
foreign
currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in
non-u.s.currencies
are translated at rates of exchange prevailing on the date of
the consolidated statement of financial condition, and revenues
and expenses are translated at average rates of exchange for the
period. gains or losses on translation of the financial
statements of a
non-u.s.operation,
when the functional currency is other than the u.s.dollar,
are included, net of hedges and taxes, in the consolidated
statements of comprehensive
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
income. the firm seeks to reduce its net investment exposure to
fluctuations in foreign exchange rates through the use of
foreign currency forward contracts and foreign
currency-denominated
debt. for foreign currency forward contracts, hedge
effectiveness is assessed based on changes in forward exchange
rates; accordingly, forward points are reflected as a component
of the currency translation adjustment in the consolidated
statements of comprehensive income. for foreign
currency-denominated debt, hedge effectiveness is assessed based
on changes in spot rates. foreign currency remeasurement gains
or losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are
included in the consolidated statements of earnings.
income
taxes
deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of the
firms assets and liabilities. valuation allowances are
established to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that
more likely than not will be realized. the firms tax
assets and liabilities are presented as a component of
other assets and other liabilities and accrued
expenses, respectively, in the consolidated statements of
financial condition. tax provisions are computed in accordance
with sfasno.109, accounting for income
taxes.
the firm adopted the provisions of fin48, accounting
for uncertainty in income taxes an interpretation of
fasb statement no.109, as of
december1,2007, and recorded a transition adjustment
resulting in a reduction of $201million to beginning
retained earnings. see note16 for further information
regarding the firms adoption of fin48. a tax
position can be recognized in the financial statements only when
it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained
upon examination by the relevant taxing authority based on the
technical merits of the position. a position that meets this
standard is measured at the largest amount of benefit that will
more likely than not be realized upon settlement. a liability is
established for differences between positions taken in a tax
return and amounts recognized in the financial statements.
fin48 also provides guidance on derecognition,
classification, interim period accounting and accounting for
interest and penalties. prior to the adoption of fin48,
contingent liabilities related to income taxes were recorded
when the criteria for loss recognition under
sfasno.5, accounting for contingencies,
as amended, had been met.
earnings per
common share (eps)
basic eps is calculated by dividing net earnings applicable to
common shareholders by the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding. common shares outstanding includes common
stock and restricted stock units for which no future service is
required as a condition to the delivery of the underlying common
stock. diluted eps includes the determinants of basic eps and,
in addition, reflects the dilutive effect of the common stock
deliverable pursuant to stock warrants and options and to
restricted stock units for which future service is required as a
condition to the delivery of the underlying common stock.
cash and cash
equivalents
the firm defines cash equivalents as highly liquid overnight
deposits held in the ordinary course of business. as of
november2008, cash and cash equivalents on the
consolidated statements of financial condition included
$5.60billion of cash and due from banks and
$10.14billion of interest-bearing deposits with banks. as
of november2007, cash and cash equivalents on
the consolidated statements of financial condition included
$4.29billion of cash and due from banks and
$5.99billion of interest-bearing deposits with banks.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
recent
accounting developments
eitf issue
no.06-11.in
june2007, the eitf reached consensus on issue
no.06-11,
accounting for income tax benefits of dividends on
share-based
payment awards. eitf issue
no.06-11
requires that the tax benefit related to dividend equivalents
paid on restricted stock units, which are expected to vest, be
recorded as an increase to additional
paid-in
capital. the firm currently accounts for this tax benefit as a
reduction to income tax expense. eitf issue
no.06-11
is to be applied prospectively for tax benefits on dividends
declared in fiscal years beginning after
december15,2007. the firm does not expect the
adoption of eitf issue
no.06-11
to have a material effect on its financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
fasb staff position
no.fas140-3.in
february2008, the fasb issued fasb staff position (fsp)
no.fas140-3,
accounting for transfers of financial assets and
repurchase financing transactions.
fspno.fas140-3
requires an initial transfer of a financial asset and a
repurchase financing that was entered into contemporaneously or
in contemplation of the initial transfer to be evaluated as a
linked transaction under sfasno.140 unless certain
criteria are met, including that the transferred asset must be
readily obtainable in the marketplace.
fspno.fas140-3
is effective for fiscal years beginning after
november15,2008, and is applicable to new
transactions entered into after the date of adoption. early
adoption is prohibited. the firm does not expect adoption of
fspno.fas140-3
to have a material effect on its financial condition and cash
flows. adoption of
fspno.fas140-3
will have no effect on the firms results of operations.
sfasno.161.in march2008, the fasb
issued sfasno.161, disclosures about
derivative instruments and hedging activities an
amendment of fasb statement no.133.
sfasno.161 requires enhanced disclosures about an
entitys derivative and hedging activities, and is
effective for financial statements issued for reporting periods
beginning after november15,2008, with early
application encouraged. since sfasno.161 requires
only additional disclosures concerning derivatives and hedging
activities, adoption of sfasno.161 will not affect
the firms financial condition, results of operations or
cash flows.
fasb staff position
no.eitf03-6-1.in
june2008, the fasb issued fsp no.
eitf03-6-1,
determining whether instruments granted in
share-based
payment transactions are participating securities. the fsp
addresses whether instruments granted in
share-based
payment transactions are participating securities prior to
vesting and therefore need to be included in the earnings
allocation in calculating earnings per share under the two-class
method described in sfasno.128, earnings per
share. the fsp requires companies to treat unvested
share-based
payment awards that have
non-forfeitable
rights to dividend or dividend equivalents as a separate class
of securities in calculating earnings per share. the fsp is
effective for fiscal years beginning after
december15,2008; earlier application is not
permitted. the firm does not expect adoption of fsp no.
eitf03-6-1
to have a material effect on its results of operations or
earnings per share.
fasb staff position
no.fas133-1
and
fin45-4.in
september2008, the fasb issued
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4,
disclosures about credit derivatives and certain
guarantees: an amendment of fasb statement no.133 and fasb
interpretation no.45; and clarification of the effective
date of fasb statement no.161.
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4
requires enhanced disclosures about credit derivatives and
guarantees and amends fin45, guarantors
accounting and disclosure requirements for guarantees, including
indirect guarantees of indebtedness of others to exclude
credit derivative instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.133. the fsp is effective for financial
statements issued for reporting periods ending after
november15,2008. since
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4
only requires additional disclosures concerning credit
derivatives and guarantees, adoption of
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4
did not have an effect on the firms financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
fasb staff position
no.fas157-3.in
october2008, the fasb issued
fspno.fas157-3,
determining the fair value of a financial asset when the
market for that asset is not active.
fspno.fas157-3
clarifies the application of sfasno.157 in an
inactive market, without changing its existing principles. the
fsp was effective immediately upon issuance. the adoption of
fspno.fas157-3
did not have an effect on the firms financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
sfasno.141(r).in december2007,
the fasb issued a revision to sfasno.141,
business combinations. sfasno.141(r)
requires changes to the accounting for transaction costs,
certain contingent assets and liabilities, and other balances in
a business combination. in addition, in partial acquisitions,
when control is obtained, the acquiring company must measure and
record all of the targets assets and liabilities,
including goodwill, at fair value as if the entire target
company had been acquired. the firm will apply the provisions of
sfasno.141(r) to business combinations occurring
after december26, 2008. adoption of
sfasno.141(r) will not affect the firms
financial condition, results of operations or cash flows, but
may have an effect on accounting for future business
combinations.
sfasno.160.in december2007, the
fasb issued sfasno.160, noncontrolling
interests in consolidated financial statements an
amendment of arb no.51. sfasno.160
requires that ownership interests in consolidated subsidiaries
held by parties other than the parent (noncontrolling interests)
be accounted for and presented as equity, rather than as a
liability or mezzanine equity. sfasno.160 is
effective for fiscal years beginning on or after
december15,2008, but the presentation and disclosure
requirements are to be applied retrospectively. the firm does
not expect adoption of the statement to have a material effect
on its financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
fasb staff position
no.fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8.in december2008, the fasb
issued
fspno.fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8, disclosures by public entities
(enterprises) about transfers of financial assets and interests
in variable interest entities.
fspno.fas140-4
and fin46(r)-8 requires enhanced disclosures about
transfers of financial assets and interests in variable interest
entities. the fsp is effective for interim and annual periods
ending after december15,2008. since the fsp requires
only additional disclosures concerning transfers of financial
assets and interests in variable interest entities, adoption of
the fsp will not affect the firms financial condition,
results of operations or cash flows.
eitf issue
no.07-5.in
june2008, the eitf reached consensus on issue
no.07-5,
determining whether an instrument (or embedded feature) is
indexed to an entitys own stock. eitf issue
no.07-5
provides guidance about whether an instrument (such as the
firms outstanding common stock warrants) should be
classified as equity and not marked to market for accounting
purposes. eitf issue
no.07-5
is effective for fiscal years beginning after december15,
2008. adoption of eitf issue
no.07-5
will not affect the firms financial condition, results of
operations or cash flows.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note3.
financial
instruments
fair value of
financial instruments
the following table sets forth the firms trading assets,
at fair value, including those pledged as collateral, and
trading liabilities, at fair value. at any point in time, the
firm may use cash instruments as well as derivatives to manage a
long or short risk position.
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of deposit,
time deposits and other money market instruments
$
8,662
(1)
$
$
8,985
(1)
$
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
69,653
37,000
70,774
58,637
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
22,393
54,073
(6)
bank loans and bridge loans
21,839
3,108
(4)
49,154
3,563
(4)
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
27,879
5,711
39,219
8,280
equities and convertible debentures
57,049
12,116
122,205
45,130
physical commodities
2,571
derivative contracts
130,337
(2)
117,695
(5)
105,614
(2)
99,378
(5)
total
$
338,325
(3)
$
175,972
$
452,595
(3)
$
215,023
(1)
includes $4.40billion and $6.17billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, of
money market instruments held by william street funding
corporation (funding corp.) to support the william street credit
extension program. see note8 for further information
regarding the william street program.
(2)
net of cash received pursuant to credit support agreements of
$137.16billion and $59.05billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
(3)
includes $1.68billion and $1.17billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, of
securities held within the firms insurance subsidiaries
which are accounted for as
available-for-sale
under sfasno.115.
(4)
includes the fair value of commitments to extend credit.
(5)
net of cash paid pursuant to credit support agreements of
$34.01billion and $27.76billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
(6)
includes $7.64billion as of november2007 of mortgage
whole loans that were transferred to securitization vehicles
where such transfers were accounted for as secured financings
rather than sales under sfasno.140. the firm
distributed to investors the securities that were issued by the
securitization vehicles and therefore did not bear economic
exposure to the underlying mortgage whole loans.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
fair value
hierarchy
the firms financial assets at fair value classified within
level3 of the fair value hierarchy are summarized below:
as of november
($ in millions)
total level3 assets
$
66,190
$
69,151
level3 assets for which the firm bears economic
exposure(1)
59,574
54,714
total assets
884,547
1,119,796
total financial assets at fair value
595,234
717,557
total level3 assets as a percentage of total assets
7.5
%
6.2
%
level3 assets for which the firm bears economic exposure
as a percentage of total assets
6.7
4.9
total level3 assets as a percentage of total financial
assets at fair value
11.1
9.6
level3 assets for which the firm bears economic exposure
as a percentage of total financial assets at fair value
10.0
7.6
(1)
excludes assets which are financed
by nonrecourse debt, attributable to minority investors or
attributable to employee interests in certain consolidated funds.
the following tables set forth by level within the fair value
hierarchy trading assets, at fair value,
trading liabilities, at fair value and other
financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair
value under sfasno.155 and sfasno.159 as
of november2008 and november2007. see note2
for further information on the fair value hierarchy. as required
by sfasno.157, assets and liabilities are classified
in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is
significant to the fair value measurement.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
financial assets at fair value as of november 2008
netting and
level 1
level 2
level 3
collateral
total
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and
other money market instruments
$
5,205
$
3,457
$
$
$
8,662
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
35,069
34,584
69,653
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
6,886
15,507
22,393
bank loans and bridge loans
9,882
11,957
21,839
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
20,269
7,596
27,879
equities and convertible debentures
25,068
15,975
16,006
(6)
57,049
physical commodities
cash instruments
65,356
91,566
51,066
207,988
derivative contracts
256,412
15,124
(141,223
)(7)
130,337
trading assets, at fair value
65,380
347,978
66,190
(141,223
)
338,325
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
20,030
(4)
58,800
(5)
78,830
receivables from customers and
counterparties(1)
1,598
1,598
securities
borrowed(2)
59,810
59,810
securities purchased under agreements to resell, at fair value
116,671
116,671
total financial assets at fair value
$
85,410
$
584,857
$
66,190
$
(141,223
)
$
595,234
level3 assets for which the firm does not bear economic
exposure(3)
(6,616
)
level3 assets for which the firm bears economic exposure
$
59,574
(1)
principally consists of transfers accounted for as secured loans
rather than purchases under sfasno.140 and prepaid
variable share forwards.
(2)
consists of securities borrowed within trading and principal
investments. excludes securities borrowed within securities
services, which are accounted for based on the amount of cash
collateral advanced plus accrued interest.
(3)
consists of level3 assets which are financed by
nonrecourse debt, attributable to minority investors or
attributable to employee interests in certain consolidated funds.
(4)
consists of u.s.treasury securities and money market
instruments as well as insurance separate account assets
measured at fair value under aicpa
sop03-1,
accounting and reporting by insurance enterprises for
certain nontraditional
long-duration
contracts and for separate accounts.
(5)
principally consists of securities borrowed and resale
agreements. the underlying securities have been segregated to
satisfy certain regulatory requirements.
(6)
consists of private equity and real estate fund investments.
(7)
represents cash collateral and the impact of netting across the
levels of the fair value hierarchy. netting among positions
classified within the same level is included in that level.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
financial liabilities at fair value as of november 2008
netting and
level 1
level 2
level 3
collateral
total
(in millions)
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
$
36,385
$
$
$
$
37,000
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
bank loans and bridge loans
2,278
3,108
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
5,185
5,711
equities and convertible debentures
11,928
12,116
physical commodities
cash instruments
48,326
8,572
1,379
58,277
derivative contracts
145,777
9,968
(38,071
)(8)
117,695
trading liabilities, at fair value
48,347
154,349
11,347
(38,071
)
175,972
unsecured
short-term
borrowings(1)
17,916
5,159
23,075
deposits(2)
4,224
4,224
securities
loaned(3)
7,872
7,872
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, at fair value
62,883
62,883
other secured
financings(4)
16,429
3,820
20,249
other
liabilities(5)
unsecured
long-term
borrowings(6)
15,886
1,560
17,446
total financial liabilities at fair value
$
48,347
$
280,537
$
21,886
(7)
$
(38,071
)
$
312,699
(1)
consists of promissory notes, commercial paper and hybrid
financial instruments.
(2)
consists of certain certificates of deposit issued by gs bank
usa.
(3)
consists of securities loaned within trading and principal
investments. excludes securities loaned within securities
services, which are accounted for based on the amount of cash
collateral received plus accrued interest.
(4)
primarily includes transfers accounted for as financings rather
than sales under sfasno.140, debt raised through the
firms william street program and certain other nonrecourse
financings.
(5)
consists of liabilities related to insurance contracts.
(6)
primarily includes hybrid financial instruments and prepaid
physical commodity transactions.
(7)
level3 liabilities were 7.0% of total liabilities at fair
value.
(8)
represents cash collateral and the impact of netting across the
levels of the fair value hierarchy. netting among positions
classified within the same level is included in that level.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
financial assets at fair value as of november 2007
netting and
level 1
level 2
level 3
collateral
total
(in millions)
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and
other money market instruments
$
6,237
$
2,748
$
$
$
8,985
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
37,966
32,808
70,774
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
38,073
16,000
54,073
bank loans and bridge loans
35,820
13,334
49,154
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
32,193
6,111
39,219
equities and convertible debentures
68,727
35,472
18,006
(6)
122,205
physical commodities
2,571
2,571
cash instruments
113,845
179,685
53,451
346,981
derivative contracts
153,065
15,700
(63,437
)(7)
105,614
trading assets, at fair value
114,131
332,750
69,151
(63,437
)
452,595
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
24,078
(4)
69,940
(5)
94,018
receivables from customers and
counterparties(1)
1,950
1,950
securities
borrowed(2)
83,277
83,277
securities purchased under agreements to resell, at fair value
85,717
85,717
total financial assets at fair value
$
138,209
$
573,634
$
69,151
$
(63,437
)
$
717,557
level3 assets for which the firm does not bear economic
exposure(3)
(14,437
)
level3 assets for which the firm bears economic exposure
$
54,714
(1)
consists of transfers accounted for as secured loans rather than
purchases under sfasno.140 and prepaid variable
share forwards.
(2)
consists of securities borrowed within trading and principal
investments. excludes securities borrowed within securities
services, which are accounted for based on the amount of cash
collateral advanced plus accrued interest.
(3)
consists of level3 assets which are financed by
nonrecourse debt, attributable to minority investors or
attributable to employee interests in certain consolidated funds.
(4)
consists of u.s.treasury securities and money market
instruments as well as insurance separate account assets
measured at fair value under aicpa
sop03-1,
accounting and reporting by insurance enterprises for
certain nontraditional
long-duration
contracts and for separate accounts.
(5)
principally consists of securities borrowed and resale
agreements. the underlying securities have been segregated to
satisfy certain regulatory requirements.
(6)
consists of private equity and real estate fund investments.
(7)
represents cash collateral and the impact of netting across the
levels of the fair value hierarchy. netting among positions
classified within the same level is included in that level.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
financial liabilities at fair value as of november 2007
netting and
level 1
level 2
level 3
collateral
total
(in millions)
u.s.government, federal agency and sovereign obligations
$
57,714
$
$
$
$
58,637
bank loans and bridge loans
3,525
3,563
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
7,764
8,280
equities and convertible debentures
44,076
1,054
45,130
physical commodities
cash instruments
101,790
13,301
115,645
derivative contracts
117,794
13,644
(32,272
)(7)
99,378
trading liabilities, at fair value
102,002
131,095
14,198
(32,272
)
215,023
unsecured
short-term
borrowings(1)
44,060
4,271
48,331
deposits(2)
securities
loaned(3)
5,449
5,449
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, at fair value
159,178
159,178
other secured
financings(4)
33,581
33,581
unsecured
long-term
borrowings(5)
15,161
15,928
total financial liabilities at fair value
$
102,002
$
388,987
$
19,236
(6)
$
(32,272
)
$
477,953
(1)
consists of promissory notes, commercial paper and hybrid
financial instruments.
(2)
consists of certain certificates of deposit issued by gs bank
usa.
(3)
consists of securities loaned within trading and principal
investments. excludes securities loaned within securities
services, which are accounted for based on the amount of cash
collateral received plus accrued interest.
(4)
primarily includes transfers accounted for as financings rather
than sales under sfasno.140, debt raised through the
firms william street program and certain other nonrecourse
financings.
(5)
primarily includes hybrid financial instruments and prepaid
physical commodity transactions.
(6)
level3 liabilities were 4.0% of total liabilities at fair
value.
(7)
represents cash collateral and the impact of netting across the
levels of the fair value hierarchy. netting among positions
classified within the same level is included in that level.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
level3
unrealized gains/(losses)
the table below sets forth a summary of unrealized
gains/(losses) on the firms level3 financial assets
and financial liabilities still held at the reporting date for
the years ended november2008 and november2007.
level 3 unrealized
gains/(losses)
year ended november
(in millions)
cash instruments assets
$
(11,485
)
$
(2,292
)
cash instruments liabilities
(871
)
(294
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on level3 cash instruments
(12,356
)
(2,586
)
derivative contracts net
5,577
4,543
unsecured
short-term
borrowings
(666
)
other secured financings
unsecured
long-term
borrowings
total level3 unrealized gains/(losses)
$
(4,547
)
$
1,313
cash
instruments
the net unrealized loss on level3 cash instruments of
$12.36billion for the year ended november2008
primarily consisted of unrealized losses on loans and securities
backed by commercial real estate, certain bank loans and bridge
loans, private equity and real estate fund investments. losses
during the year reflected the significant weakness in the global
credit and equity markets.
level3 cash instruments are frequently economically hedged
with instruments classified within level1 and
level2, and accordingly, gains or losses that have been
reported in level3 can be offset by gains or losses
attributable to instruments classified within level1 or
level 2 or by gains or losses on derivative contracts classified
in level3 of the fair value hierarchy.
derivative
contracts
the net unrealized gain on level3 derivative contracts of
$5.58billion for the year ended november2008 was
primarily attributable to changes in observable credit spreads
(which are level2 inputs) on the underlying instruments.
level3 gains and losses on derivative contracts should be
considered in the context of the following:
a derivative contract with level1
and/or
level2 inputs is classified as a level3 financial
instrument in its entirety if it has at least one significant
level3 input.
if there is one significant level3 input, the entire gain
or loss from adjusting only observable inputs
(i.e.,level1 and level2)is still
classified as level3.
gains or losses that have been reported in level3
resulting from changes in level1 or level2 inputs
are frequently offset by gains or losses attributable to
instruments classified within level1 or level2 or by
cash instruments reported in level3 of the fair value
hierarchy.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the tables below set forth a summary of changes in the fair
value of the firms level3 financial assets and
financial liabilities for the years ended november2008 and
november2007. the tables reflect gains and losses,
including gains and losses on financial assets and financial
liabilities that were transferred to level3 during the
year, for all financial assets and financial liabilities
categorized as level3 as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. the tables do not include
gains or losses that were reported in level3 in prior
periods for instruments that were sold or transferred out of
level3 prior to the end of the period presented.
level 3 financial assets and financial liabilities
year ended november 2008
cash
cash
derivative
unsecured
other
unsecured
instruments
instruments
contracts
short-term
secured
long-term
-assets
-liabilities
-net
borrowings
financings
borrowings
(in millions)
balance, beginning of year
$
53,451
$
(554
)
$
2,056
$
(4,271
)
$
$
(767
)
realized gains/(losses)
1,930
(1)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(20
)(3)
unrealized gains/(losses) relating to instruments still held at
the reporting date
(11,485
)(1)
(871
)(3)
5,577
(3)(4)
(3)
(3)
(3)
purchases, issuances and settlements
3,955
(1,813
)
(1,353
)
(1,314
)
transfers in
and/or out
of level3
3,215
(2)
(37
)
(931
)(5)
(626
)
(5,161
)(6)
(116
)
balance, end of year
$
51,066
$
(1,379
)
$
5,156
$
(5,159
)
$
(3,820
)
$
(1,560
)
level 3 financial assets and financial liabilities
year ended november 2007
cash
cash
derivative
unsecured
other
unsecured
instruments
instruments
contracts
short-term
secured
long-term
-assets
-liabilities
-net
borrowings
financings
borrowings
(in millions)
balance, beginning of year
$
29,905
$
(223
)
$
$
(3,253
)
$
$
(135
)
realized gains/(losses)
2,232
(1)
(9
)(3)
1,713
(3)
(3)
(7
)(3)
unrealized gains/(losses) relating to instruments still held at
the reporting date
(2,292
)(1)
(294
)(3)
4,543
(3)(4)
(666
)(3)
(3)
purchases, issuances and settlements
22,561
(30
)
(1,365
)
(1,559
)
(567
)
transfers in
and/or out
of level3
1,045
(7)
(3,415
)(8)
1,040
(80
)
balance, end of year
$
53,451
$
(554
)
$
2,056
$
(4,271
)
$
$
(767
)
(1)
the aggregate amounts include approximately $(11.54) billion and
$1.98billion reported in trading and principal
investments and interest income, respectively,
in the consolidated statements of earnings for the year ended
november2008. the aggregate amounts include approximately
$(1.77) billion and $1.71billion reported in trading
and principal investments and interest income,
respectively, in the consolidated statements of earnings for the
year ended november2007.
(2)
principally reflects transfers from level2 within the fair
value hierarchy of loans and securities backed by commercial
real estate, reflecting reduced price transparency for these
financial instruments.
(3)
substantially all is reported in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings.
(4)
principally resulted from changes in level2 inputs.
(5)
principally reflects transfers to level2 within the fair
value hierarchy of
mortgage-related
derivative assets, as recent trading activity provided improved
transparency of correlation inputs. this decrease was partially
offset by transfers from level2 within the fair value
hierarchy of credit and
equity-linked
derivatives due to reduced price transparency.
(6)
consists of transfers from level2 within the fair value
hierarchy.
(7)
principally reflects transfers from level2 within the fair
value hierarchy of loans and securities backed by commercial and
residential real estate and certain bank loans and bridge loans,
reflecting reduced price transparency for these financial
instruments.
(8)
principally reflects transfers from level2 within the fair
value hierarchy of structured credit derivative liabilities, due
to reduced transparency of correlation inputs.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
impact of
credit spreads
on an ongoing basis, the firm realizes gains or losses relating
to changes in credit risk on derivative contracts through
changes in credit mitigants or the sale or unwind of the
contracts. the net gain/(loss) attributable to the impact of
changes in credit exposure and credit spreads on derivative
contracts was $(137)million and $86million for the
years ended november2008 and november2007,
respectively.
the following table sets forth the net gains attributable to the
impact of changes in the firms own credit spreads on
unsecured borrowings for which the fair value option was
elected. the firm calculates the fair value of unsecured
borrowings by discounting future cash flows at a rate which
incorporates the firms observable credit spreads.
year ended november
(in millions)
net gains including hedges
$
1,127
$
net gains excluding hedges
1,196
the impact of changes in instrument-specific credit spreads on
loans and loan commitments for which the fair value option was
elected was a loss of $4.61billion for the year ended
november 2008 and not material for the year ended
november2007. the firm attributes changes in the fair
value of floating rate loans and loan commitments to changes in
instrument-specific credit spreads. for fixed rate loans and
loan commitments, the firm allocates changes in fair value
between interest rate-related changes and credit spread-related
changes based on changes in interest rates. see below for
additional details regarding the fair value option.
the fair value
option
gains/losses
the following table sets forth the gains/(losses) included in
earnings for the years ended november2008 and
november2007 as a result of the firm electing to apply the
fair value option to certain financial assets and financial
liabilities, as described in note2. the table excludes
gains and losses related to trading assets and trading
liabilities, as well as gains and losses that would have been
recognized under other generally accepted accounting principles
if the firm had not elected the fair value option or that are
economically hedged with instruments accounted for at fair value
under other generally accepted accounting principles.
year ended november
(in millions)
unsecured
long-term
borrowings(1)
$
$
other secured
financings(2)
(293
)
unsecured
short-term
borrowings(3)
other(4)
(20
)
total(5)
$
2,055
$
(67
)
(1)
excludes gains of
$2.42billion and losses of $2.18billion for the
years ended november2008 and november2007,
respectively, related to the derivative component of hybrid
financial instruments. such gains and losses would have been
recognized pursuant to sfasno.133 if the firm had
not elected to account for the entire hybrid instrument at fair
value under the fair value option.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
(2)
excludes gains of
$1.29billion and $2.19billion for the years ended
november2008 and november2007, respectively, related
to financings recorded as a result of securitization-related
transactions that were accounted for as secured financings
rather than sales under sfasno.140. changes in the
fair value of these secured financings are offset by changes in
the fair value of the related financial instruments included
within the firms trading assets, at fair value
in the consolidated statements of financial condition.
(3)
excludes gains of
$6.37billion and losses of $1.07billion for the
years ended november2008 and november2007,
respectively, related to the derivative component of hybrid
financial instruments. such gains and losses would have been
recognized pursuant to sfasno.133 if the firm had
not elected to account for the entire hybrid instrument at fair
value under the fair value option.
(4)
primarily consists of certain
insurance and reinsurance contracts, resale and repurchase
agreements and securities borrowed and loaned within trading and
principal investments.
(5)
reported within trading and
principal investments within the consolidated statements
of earnings. the amounts exclude contractual interest, which is
included in interest income and interest
expense, for all instruments other than hybrid financial
instruments.
all trading assets and trading liabilities are accounted for at
fair value either under the fair value option or as required by
other accounting pronouncements. excluding equities commissions
of $5.00billion and $4.58billion for the years ended
november 2008 and november 2007, respectively, and the gains and
losses on the instruments accounted for under the fair value
option described above, the firms trading and
principal investments revenues in the consolidated
statements of earnings primarily represent gains and losses on
trading assets, at fair value and trading
liabilities, at fair value in the consolidated statements
of financial condition.
loans and loan
commitments
as of november2008, the aggregate contractual principal
amount of loans and long-term receivables for which the fair
value option was elected exceeded the related fair value by
$50.21billion, including a difference of
$37.46billion related to loans with an aggregate fair
value of $3.77billion that were on nonaccrual status
(including loans more than 90days past due). the aggregate
contractual principal exceeds the related fair value primarily
because the firm regularly purchases loans, such as distressed
loans, at values significantly below contractual principal
amounts.
as of november 2008, the fair value of unfunded lending
commitments for which the fair value option was elected was a
liability of $3.52billion and the related total
contractual amount of these lending commitments was
$39.49billion.
as of november2007, substantially all of the firms
loans and unfunded lending commitments were recorded at fair
value in accordance with specialized industry accounting for
broker-dealers, and not pursuant to the fair value option. as a
result, the difference between the aggregate fair value and
related contractual principal amounts of loans and long-term
receivables accounted for under the fair value option was not
material as of november2007. see note2 for further
information related to fair value option elections made by the
firm upon becoming a bank holding company in september2008.
long-term debt
instruments
the aggregate contractual principal amount of long-term debt
instruments (principal and non-principal protected) for which
the fair value option was elected exceeded the related fair
value by $2.42billion as of november 2008, while the
difference between the fair value and the aggregate contractual
principal amount was not material to the carrying value as of
november 2007.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
credit
concentrations
credit concentrations may arise from trading, investing,
underwriting and securities borrowing activities and may be
impacted by changes in economic, industry or political factors.
the firm seeks to mitigate credit risk by actively monitoring
exposures and obtaining collateral as deemed appropriate. while
the firms activities expose it to many different
industries and counterparties, the firm routinely executes a
high volume of transactions with counterparties in the financial
services industry, including brokers and dealers, commercial
banks, investment funds and other institutional clients,
resulting in significant credit concentration with respect to
this industry. in the ordinary course of business, the firm may
also be subject to a concentration of credit risk to a
particular counterparty, borrower or issuer.
as of november2008 and november2007, the firm held
$53.98billion (6% of total assets) and $45.75billion
(4% of total assets), respectively, of u.s.government and
federal agency obligations included in trading assets, at
fair value and cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes in the consolidated
statements of financial condition. as of november2008 and
november2007, the firm held $21.13billion (2% of
total assets) and $31.65billion (3% of total assets),
respectively, of other sovereign obligations, principally
consisting of securities issued by the governments of japan and
the united kingdom. in addition, as of november2008 and
november2007, $126.27billion and
$144.92billion of the firms securities purchased
under agreements to resell and securities borrowed (including
those in cash and securities segregated for regulatory and
other purposes), respectively, were collateralized by
u.s.government and federal agency obligations. as of
november2008 and november2007, $65.37billion
and $41.26billion of the firms securities purchased
under agreements to resell and securities borrowed,
respectively, were collateralized by other sovereign
obligations. as of november2008 and november2007,
the firm did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty
that exceeded 2% of the firms total assets.
derivative
activities
derivative contracts are instruments, such as futures, forwards,
swaps or option contracts, that derive their value from
underlying assets, indices, reference rates or a combination of
these factors. derivative instruments may be privately
negotiated contracts, which are often referred to as otc
derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange.
derivatives may involve future commitments to purchase or sell
financial instruments or commodities, or to exchange currency or
interest payment streams. the amounts exchanged are based on the
specific terms of the contract with reference to specified
rates, securities, commodities, currencies or indices.
certain cash instruments, such as
mortgage-backed
securities, interest-only and principal-only obligations, and
indexed debt instruments, are not considered derivatives even
though their values or contractually required cash flows are
derived from the price of some other security or index. however,
certain commodity-related contracts are included in the
firms derivatives disclosure, as these contracts may be
settled in cash or the assets to be delivered under the contract
are readily convertible into cash.
the firm enters into derivative transactions to facilitate
client transactions, to take proprietary positions and as a
means of risk management. risk exposures are managed through
diversification, by controlling position sizes and by entering
into offsetting positions. for example, the firm may manage the
risk related to a portfolio of common stock by entering into an
offsetting position in a related
equity-index
futures contract.
the firm applies hedge accounting under sfasno.133
to certain derivative contracts. the firm uses these derivatives
to manage certain interest rate and currency exposures,
including the firms net investment in
non-u.s.operations.
the firm designates certain interest rate swap contracts as fair
value hedges. these interest rate swap contracts hedge changes
in the relevant benchmark interest
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
rate (e.g.,london interbank offered rate (libor)),
effectively converting a substantial portion of the firms
unsecured
long-term
and certain unsecured
short-term
borrowings into floating rate obligations. see note2 for
information regarding the firms accounting policy for
foreign currency forward contracts used to hedge its net
investment in
non-u.s.operations.
the firm applies a
long-haul
method to all of its hedge accounting relationships to perform
an ongoing assessment of the effectiveness of these
relationships in achieving offsetting changes in fair value or
offsetting cash flows attributable to the risk being hedged. the
firm utilizes a
dollar-offset
method, which compares the change in the fair value of the
hedging instrument to the change in the fair value of the hedged
item, excluding the effect of the passage of time, to
prospectively and retrospectively assess hedge effectiveness.
the firms prospective
dollar-offset
assessment utilizes scenario analyses to test hedge
effectiveness via simulations of numerous parallel and slope
shifts of the relevant yield curve. parallel shifts change the
interest rate of all maturities by identical amounts. slope
shifts change the curvature of the yield curve. for both the
prospective assessment, in response to each of the simulated
yield curve shifts, and the retrospective assessment, a hedging
relationship is deemed to be effective if the fair value of the
hedging instrument and the hedged item change inversely within a
range of 80% to 125%.
for fair value hedges, gains or losses on derivative
transactions are recognized in interest expense in
the consolidated statements of earnings. the change in fair
value of the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged
is reported as an adjustment to its carrying value and is
subsequently amortized into interest expense over its remaining
life. gains or losses related to hedge ineffectiveness for all
hedges are generally included in interest expense.
these gains or losses and the component of gains or losses on
derivative transactions excluded from the assessment of hedge
effectiveness (e.g.,the effect of the passage of time on
fair value hedges of the firms borrowings) were not
material to the firms results of operations for the years
ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006. gains and losses on derivatives used for
trading purposes are included in trading and principal
investments in the consolidated statements of earnings.
the fair value of the firms derivative contracts is
reflected net of cash paid or received pursuant to credit
support agreements and is reported on a
net-by-counterparty
basis in the firms consolidated statements of financial
condition when management believes a legal right of setoff
exists under an enforceable netting agreement. the fair value of
derivative financial instruments, presented in accordance with
the firms netting policy, is set forth below:
as of november
assets
liabilities
assets
liabilities
(in millions)
contract type
forward settlement contracts
$
35,997
$
35,778
$
22,561
$
27,138
swap agreements
175,153
82,189
104,793
62,697
option contracts
81,077
58,467
53,056
53,047
subtotal
292,227
176,434
180,410
142,882
netting across contract
types(1)
(24,730
)
(24,730
)
(15,746
)
(15,746
)
cash collateral
netting(2)
(137,160
)
(34,009
)
(59,050
)
(27,758
)
total
$
130,337
$
117,695
$
105,614
$
99,378
(1)
represents the netting of
receivable balances with payable balances for the same
counterparty across contract types pursuant to legally
enforceable netting agreements.
(2)
represents the netting of cash
collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis pursuant
to credit support agreements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the fair value of derivatives accounted for as qualifying hedges
under sfasno.133 consisted of $20.40billion
and $5.15billion in assets as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, and $128million and
$355million in liabilities as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively.
the firm also has embedded derivatives that have been bifurcated
from related borrowings under sfasno.133. such
derivatives, which are classified in unsecured
short-term
and unsecured
long-term
borrowings, had a carrying value of $(774) million and
$463million (excluding the debt host contract) as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively. see
notes6 and 7 for further information regarding the
firms unsecured borrowings.
the firm enters into various derivative transactions that are
considered credit derivatives under fsp no.
fas133-1
and
fin45-4.
the firms written and purchased credit derivatives include
credit default swaps, credit spread options, credit index
products and total return swaps. as of november2008, the
firms written and purchased credit derivatives had total
gross notional amounts of $3.78trillion and
$4.03trillion, respectively, for total net purchased
protection of $255.24billion in notional value.
the following table sets forth certain information related to
the firms credit derivatives. fair values in the table
below exclude the effects of both netting under enforceable
netting agreements and netting of cash paid pursuant to credit
support agreements, and therefore are not representative of the
firms net exposure.
as of november 2008
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration
maximum payout/notional amount
offsetting
other
written
written
purchased
purchased
credit
10years
credit
credit
credit
derivatives at
0-5 years
5-10 years
or greater
derivatives
derivatives(1)
derivatives(2)
fair value
($ in millions)
credit spread on underlying
(basispoints)(3)
0-250
$
1,194,228
$
609,056
$
22,866
$
1,826,150
$
1,632,681
$
347,573
$
77,836
251-500
591,813
184,763
12,494
789,070
784,149
26,316
94,278
501-1,000
430,801
140,782
15,886
587,469
538,251
67,958
75,079
greater than 1,000
383,626
120,866
71,690
576,182
533,816
103,362
222,346
total
$
2,600,468
(4)
$
1,055,467
$
122,936
$
3,778,871
$
3,488,897
(4)
$
545,209
$
469,539
(5)
(1)
offsetting purchased credit derivatives represent the notional
amount of purchased credit derivatives to the extent they hedge
written credit derivatives with identical underlyings.
(2)
comprised of purchased protection in excess of the amount of
written protection on identical underlyings and purchased
protection on other underlyings on which the firm has not
written protection.
(3)
credit spread on the underlying, together with the period of
expiration, are indicators of payment/performance risk. for
example, the firm is least likely to pay or otherwise be
required to perform where the credit spread on the underlying is
0-250
basis points and the period of expiration is 0-5
years. the likelihood of payment or performance is
generally greater as the credit spread on the underlying and
period of expiration increase.
(4)
includes a maximum payout/notional amount for written credit
derivatives of $208.44billion expiring within one year as
of november2008.
(5)
this liability excludes the effects of both netting under
enforceable netting agreements and netting of cash collateral
paid pursuant to credit support agreements. including the
effects of netting receivable balances with payable balances for
the same counterparty pursuant to enforceable netting
agreements, the firms net liability related to credit
derivatives in the firms statement of financial condition
as of november2008 was $33.76billion. this net
amount excludes the netting of cash collateral paid pursuant to
credit support agreements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
collateralized
transactions
the firm receives financial instruments as collateral, primarily
in connection with resale agreements, securities borrowed,
derivative transactions and customer margin loans. such
financial instruments may include obligations of the
u.s.government, federal agencies, sovereigns and
corporations, as well as equities and convertibles.
in many cases, the firm is permitted to deliver or repledge
these financial instruments in connection with entering into
repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements and other
secured financings, collateralizing derivative transactions and
meeting firm or customer settlement requirements. as of
november2008 and november2007, the fair value of
financial instruments received as collateral by the firm that it
was permitted to deliver or repledge was $578.72billion
and $891.05billion, respectively, of which the firm
delivered or repledged $445.11billion and
$785.62billion, respectively.
the firm also pledges assets that it owns to counterparties who
may or may not have the right to deliver or repledge them.
trading assets pledged to counterparties that have the right to
deliver or repledge are included in trading assets, at
fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and were $26.31billion and $46.14billion
as of november2008 and november2007, respectively.
trading assets, pledged in connection with repurchase
agreements, securities lending agreements and other secured
financings to counterparties that did not have the right to sell
or repledge are included in trading assets, at fair
value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and were $80.85billion and $156.92billion
as of november2008 and november2007, respectively.
other assets (primarily real estate and cash) owned and pledged
in connection with other secured financings to counterparties
that did not have the right to sell or repledge were
$9.24billion and $5.86billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
in addition to repurchase agreements and securities lending
agreements, the firm obtains secured funding through the use of
other arrangements. other secured financings include
arrangements that are nonrecourse, that is, only the subsidiary
that executed the arrangement or a subsidiary guaranteeing the
arrangement is obligated to repay the financing. other secured
financings consist of liabilities related to the firms
william street program, consolidated vies, collateralized
central bank financings, transfers of financial assets that are
accounted for as financings rather than sales under
sfasno.140 (primarily pledged bank loans and
mortgage whole loans) and other structured financing
arrangements.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
other secured financings by maturity are set forth in the table
below:
as of november
(in millions)
other secured financings
(short-term)(1)(2)
$
21,225
$
32,410
other secured financings
(long-term):
2,903
2,157
2,301
4,578
2,427
3,040
4,973
1,377
2014-thereafter
6,306
19,994
total other secured financings
(long-term)(3)(4)
17,458
33,300
total other secured
financings(5)
$
38,683
$
65,710
(1)
as of november2008, consists
of
u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $12.53billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 2.98% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $8.70billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 0.95%, after giving effect to hedging
activities. as of november2007, consists of
u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $18.47billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 5.32% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $13.94billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 0.91%, after giving effect to hedging
activities. the weighted average interest rates as of
november2008 and november2007 excluded financial
instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.159.
(2)
includes other secured financings
maturing within one year of the financial statement date and
other secured financings that are redeemable within one year of
the financial statement date at the option of the holder.
(3)
as of november2008, consists
of
u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $9.55billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 4.62% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $7.91billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 4.39%, after giving effect to hedging
activities. as of november2007, consists of
u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $22.13billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 5.73% and
non-u.s.dollar-denominated
financings of $11.17billion with a weighted average
interest rate of 4.28%, after giving effect to hedging
activities. the weighted average interest rates as of
november2008 and november2007 excluded financial
instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.159.
(4)
secured
long-term
financings that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of
the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity dates.
secured
long-term
financings that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option
of the holder are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
(5)
as of november2008,
$31.54billion of these financings were collateralized by
financial instruments and $7.14billion by other assets
(primarily real estate and cash). as of november2007,
$61.34billion of these financings were collateralized by
financial instruments and $4.37billion by other assets
(primarily real estate and cash). other secured financings
include $13.74billion and $25.37billion of
nonrecourse obligations as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively.
note4.
securitization
activities and variable interest entities
securitization
activities
the firm securitizes commercial and residential mortgages, home
equity and auto loans, government and corporate bonds and other
types of financial assets. the firm acts as underwriter of the
beneficial interests that are sold to investors. the firm
derecognizes financial assets transferred in securitizations,
provided it has relinquished control over such assets.
transferred assets are accounted for at fair value prior to
securitization. net revenues related to these underwriting
activities are recognized in connection with the sales of the
underlying beneficial interests to investors.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the firm may retain interests in securitized financial assets,
primarily in the form of senior or subordinated securities,
including residual interests. retained interests are accounted
for at fair value and are included in trading assets, at
fair value in the consolidated statements of financial
condition.
the following table sets forth the amount of financial assets
the firm securitized, as well as cash flows received on retained
interests:
year ended november
(in millions)
residential mortgages
$
6,671
$
24,954
commercial mortgages
19,498
other financial assets
7,014
(1)
36,948
(2)
total
$
14,458
$
81,400
cash flows received on retained interests
$
$
(1)
primarily in connection with
collateralized loan obligations (clos).
(2)
primarily in connection with cdos
and clos.
as of november2008 and november2007, the firm held
$1.78billion and $4.57billion of retained interests,
respectively, from securitization activities, including
$1.53billion and $2.72billion, respectively, held in
qspes.
the following table sets forth the weighted average key economic
assumptions used in measuring the fair value of the firms
retained interests and the sensitivity of this fair value to
immediate adverse changes of 10% and 20% in those assumptions:
as of november 2008
as of november 2007
type of retained interests
type of retained interests
mortgage-
cdos and
mortgage-
cdos and
backed
clos(4)
backed
clos(4)
($ in millions)
fair value of retained interests
$
1,415
$
$
3,378
$
1,188
weighted average life (years)
6.0
5.1
6.6
2.7
constant prepayment
rate(1)
15.5
%
4.5
%
15.1
%
11.9
%
impact of 10% adverse
change(1)
$
(14
)
$
(6
)
$
(50
)
$
(43
)
impact of 20% adverse
change(1)
(27
)
(12
)
(91
)
(98
)
anticipated credit
losses(2)
2.0
%
n/a
4.3
%
n/a
impact of 10% adverse
change(3)
$
(1
)
$
$
(45
)
$
impact of 20% adverse
change(3)
(2
)
(72
)
discount rate
21.1
%
29.2
%
8.4
%
23.1
%
impact of 10% adverse change
$
(46
)
$
(25
)
$
(89
)
$
(46
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(89
)
(45
)
(170
)
(92
)
(1)
constant prepayment rate is included only for positions for
which constant prepayment rate is a key assumption in the
determination of fair value.
(2)
anticipated credit losses are computed only on positions for
which expected credit loss is a key assumption in the
determination of fair value or positions for which expected
credit loss is not reflected within the discount rate.
(3)
the impacts of adverse change take into account credit mitigants
incorporated in the retained interests, including
over-collateralization
and subordination provisions.
(4)
includes $192million and $905million as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, of
retained interests related to transfers of securitized assets
that were accounted for as secured financings rather than sales
under sfasno.140.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the preceding table does not give effect to the offsetting
benefit of other financial instruments that are held to mitigate
risks inherent in these retained interests. changes in fair
value based on an adverse variation in assumptions generally
cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in
assumptions to the change in fair value is not usually linear.
in addition, the impact of a change in a particular assumption
is calculated independently of changes in any other assumption.
in practice, simultaneous changes in assumptions might magnify
or counteract the sensitivities disclosed above.
in addition to the retained interests described above, the firm
also held interests in residential mortgage qspes purchased in
connection with secondary
market-making
activities. these purchased interests were approximately
$4billion and $6billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively.
as of november2008 and november2007, the firm held
mortgage servicing rights with a fair value of $147million
and $93million, respectively. these servicing assets
represent the firms right to receive a future stream of
cash flows, such as servicing fees, in excess of the firms
obligation to service residential mortgages. the fair value of
mortgage servicing rights will fluctuate in response to changes
in certain economic variables, such as discount rates and loan
prepayment rates. the firm estimates the fair value of mortgage
servicing rights by using valuation models that incorporate
these variables in quantifying anticipated cash flows related to
servicing activities. mortgage servicing rights are included in
trading assets, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition and are classified within
level3 of the fair value hierarchy. the following table
sets forth changes in the firms mortgage servicing rights,
as well as servicing fees earned:
year ended
november 2008
(in millions)
balance, beginning of year
$
purchases(1)
servicing assets that resulted from transfers of financial assets
changes in fair value due to changes in valuation inputs and
assumptions
(221
)
balance, end of
year(2)
$
contractually specified servicing fees
$
(1)
primarily related to the
acquisition of litton loan servicing lp.
(2)
as of november2008, the fair
value was estimated using a weighted average discount rate of
approximately 16% and a weighted average prepayment rate of
approximately 27%.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
variable
interest entities (vies)
the firm, in the ordinary course of business, retains interests
in vies in connection with its securitization activities. the
firm also purchases and sells variable interests in vies, which
primarily issue
mortgage-backed
and other
asset-backed
securities, cdos and clos, in connection with its
market-making
activities and makes investments in and loans to vies that hold
performing and nonperforming debt, equity, real estate,
power-related and other assets. in addition, the firm utilizes
vies to provide investors with principal-protected notes,
credit-linked
notes and
asset-repackaged
notes designed to meet their objectives.
vies generally purchase assets by issuing debt and equity
instruments. in certain instances, the firm provides guarantees
to vies or holders of variable interests in vies. in such cases,
the maximum exposure to loss included in the tables set forth
below is the notional amount of such guarantees. such amounts do
not represent anticipated losses in connection with these
guarantees.
the firms variable interests in vies include senior and
subordinated debt; loan commitments; limited and general
partnership interests; preferred and common stock; interest
rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit
derivatives; guarantees; and residual interests in
mortgage-backed
and
asset-backed
securitization vehicles, cdos and clos. the firms exposure
to the obligations of vies is generally limited to its interests
in these entities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the following tables set forth total assets in nonconsolidated
vies in which the firm holds significant variable interests and
the firms maximum exposure to loss excluding the benefit
of offsetting financial instruments that are held to mitigate
the risks associated with these variable interests. the firm has
aggregated nonconsolidated vies based on principal business
activity, as reflected in the first column. the nature of the
firms variable interests can take different forms, as
described in the columns under maximum exposure to loss.
as of november 2008
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated
vies(1)
purchased
commitments
and retained
and
loans and
vie assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
mortgage cdos
$
13,061
$
$
$
5,616
(4)
$
$
5,858
corporate cdos and clos
8,584
(5)
1,079
real estate,
credit-related
and other
investing(2)
26,898
3,223
3,366
municipal bond securitizations
other
asset-backed
4,355
1,084
1,084
power-related
principal-protected
notes(3)
4,516
4,353
4,353
total
$
58,369
$
$
$
11,971
$
3,436
$
16,101
as of november 2007
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated
vies(1)
purchased
commitments
and retained
and
loans and
vie assets
interests
guarantees
derivatives
investments
total
(in millions)
mortgage cdos
$
18,914
$
1,011
$
$
10,089
(4)
$
$
11,100
corporate cdos and clos
10,750
2,218
(5)
2,629
real estate,
credit-related
and other
investing(2)
17,272
3,141
3,260
municipal bond securitizations
1,413
1,413
1,413
other
mortgage-backed
3,881
other
asset-backed
3,771
1,579
1,579
power-related
principal-protected
notes(3)
5,698
5,186
5,186
total
$
62,137
$
2,143
$
1,557
$
19,084
$
3,157
$
25,941
(1)
such amounts do not represent the anticipated losses in
connection with these transactions as they exclude the effect of
offsetting financial instruments that are held to mitigate these
risks.
(2)
the firm obtains interests in these vies in connection with
making investments in real estate, distressed loans and other
types of debt, mezzanine instruments and equities.
(3)
consists of
out-of-the-money
written put options that provide principal protection to clients
invested in various fund products, with risk to the firm
mitigated through portfolio rebalancing.
(4)
primarily consists of written protection on
investment-grade,
short-term
collateral held by vies that have issued cdos.
(5)
primarily consists of total return swaps on cdos and clos. the
firm has generally transferred the risks related to the
underlying securities through derivatives with
non-vies.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the following table sets forth the firms total assets and
maximum exposure to loss excluding the benefit of offsetting
financial instruments that are held to mitigate the risks
associated with its significant variable interests in
consolidated vies where the firm does not hold a majority voting
interest. the firm has aggregated consolidated vies based on
principal business activity, as reflected in the first column.
as of november 2008
as of november 2007
maximum
maximum
exposure
exposure
vie
assets(1)
to
loss(2)
vie
assets(1)
to
loss(2)
(in millions)
real estate,
credit-related
and other investing
$
1,560
$
$
2,118
$
municipal bond securitizations
1,959
1,959
cdos,
mortgage-backed
and other
asset-backed
foreign exchange and commodities
principal-protected notes
1,119
1,118
total
$
3,444
$
2,427
$
6,100
$
4,040
(1)
consolidated vie assets include
assets financed on a nonrecourse basis.
(2)
such amounts do not represent the
anticipated losses in connection with these transactions as they
exclude the effect of offsetting financial instruments that are
held to mitigate these risks.
the firm did not have
off-balance-sheet
commitments to purchase or finance any cdos held by structured
investment vehicles as of november2008 or
november2007.
note5.
deposits
the following table sets forth deposits as of november2008
and november2007:
as of november
(in millions)
u.s.offices(1)
$
23,018
$
15,272
non-u.s.offices(2)
4,625
total (includes $4,224 and $463 at fair value as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively)
$
27,643
$
15,370
(1)
substantially all
u.s.deposits were interest-bearing and were held at gs
bank usa.
(2)
all
non-u.s.deposits
were interest-bearing and were primarily held at goldman sachs
bank (europe) plc (gs bank europe).
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
included in the above table are time deposits of
$8.49billion and $463million, as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively. the
following table sets forth the maturities of time deposits as of
november2008:
as of november 2008
u.s.
non-u.s.
total
(in millions)
$
3,583
$
$
3,583
1,431
1,456
2014-thereafter
1,532
1,532
total
$
8,430
$
$
8,485
note6.
short-term
borrowings
as of november2008,
short-term
borrowings were $73.89billion, comprised of
$21.23billion included in other secured
financings in the consolidated statement of financial
condition and $52.66billion of unsecured
short-term
borrowings. as of november2007,
short-term
borrowings were $103.97billion, comprised of
$32.41billion included in other secured
financings in the consolidated statement of financial
condition and $71.56billion of unsecured
short-term
borrowings. see note3 for information on other secured
financings.
unsecured
short-term
borrowings include the portion of unsecured
long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement
date and unsecured
long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder. the firm accounts
for promissory notes, commercial paper and certain hybrid
financial instruments at fair value under sfasno.155
or sfasno.159.
short-term
borrowings that are not recorded at fair value are recorded
based on the amount of cash received plus accrued interest, and
such amounts approximate fair value due to the
short-term
nature of the obligations.
unsecured
short-term
borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
current portion of unsecured
long-term
borrowings(1)
$
26,281
$
22,740
hybrid financial instruments
12,086
22,318
promissory
notes(2)
6,944
13,251
commercial
paper(3)
1,125
4,343
other
short-term
borrowings
6,222
8,905
total(4)
$
52,658
$
71,557
(1)
includes $25.12billion and
$21.24billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, issued by
group inc.
(2)
includes $3.42billion as of
november2008 guaranteed by the federal deposit insurance
corporation (fdic) under the temporary liquidity guarantee
program (tlgp).
(3)
includes $751million as of
november 2008 guaranteed by the fdic under the tlgp.
(4)
the weighted average interest rates
for these borrowings, after giving effect to hedging activities,
were 3.37% and 4.77% as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. the weighted average interest
rates as of november2008 and november2007 excluded
financial instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.155 or sfas no.159.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note7.
long-term
borrowings
as of november2008,
long-term
borrowings were $185.68billion, comprised of
$17.46billion included in other secured
financings in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and $168.22billion of unsecured
long-term
borrowings. as of november2007,
long-term
borrowings were $197.47billion, comprised of
$33.30billion included in other secured
financings in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and $164.17billion of unsecured
long-term
borrowings. see note3 for information on other secured
financings.
the firms unsecured
long-term
borrowings extend through 2043 and consist principally of senior
borrowings.
unsecured
long-term
borrowings issued by group inc. and its subsidiaries are set
forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
fixed rate
obligations(1)
group inc.
$
101,454
$
82,276
subsidiaries
2,371
2,144
floating rate
obligations(2)
group inc.
57,018
73,075
subsidiaries
7,377
6,679
total(3)
$
168,220
$
164,174
(1)
as of november2008 and
november2007, $70.08billion and $55.28billion,
respectively, of the firms fixed rate debt obligations
were denominated in u.s.dollars and interest rates ranged
from 3.87% to 10.04% and from 3.88% to 10.04%, respectively. as
of november2008 and november2007,
$33.75billion and $29.14billion, respectively, of
the firms fixed rate debt obligations were denominated in
non-u.s.dollars
and interest rates ranged from 0.67% to 8.88% for both periods.
(2)
as of november2008 and
november2007, $32.41billion and $47.31billion,
respectively, of the firms floating rate debt obligations
were denominated in u.s.dollars. as of november2008
and november2007, $31.99billion and
$32.44billion, respectively, of the firms floating
rate debt obligations were denominated in
non-u.s.dollars.
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the
federal funds target rate.
equity-linked
and indexed instruments are included in floating rate
obligations.
(3)
includes $3.36billion and
$3.05billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, of foreign
currency-denominated
debt designated as hedges of net investments in
non-u.s.subsidiaries
under sfasno.133.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
unsecured
long-term
borrowings by maturity date are set forth below:
as of november
2008(1)(2)
2007(1)(2)
group inc.
subsidiaries
total
group inc.
subsidiaries
total
(in millions)
$
$
$
$
22,695
$
$
23,182
13,967
14,243
13,433
13,703
10,377
10,879
10,572
10,687
16,806
16,872
18,487
18,608
21,627
21,878
15,501
15,816
2014-thereafter
95,695
8,653
104,348
74,663
7,515
82,178
total
$
158,472
$
9,748
$
168,220
$
155,351
$
8,823
$
164,174
(1)
unsecured
long-term
borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement
date and certain unsecured
long-term
borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial
statement date at the option of the holder are included as
unsecured
short-term
borrowings in the consolidated statements of financial condition.
(2)
unsecured
long-term
borrowings that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of
the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity dates.
unsecured
long-term
borrowings that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option
of the holder are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
the firm enters into derivative contracts to effectively convert
a substantial portion of its unsecured
long-term
borrowings which are not accounted for at fair value into
u.s.dollar-based
floating rate obligations. accordingly, excluding the cumulative
impact of changes in the firms credit spreads, the
carrying value of unsecured
long-term
borrowings approximated fair value as of november2008 and
november2007. for unsecured
long-term
borrowings for which the firm did not elect the fair value
option, the cumulative impact due to the widening of the
firms own credit spreads was a reduction in the fair value
of total unsecured
long-term
borrowings of approximately 9% and 1% as of november2008
and november2007, respectively.
the effective weighted average interest rates for unsecured
long-term
borrowings are set forth below:
as of november
amount
rate
amount
rate
($ in millions)
fixed rate obligations
group inc.
$
1,863
5.71
%
$
1,858
5.69
%
subsidiaries
2,152
4.32
1,929
4.88
floating rate
obligations(1)(2)
group inc.
156,609
2.66
153,493
5.20
subsidiaries
7,596
4.23
6,894
4.43
total(2)
$
168,220
2.73
%
$
164,174
5.19
%
(1)
includes fixed rate obligations
that have been converted into floating rate obligations through
derivative contracts.
(2)
the weighted average interest rates
as of november2008 and november2007 excluded
financial instruments accounted for at fair value under
sfasno.155 or sfasno.159.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
subordinated
borrowings
as of november2008, unsecured
long-term
borrowings were comprised of subordinated borrowings with
outstanding principal amounts of $19.26billion as set
forth below, of which $18.79billion has been issued by
group inc. as of november2007, unsecured
long-term
borrowings were comprised of subordinated borrowings with
outstanding principal amounts of $16.32billion as set
forth below, of which $16.00billion has been issued by
group inc.
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts in connection with
fixed-to-floating
and floating rate normal automatic preferred enhanced capital
securities.in 2007, group inc. issued a total of
$2.25billion of remarketable junior subordinated debt to
goldman sachs capital ii and goldman sachs capital iii (apex
trusts), delaware statutory trusts that, in turn, issued
$2.25billion of guaranteed perpetual automatic preferred
enhanced capital securities (apex) to third parties and a de
minimis amount of common securities to group inc. group inc.
also entered into contracts with the apex trusts to sell
$2.25billion of perpetual
non-cumulative
preferred stock to be issued by group inc. (the stock purchase
contracts). the apex trusts are wholly owned finance
subsidiaries of the firm for regulatory and legal purposes but
are not consolidated for accounting purposes.
the firm pays interest
semi-annually
on $1.75billion of junior subordinated debt issued to
goldman sachs capital ii at a fixed annual rate of 5.59% and the
debt matures on june1,2043. the firm pays interest
quarterly on $500million of junior subordinated debt
issued to goldman sachs capital iii at a rate per annum equal to
three-month
libor plus 0.57% and the debt matures on
september1,2043. in addition, the firm makes
contract payments at a rate of 0.20% per annum on the stock
purchase contracts held by the apex trusts. the firm has the
right to defer payments on the junior subordinated debt and the
stock purchase contracts, subject to limitations, and therefore
cause payment on the apex to be deferred. during any such
extension period, the firm will not be permitted to, among other
things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of its
common or preferred stock. the junior subordinated debt is
junior in right of payment to all of group inc.s senior
indebtedness and all of group inc.s other subordinated
borrowings.
in connection with the apex issuance, the firm covenanted in
favor of certain of its debtholders, who are initially the
holders of group inc.s 6.345% junior subordinated
debentures due february15,2034, that, subject to
certain exceptions, the firm would not redeem or purchase
(i)group inc.s junior subordinated debt issued to
the apex trusts prior to the applicable stock purchase date or
(ii)apex or shares of group inc.s seriese or
seriesf preferred stock prior to the date that is ten
years after the applicable stock purchase date, unless the
applicable redemption or purchase price does not exceed a
maximum amount determined by reference to the aggregate amount
of net cash proceeds that the firm has received from the sale of
qualifying equity securities during the
180-day
period preceding the redemption or purchase.
the firm has accounted for the stock purchase contracts as
equity instruments under eitf issue
no.00-19,
accounting for derivative financial instruments indexed
to, and potentially settled in, a companys own
stock, and, accordingly, recorded the cost of the stock
purchase contracts as a reduction to additional
paid-in
capital. see note9 for information on the preferred stock
that group inc. will issue in connection with the stock purchase
contracts.
junior subordinated debt issued to a trust in connection with
trustpreferred securities.group inc.
issued $2.84billion of junior subordinated debentures in
2004 to goldman sachs capital i (trust), a delaware statutory
trust that, in turn, issued $2.75billion of guaranteed
preferred beneficial interests to third parties and
$85million of common beneficial interests to group inc.
and invested the proceeds from the sale in junior subordinated
debentures issued by group inc. the trust is a wholly
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
owned finance subsidiary of the firm for regulatory and legal
purposes but is not consolidated for accounting purposes.
the firm pays interest
semi-annually
on these debentures at an annual rate of 6.345% and the
debentures mature on february15,2034. the coupon
rate and the payment dates applicable to the beneficial
interests are the same as the interest rate and payment dates
applicable to the debentures. the firm has the right, from time
to time, to defer payment of interest on the debentures, and,
therefore, cause payment on the trusts preferred
beneficial interests to be deferred, in each case up to ten
consecutive
semi-annual
periods. during any such extension period, the firm will not be
permitted to, among other things, pay dividends on or make
certain repurchases of its common stock. the trust is not
permitted to pay any distributions on the common beneficial
interests held by group inc. unless all dividends payable on the
preferred beneficial interests have been paid in full. these
debentures are junior in right of payment to all of group
inc.s senior indebtedness and all of group inc.s
subordinated borrowings, other than the junior subordinated debt
issued in connection with the normal automatic preferred
enhanced capital securities.
subordinated debt.as of november2008,
the firm had $14.17billion of other subordinated debt
outstanding, of which $13.70billion has been issued by
group inc., with maturities ranging from fiscal 2009 to 2038.
the effective weighted average interest rate on this debt was
1.99%, after giving effect to derivative contracts used to
convert fixed rate obligations into floating rate obligations.
as of november2007, the firm had $11.23billion of
other subordinated debt outstanding, of which
$10.91billion has been issued by group inc., with
maturities ranging from fiscal 2009 to 2037. the effective
weighted average interest rate on this debt was 5.75%, after
giving effect to derivative contracts used to convert fixed rate
obligations into floating rate obligations. this debt is junior
in right of payment to all of the firms senior
indebtedness.
note8.
commitments,
contingencies and guarantees
commitments
forward starting collateralized agreements and
financings.the firm had forward starting resale
agreements and securities borrowing agreements of
$61.46billion and $28.14billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively. the
firm had forward starting repurchase agreements and securities
lending agreements of $6.95billion and $15.39billion
as of november2008 and november2007, respectively.
commitments to extend credit.in connection
with its lending activities, the firm had outstanding
commitments to extend credit of $41.04billion and
$82.75billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. the firms commitments to
extend credit are agreements to lend to counterparties that have
fixed termination dates and are contingent on the satisfaction
of all conditions to borrowing set forth in the contract. since
these commitments may expire unused or be reduced or cancelled
at the counterpartys request, the total commitment amount
does not necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow
requirements. the firm accounts for these commitments at fair
value. to the extent that the firm recognizes losses on these
commitments, such losses are recorded within the firms
trading and principal investments segment net of any related
underwriting fees.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the following table summarizes the firms commitments to
extend credit, net of amounts syndicated to third parties, as of
november2008 and november2007:
year ended november
(in millions)
commercial lending commitments
investment-grade
$
8,007
$
11,719
non-investment-grade
9,318
41,930
william street program
22,610
24,488
warehouse financing
1,101
4,610
total commitments to extend credit
$
41,036
$
82,747
commercial lending commitments.the
firms commercial lending commitments are generally
extended in connection with contingent acquisition financing and
other types of corporate lending as well as commercial real
estate financing. the total commitment amount does not
necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow requirements, as
the firm may syndicate all or substantial portions of these
commitments in the future, the commitments may expire unused, or
the commitments may be cancelled or reduced at the request of
the counterparty. in addition, commitments that are extended for
contingent acquisition financing are often intended to be
short-term
in nature, as borrowers often seek to replace them with other
funding sources.
included within
non-investment-grade
commitments as of november2008 was $2.07billion of
exposure to leveraged lending capital market transactions,
$164million related to commercial real estate transactions
and $7.09billion arising from other unfunded credit
facilities. included within the
non-investment-grade
amount as of november2007 was $26.09billion of
exposure to leveraged lending capital market transactions,
$3.50billion related to commercial real estate
transactions and $12.34billion arising from other unfunded
credit facilities. including funded loans, the firms total
exposure to leveraged lending capital market transactions was
$7.97billion and $43.06billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
william street program.substantially all of
the commitments provided under the william street credit
extension program are to
investment-grade
corporate borrowers. commitments under the program are
principally extended by william street commitment corporation
(commitment corp.), a consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of gs
bank usa, and also by william street credit corporation, gs bank
usa or goldman sachs credit partners l.p. the commitments
extended by commitment corp. are supported, in part, by funding
raised by william street funding corporation (funding corp.),
another consolidated wholly owned subsidiary of gs bank usa. the
assets and liabilities of commitment corp. and funding corp. are
legally separated from other assets and liabilities of the firm.
the assets of commitment corp. and of funding corp. will not be
available to their respective shareholders until the claims of
their respective creditors have been paid. in addition, no
affiliate of either commitment corp. or funding corp., except in
limited cases as expressly agreed in writing, is responsible for
any obligation of either entity. with respect to most of the
william street commitments, sumitomo mitsui financial group,
inc. (smfg) provides the firm with credit loss protection that
is generally limited to 95% of the first loss the firm realizes
on approved loan commitments, up to a maximum of
$1.00billion. in addition, subject to the satisfaction of
certain conditions, upon the firms request, smfg will
provide protection for 70% of additional losses on such
commitments, up to a maximum of $1.13billion, of which
$375million of protection has been provided as of
november2008. the firm also uses other financial
instruments to mitigate credit risks related to certain william
street commitments not covered by smfg.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
warehouse financing.the firm provides
financing for the warehousing of financial assets. these
arrangements are secured by the warehoused assets, primarily
consisting of commercial mortgages as of november2008 and
corporate bank loans and commercial mortgages as of
november2007.
letters of credit.the firm provides letters
of credit issued by various banks to counterparties in lieu of
securities or cash to satisfy various collateral and margin
deposit requirements. letters of credit outstanding were
$7.25billion and $8.75billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
investment commitments.in connection with its
merchant banking and other investing activities, the firm
invests in private equity, real estate and other assets directly
and through funds that it raises and manages. in connection with
these activities, the firm had commitments to invest up to
$14.27billion and $17.76billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively,
including $12.25billion and $12.32billion,
respectively, of commitments to invest in funds managed by the
firm.
construction-related
commitments.as of november2008 and
november2007, the firm had
construction-related
commitments of $483million and $769million,
respectively, including commitments of $388million and
$642million as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, related to the firms new
headquarters in new york city, which is expected to cost between
$2.1billion and $2.3billion. the firm has partially
financed this construction project with $1.65billion of
tax-exempt
liberty bonds.
underwriting commitments.as of
november2008 and november2007, the firm had
commitments to purchase $241million and $88million,
respectively, of securities in connection with its underwriting
activities.
other.the firm had other purchase commitments
of $260million as of november2008 and
$1.76billion (including a $1.34billion commitment
for the acquisition of litton loan servicing lp) as of
november2007.
leases.the firm has contractual obligations
under
long-term
noncancelable lease agreements, principally for office space,
expiring on various dates through 2069. certain agreements are
subject to periodic escalation provisions for increases in real
estate taxes and other charges. future minimum rental payments,
net of minimum sublease rentals are set forth below (in
millions):
minimum rental payments
$
2014-thereafter
1,664
total
$
3,493
rent charged to operating expense is set forth below (in
millions):
net rent expense
$
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
contingencies
the firm is involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and
arbitration proceedings concerning matters arising in connection
with the conduct of its businesses. management believes, based
on currently available information, that the results of such
proceedings, in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse
effect on the firms financial condition, but may be
material to the firms operating results for any particular
period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such
period. given the inherent difficulty of predicting the outcome
of the firms litigation and regulatory matters,
particularly in cases or proceedings in which substantial or
indeterminate damages or fines are sought, the firm cannot
estimate losses or ranges of losses for cases or proceedings
where there is only a reasonable possibility that a loss may be
incurred.
in connection with its insurance business, the firm is
contingently liable to provide guaranteed minimum death and
income benefits to certain contract holders and has established
a reserve related to $6.13billion and $10.84billion
of contract holder account balances as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, for such benefits. the
weighted average attained age of these contract holders was
68years and 67years as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. the net amount at risk,
representing guaranteed minimum death and income benefits in
excess of contract holder account balances, was
$2.96billion and $1.04billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively. see
note12 for more information on the firms insurance
liabilities.
guarantees
the firm enters into various derivative contracts that meet the
definition of a guarantee under fin45,
guarantors accounting and disclosure requirements
for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of indebtedness of
others, as amended by
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4.
fin45 does not require disclosures about derivative
contracts if such contracts may be cash settled and the firm has
no basis to conclude it is probable that the counterparties
held, at inception, the underlying instruments related to the
derivative contracts. the firm has concluded that these
conditions have been met for certain large, internationally
active commercial and investment bank counterparties and certain
other counterparties. accordingly, the firm has not included
such contracts in the tables below.
the firm, in its capacity as an agency lender, indemnifies most
of its securities lending customers against losses incurred in
the event that borrowers do not return securities and the
collateral held is insufficient to cover the market value of the
securities borrowed.
in the ordinary course of business, the firm provides other
financial guarantees of the obligations of third parties
(e.g.,performance bonds, standby letters of credit and
other guarantees to enable clients to complete transactions and
merchant banking fund-related guarantees). these guarantees
represent obligations to make payments to beneficiaries if the
guaranteed party fails to fulfill its obligation under a
contractual arrangement with that beneficiary.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
as of november2008 and november 2007, derivative contracts
that meet the definition of a guarantee include written equity
and commodity put options, written currency contracts and
interest rate caps, floors and swaptions. as of
november2007, prior to the adoption of
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4,
derivative contracts that met the definition of a guarantee also
included credit derivatives, such as credit default swaps,
credit spread options, credit index products and total return
swaps. see
recent
accounting developments for further information on
fspno.fas133-1
and
fin45-4
and note3 for additional information on the firms
credit derivatives as of november2008. the following
tables set forth certain information about the firms
derivative contracts that meet the definition of a guarantee and
certain other guarantees as of november2008 and
november2007:
as of november 2008
maximum payout/notional amount by period of
expiration(1)
carrying
2010-
2012-
2014-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives(2)
$17,462
$114,863
$73,224
$30,312
$90,643
$309,042
securities lending
indemnifications(3)
19,306
19,306
other financial guarantees
1,376
as of november 2007
maximum payout/notional amount by period of
expiration(1)
carrying
2009-
2011-
2013-
value
thereafter
total
(in millions)
derivatives(2)(4)
$33,098
$580,769
$492,563
$457,511
$514,498
$2,045,341
securities lending
indemnifications(3)
26,673
26,673
performance
bond(5)
2,046
2,046
other financial guarantees
(1)
such amounts do not represent the
anticipated losses in connection with these contracts.
(2)
because derivative contracts are
accounted for at fair value, carrying value is considered the
best indication of payment/performance risk for individual
contracts. however, the carrying value excludes the effect of a
legal right of setoff that may exist under an enforceable
netting agreement and the effect of netting of cash paid
pursuant to credit support agreements. these derivative
contracts are risk managed together with derivative contracts
that are not considered guarantees under fin45 and,
therefore, these amounts do not reflect the firms overall
risk related to its derivative activities.
(3)
collateral held by the lenders in
connection with securities lending indemnifications was
$19.95billion and $27.49billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively. because
the contractual nature of these arrangements requires the firm
to obtain collateral with a market value that exceeds the value
of the securities on loan from the borrower, there is minimal
performance risk associated with these guarantees.
(4)
includes credit derivatives that
meet the definition of a guarantee as of november2007.
(5)
excludes cash collateral of
$2.05billion related to this obligation.
the firm has established trusts, including goldman sachs capital
i, ii and iii, and other entities for the limited purpose of
issuing securities to third parties, lending the proceeds to the
firm and entering into contractual arrangements with the firm
and third parties related to this purpose. see note7 for
information regarding the transactions involving goldman sachs
capital i, ii and iii. the firm effectively provides for the
full and unconditional guarantee of the securities issued by
these entities, which are not consolidated for accounting
purposes. timely payment by the firm of amounts due to these
entities under the borrowing, preferred stock and related
contractual arrangements will be sufficient to cover payments
due on the securities issued by these entities. management
believes that it is unlikely that any circumstances will occur,
such as nonperformance on the part of paying agents or other
service providers, that would make it necessary for the firm to
make payments related
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
to these entities other than those required under the terms of
the borrowing, preferred stock and related contractual
arrangements and in connection with certain expenses incurred by
these entities.
in the ordinary course of business, the firm indemnifies and
guarantees certain service providers, such as clearing and
custody agents, trustees and administrators, against specified
potential losses in connection with their acting as an agent of,
or providing services to, the firm or its affiliates. the firm
also indemnifies some clients against potential losses incurred
in the event specified
third-party
service providers, including
sub-custodians
and
third-party
brokers, improperly execute transactions. in addition, the firm
is a member of payment, clearing and settlement networks as well
as securities exchanges around the world that may require the
firm to meet the obligations of such networks and exchanges in
the event of member defaults. in connection with its prime
brokerage and clearing businesses, the firm agrees to clear and
settle on behalf of its clients the transactions entered into by
them with other brokerage firms. the firms obligations in
respect of such transactions are secured by the assets in the
clients account as well as any proceeds received from the
transactions cleared and settled by the firm on behalf of the
client. in connection with joint venture investments, the firm
may issue loan guarantees under which it may be liable in the
event of fraud, misappropriation, environmental liabilities and
certain other matters involving the borrower. the firm is unable
to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these
guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes
that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material
payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities related to
these guarantees and indemnifications have been recognized in
the consolidated statements of financial condition as of
november2008 and november2007.
the firm provides representations and warranties to
counterparties in connection with a variety of commercial
transactions and occasionally indemnifies them against potential
losses caused by the breach of those representations and
warranties. the firm may also provide indemnifications
protecting against changes in or adverse application of certain
u.s.tax laws in connection with ordinary-course
transactions such as securities issuances, borrowings or
derivatives. in addition, the firm may provide indemnifications
to some counterparties to protect them in the event additional
taxes are owed or payments are withheld, due either to a change
in or an adverse application of certain
non-u.s.tax
laws. these indemnifications generally are standard contractual
terms and are entered into in the ordinary course of business.
generally, there are no stated or notional amounts included in
these indemnifications, and the contingencies triggering the
obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur. the firm is
unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these
guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes
that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material
payments under these arrangements, and no liabilities related to
these arrangements have been recognized in the consolidated
statements of financial condition as of november2008 and
november2007.
group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of goldman,
sachs& co. (gs&co.), gsbank usa and gs
bank europe, subject to certain exceptions. in
november2008, the firm contributed subsidiaries with an
aggregate of $117.16billion of assets into gs bank usa
(which brought total assets in gsbank usa to
$145.06billion as of november 2008) and group inc. agreed
to guarantee certain losses, including
credit-related
losses, relating to assets held by the contributed entities. in
connection with this guarantee, group inc. also agreed to pledge
to gs bank usa certain collateral, including interests in
subsidiaries and other illiquid assets. in addition, group inc.
guarantees many of the obligations of its other consolidated
subsidiaries on a
transaction-by-transaction
basis, as negotiated with counterparties. group inc. is unable
to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under its
subsidiary guarantees; however, because these guaranteed
obligations are also obligations of consolidated subsidiaries
included in the tables above, group inc.s liabilities as
guarantor are not separately disclosed.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note9.
shareholders
equity
common and
preferred equity
in september2008, group inc. completed a public offering
of 46.7million shares of common stock at $123.00 per share
for proceeds of $5.75billion.
in october2008, group inc. issued to berkshire hathaway
inc. and certain affiliates 50,000shares of 10% cumulative
perpetual preferred stock, seriesg (seriesg
preferred stock), and a five-year warrant to purchase up to
43.5million shares of common stock at an exercise price of
$115.00 per share, for aggregate proceeds of $5.00billion.
the allocated carrying values of the warrant and the
seriesg preferred stock on the date of issuance (based on
their relative fair values) were $1.14billion and
$3.86billion, respectively. the warrant is exercisable at
any time until october1,2013 and the number of
shares of common stock underlying the warrant and the exercise
price are subject to adjustment for certain dilutive events.
in october2008, under the u.s.department of the
treasurys (u.s.treasury) tarp capital purchase
program, group inc. issued to the u.s.treasury
10.0million shares of fixed rate cumulative perpetual
preferred stock, seriesh (seriesh preferred stock),
and a
10-year
warrant to purchase up to 12.2million shares of common
stock at an exercise price of $122.90 per share, for aggregate
proceeds of $10.00billion. the allocated carrying values
of the warrant and the seriesh preferred stock on the date
of issuance (based on their relative fair values) were
$490million and $9.51billion, respectively.
cumulative dividends on the seriesh preferred stock are
payable at 5% per annum through november14,2013 and
at a rate of 9% per annum thereafter. the seriesh
preferred stock will be accreted to the redemption price of
$10.00billion over five years. the warrant is exercisable
at any time until october28,2018 and the number of
shares of common stock underlying the warrant and the exercise
price are subject to adjustment for certain dilutive events. if,
on or prior to december31,2009, the firm receives
aggregate gross cash proceeds of at least $10billion from
sales of tier1 qualifying perpetual preferred stock or
common stock, the number of shares of common stock issuable upon
exercise of the warrant will be reduced by
one-half of
the original number of shares of common stock.
dividends declared per common share were $1.40 in 2008, $1.40 in
2007, and $1.30 in 2006. on december15,2008, the
board of directors of group inc. (board) declared a dividend of
$0.4666666 per common share to be paid on
march26,2009 to common shareholders of record on
february24,2009. the dividend of $0.4666666 per
common share is reflective of a four-month period
(december2008 through march2009), due to the change
in the firms fiscal year-end. see note21 for further
information regarding the change in the firms fiscal
year-end. see below for information regarding restrictions on
the firms ability to raise its common stock dividend.
during 2008 and 2007, the firm repurchased 10.5million and
41.2million shares of its common stock at an average cost
per share of $193.18 and $217.29, for a total cost of
$2.04billion and $8.96billion, respectively. in
addition, to satisfy minimum statutory employee tax withholding
requirements related to the delivery of common stock underlying
restricted stock units, the firm cancelled 6.7million and
4.7million of restricted stock units with a total value of
$1.31billion and $929million in 2008 and 2007,
respectively.
the firms share repurchase program is intended to help
maintain the appropriate level of common equity and to
substantially offset increases in share count over time
resulting from employee
share-based
compensation. the repurchase program is effected primarily
through regular
open-market
purchases, the amounts and timing of which are determined
primarily by the firms current and projected capital
positions (i.e.,comparisons of the firms desired
level of capital to its actual level of capital) but which may
also be influenced by general market conditions and the
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
prevailing price and trading volumes of the firms common
stock, in each case subject to the limit imposed under the
u.s.treasurys tarp capital purchase program. see
below for information regarding current restrictions on the
firms ability to repurchase common stock.
as of november2008, the firm had 10.2million shares
of perpetual preferred stock issued and outstanding as set forth
in the following table:
dividend
shares
shares
earliest
redemption value
series
preference
issued
authorized
dividend rate
redemption date
(in millions)
a
non-cumulative
30,000
50,000
3 month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 3.75% per annum
april25,2010
$
b
non-cumulative
32,000
50,000
6.20% per annum
october31,2010
c
non-cumulative
8,000
25,000
3 month libor + 0.75%,
with floor of 4.00% per annum
october31,2010
d
non-cumulative
54,000
60,000
3 month libor + 0.67%,
with floor of 4.00% per annum
may24,2011
1,350
g
cumulative
50,000
50,000
10.00% per annum
date of issuance
5,500
h
cumulative
10,000,000
10,000,000
5.00% per annum through
november14,2013 and
9.00% per annum thereafter
date of issuance
10,000
10,174,000
10,235,000
$
18,600
each share of
non-cumulative
preferred stock issued and outstanding has a par value of $0.01,
has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is represented by 1,000
depositary shares and is redeemable at the firms option,
subject to the approval of the board of governors of the federal
reserve system (federal reserve board), at a redemption price
equal to $25,000 plus declared and unpaid dividends.
each share of seriesg preferred stock issued and
outstanding has a par value of $0.01, has a liquidation
preference of $100,000 and is redeemable at the firms
option, subject to the approval of the federal reserve board, at
a redemption price equal to $110,000 plus accrued and unpaid
dividends.
each share of seriesh preferred stock issued and
outstanding has a par value of $0.01, has a liquidation
preference of $1,000 and is redeemable at the firms
option, subject to the approval of the federal reserve board, at
a redemption price equal to $1,000 plus accrued and unpaid
dividends, provided that through november14,2011 the
seriesh preferred stock is redeemable only in an amount up
to the aggregate net cash proceeds received from sales of
tier1 qualifying perpetual preferred stock or common
stock, and only once such sales have resulted in aggregate gross
proceeds of at least $2.5billion.
all series of preferred stock are pari passu and have a
preference over the firms common stock upon liquidation.
dividends on each series of preferred stock, if declared, are
payable quarterly in arrears. the firms ability to declare
or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire,
its common stock is subject to certain restrictions in the event
that the firm fails to pay or set aside full dividends on the
preferred stock for the latest completed dividend period. in
addition, pursuant to the u.s.treasurys tarp capital
purchase program, until the earliest of
october28,2011, the redemption of all of the
seriesh preferred stock or transfer by the
u.s.treasury of all of the seriesh preferred stock
to third parties, the firm must obtain the consent of the
u.s.treasury to raise the firms common stock
dividend or to repurchase any shares of common stock or other
preferred stock, with certain exceptions (including repurchases
of shares of common stock under the firms share repurchase
program to offset dilution from
equity-based
compensation). for as long as the seriesh preferred stock
remains outstanding, due to the limitations pursuant to the u.s.
treasurys tarp capital purchase program, the firm will
repurchase shares of common stock through its share
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
repurchase program only for the purpose of offsetting dilution
from
equity-based
compensation, to the extent permitted.
in 2007, the board authorized 17,500.1shares of perpetual
non-cumulative
preferred stock, seriese, and 5,000.1shares of
perpetual
non-cumulative
preferred stock, seriesf, in connection with the apex
issuance. see note7 for further information on the apex
issuance. under the stock purchase contracts, group inc. will
issue on the relevant stock purchase dates (on or before
june1,2013 and september1,2013 for
seriese and seriesf preferred stock, respectively)
one share of seriese and seriesf preferred stock to
goldman sachs capital ii and iii, respectively, for each
$100,000 principal amount of subordinated debt held by these
trusts. when issued, each share of seriese and
seriesf preferred stock will have a par value of $0.01 and
a liquidation preference of $100,000 per share. dividends on
seriese preferred stock, if declared, will be payable
semi-annually
at a fixed annual rate of 5.79% if the stock is issued prior to
june1,2012 and quarterly thereafter, at a rate per
annum equal to the greater of
(i)three-month
libor plus 0.77% and (ii)4.00%. dividends on seriesf
preferred stock, if declared, will be payable quarterly at a
rate per annum equal to
three-month
libor plus 0.77% if the stock is issued prior to
september1,2012 and quarterly thereafter, at a rate
per annum equal to the greater of
(i)three-month
libor plus 0.77% and (ii)4.00%. the preferred stock may be
redeemed at the option of the firm on the stock purchase dates
or any day thereafter, subject to regulatory approval and
certain covenant restrictions governing the firms ability
to redeem or purchase the preferred stock without issuing common
stock or other instruments with
equity-like
characteristics.
preferred dividends declared are set forth below:
year ended november
(per share)
(in millions)
(per share)
(in millions)
seriesa
$
1,068.86
$
$
1,563.51
$
seriesb
1,550.00
1,550.00
seriesc
1,110.18
1,563.51
seriesd
1,105.18
1,543.06
seriesg
1,083.33
total
$
$
on december15,2008, the board declared a dividend
per preferred share of $239.58, $387.50, $255.56, $255.56 and
$2,500 for seriesa, seriesb, seriesc,
seriesd and seriesg preferred stock, respectively,
to be paid on february10,2009 to preferred
shareholders of record on january26,2009. also on
december15,2008, the board declared a dividend of
$14.8611111 per share of seriesh preferred stock to be
paid on february17,2009 to preferred shareholders of
record on january31,2009. the total amount of
preferred stock dividends declared on
december15,2008 was $309million.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
other
comprehensive income
the following table sets forth the firms accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss) by type:
as of
november
(in millions)
adjustment from adoption of sfasno.158, net of tax
$
(194
)
$
(194
)
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(30
)
pension and postretirement liability adjustment, net of tax
net unrealized gains/(losses) on
available-for-sale
securities, net of
tax(1)
(47
)
total accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax
$
(202
)
$
(118
)
(1)
consists of net unrealized losses
of $55million on
available-for-sale
securities held by the firms insurance subsidiaries and
net unrealized gains of $8million on
available-for-sale
securities held by investees accounted for under the equity
method as of november2008. consists of net unrealized
gains of $9million on
available-for-sale
securities held by investees accounted for under the equity
method and net unrealized losses of $1million on
available-for-sale
securities held by the firms insurance subsidiaries as of
november2007.
note10.
earnings
per common share
the computations of basic and diluted earnings per common share
are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions, except per share amounts)
numerator for basic and diluted eps net earnings
applicable to common shareholders
$
2,041
$
11,407
$
9,398
denominator for basic eps weighted average number of
common shares
437.0
433.0
449.0
effect of dilutive
securities(1)
restricted stock units
10.2
13.6
13.6
stock options
9.0
14.6
14.8
dilutive potential common shares
19.2
28.2
28.4
denominator for diluted eps weighted average number
of common shares and dilutive potential common shares
456.2
461.2
477.4
basic eps
$
4.67
$
26.34
$
20.93
diluted eps
4.47
24.73
19.69
(1)
the diluted eps computations do not
include the antidilutive effect of restricted stock units
(rsus), stock options and warrants as follows:
as of november
(in millions)
number of antidilutive rsus and common shares underlying
antidilutive stock options and warrants
60.5
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note11.
goodwill
and identifiable intangible assets
goodwill
the following table sets forth the carrying value of the
firms goodwill by operating segment, which is included in
other assets in the consolidated statements of
financial condition:
as of november
(in millions)
investment banking
underwriting
$
$
trading and principal investments
ficc
equities(1)
2,389
2,381
principal investments
asset management and securities services
asset
management(2)
securities services
total
$
3,523
$
3,321
(1)
primarily related to slk llc (slk).
(2)
primarily related to the ayco
company, l.p. (ayco).
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
identifiable
intangible assets
the following table sets forth the gross carrying amount,
accumulated amortization and net carrying amount of the
firms identifiable intangible assets:
as of november
(in millions)
customer
lists(1)
gross carrying amount
$
1,160
$
1,086
accumulated amortization
(436
)
(354
)
net carrying amount
$
$
new york stock
gross carrying amount
$
$
exchange (nyse)
accumulated amortization
(252
)
(212
)
dmm rights
net carrying amount
$
$
insurance-related
gross carrying amount
$
$
assets(2)
accumulated amortization
(145
)
(89
)
net carrying amount
$
$
exchange-traded
gross carrying amount
$
$
fund (etf) lead
accumulated amortization
(43
)
(38
)
market maker rights
net carrying amount
$
$
other(3)
gross carrying amount
$
$
accumulated amortization
(85
)
(295
)
net carrying amount
$
$
total
gross carrying amount
$
2,638
$
2,759
accumulated amortization
(961
)
(988
)
net carrying amount
$
1,677
$
1,771
(1)
primarily includes the firms
clearance and execution and nasdaq customer lists related to slk
and financial counseling customer lists related to ayco.
(2)
consists of voba and dac. voba
represents the present value of estimated future gross profits
of acquired variable annuity and life insurance businesses. dac
results from commissions paid by the firm to the primary insurer
(ceding company) on life and annuity reinsurance agreements as
compensation to place the business with the firm and to cover
the ceding companys acquisition expenses. voba and dac are
amortized over the estimated life of the underlying contracts
based on estimated gross profits, and amortization is adjusted
based on actual experience. the weighted average remaining
amortization period for voba and dac is seven years as of
november2008.
(3)
primarily includes
marketing-related assets and power contracts.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
substantially all of the firms identifiable intangible
assets are considered to have finite lives and are amortized
over their estimated lives. the weighted average remaining life
of the firms identifiable intangibles is approximately
11years.
the estimated future amortization for existing identifiable
intangible assets through 2013 is set forth below (in millions):
$
note12.
other
assets and other liabilities
other
assets
other assets are generally less liquid, nonfinancial assets. the
following table sets forth the firms other assets by type:
as of november
(in millions)
property, leasehold improvements and
equipment(1)
$
10,793
$
8,975
goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets(2)
5,200
5,092
income tax-related assets
8,359
4,177
equity-method
investments(3)
1,454
2,014
miscellaneous receivables and other
4,632
3,809
total
$
30,438
$
24,067
(1)
net of accumulated depreciation and
amortization of $6.55billion and $5.88billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
(2)
see note11 for further
information regarding the firms goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets.
(3)
excludes investments of
$3.45billion and $2.25billion accounted for at fair
value under sfasno.159 as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively, which are included in
trading assets, at fair value in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
other
liabilities
the following table sets forth the firms other liabilities
and accrued expenses by type:
as of november
(in millions)
compensation and benefits
$
4,646
$
11,816
insurance-related
liabilities(1)
9,673
10,344
minority
interest(2)
1,643
7,265
income tax-related liabilities
2,865
2,546
employee interests in consolidated funds
2,187
accrued expenses and other payables
3,872
4,749
total
$
23,216
$
38,907
(1)
insurance-related liabilities are
set forth in the table below:
asofnovember
(in millions)
separate account liabilities
$
3,628
$
7,039
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims
4,778
2,142
contract holder account balances
reserves for guaranteed minimum death and income benefits
total insurance-related liabilities
$
9,673
$
10,344
separate account liabilities are supported by separate account
assets, representing segregated contract holder funds under
variable annuity and life insurance contracts. separate account
assets are included in cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes in the consolidated
statements of financial condition.
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims include
liabilities arising from reinsurance provided by the firm to
other insurers. the firm had a receivable for $1.30billion
as of both november2008 and november2007, related to
such reinsurance contracts, which is reported in
receivables from customers and counterparties in the
consolidated statements of financial condition. in addition, the
firm has ceded risks to reinsurers related to certain of its
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims and had a
receivable of $1.20billion and $785million as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively, related
to such reinsurance contracts, which is reported in
receivables from customers and counterparties in the
consolidated statements of financial condition. contracts to
cede risks to reinsurers do not relieve the firm from its
obligations to contract holders. liabilities for future benefits
and unpaid claims include $978million carried at fair
value under sfasno.159.
reserves for guaranteed minimum death and income benefits
represent a liability for the expected value of guaranteed
benefits in excess of projected annuity account balances. these
reserves are computed in accordance with aicpa
sop03-1
and are based on total payments expected to be made less total
fees expected to be assessed over the life of the contract.
(2)
includes $784million and
$5.95billion related to consolidated investment funds as
of november2008 and november2007, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note13.
employee
benefit plans
the firm sponsors various pension plans and certain other
postretirement benefit plans, primarily healthcare and life
insurance. the firm also provides certain benefits to former or
inactive employees prior to retirement.
defined
benefit pension plans and postretirement plans
employees of certain
non-u.s.subsidiaries
participate in various defined benefit pension plans. these
plans generally provide benefits based on years of credited
service and a percentage of the employees eligible
compensation. the firm maintains a defined benefit pension plan
for most u.k. employees. as of april2008, the u.k. defined
benefit plan was closed to new participants, but will continue
to accrue benefits for existing participants.
the firm also maintains a defined benefit pension plan for
substantially all u.s.employees hired prior to
november1,2003. as of november2004, this plan
was closed to new participants and frozen such that existing
participants would not accrue any additional benefits. in
addition, the firm maintains unfunded postretirement benefit
plans that provide medical and life insurance for eligible
retirees and their dependents covered under these programs.
on november30,2007, the firm adopted
sfasno.158 which requires an entity to recognize in
its statement of financial condition the funded status of its
defined benefit pension and postretirement plans, measured as
the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the
benefit obligation. upon adoption, sfasno.158
requires an entity to recognize previously unrecognized
actuarial gains and losses, prior service costs, and transition
obligations and assets within accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss) in the consolidated statements
of changes in shareholders equity. additional minimum
pension liabilities are derecognized upon adoption of the new
standard.
as a result of adopting sfasno.158, the firm
recorded increases of $59million and $253million to
other assets and other liabilities and accrued
expenses, respectively, and a $194million loss, net
of taxes, within accumulated other comprehensive
income/(loss).
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the following table provides a summary of the changes in the
plans benefit obligations and the fair value of assets for
november2008 and november2007 and a statement of the
funded status of the plans as of november2008 and
november2007:
as of or for the year ended november
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
benefit obligation
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
service cost
interest cost
plan amendments
(61
)
(1
)
actuarial loss/(gain)
(50
)
(261
)
(11
)
(79
)
benefits paid
(8
)
(2
)
(10
)
(7
)
(1
)
(7
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
(154
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
fair value of plan assets
balance, beginning of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
actual return on plan assets
(151
)
(77
)
firm contributions
employee contributions
benefits paid
(8
)
(1
)
(9
)
(7
)
(1
)
(7
)
effect of foreign exchange rates
(170
)
balance, end of year
$
$
$
$
$
$
funded status of plans
$
(74
)
$
$
(441
)
$
$
(134
)
$
(445
)
amounts recognized in the consolidated statements of financial
condition consist of:
other assets
$
$
$
$
$
$
other liabilities and accrued expenses
(74
)
(34
)
(441
)
(134
)
(445
)
net amount recognized
$
(74
)
$
$
(441
)
$
$
(134
)
$
(445
)
amounts recognized in
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) consist of:
actuarial loss/(gain)
$
$
(59
)
$
$
$
$
prior service cost/(credit)
(39
)
transition obligation/(asset)
(11
)
(14
)
total amount recognized
pre-tax
$
$
(53
)
$
$
$
$
the accumulated benefit obligation for all defined benefit
pension plans was $769million and $1.05billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
for plans in which the accumulated benefit obligation exceeded
plan assets, the aggregate projected benefit obligation and
accumulated benefit obligation was $426million and
$413million, respectively, as of november2008, and
$722million and $636million, respectively, as of
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
november2007. the fair value of plan assets for each of
these plans was $317million and $590million as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
the components of pension expense/(income) and postretirement
expense are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
u.s.pension
interest cost
$
$
$
expected return on plan assets
(33
)
(32
)
(26
)
net amortization
(1
)
total
$
(10
)
$
(9
)
$
non-u.s.pension
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
expected return on plan assets
(41
)
(36
)
(29
)
net amortization
total
$
$
$
postretirement
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
net amortization
total
$
$
$
estimated 2009 amortization from accumulated other comprehensive
income:
actuarial loss/(gain)
$
prior service cost/(credit)
transition obligation/(asset)
(2
)
total
$
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the weighted average assumptions used to develop the actuarial
present value of the projected benefit obligation and net
periodic pension cost are set forth below. these assumptions
represent a weighted average of the assumptions used for the
u.s.and
non-u.s.plans
and are based on the economic environment of each applicable
country.
year ended november
defined benefit pension plans
u.s.pension projected benefit obligation
discount rate
6.75
%
6.00
%
5.50
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
n/a
n/a
u.s.pension net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
6.00
5.50
5.25
rate of increase in future compensation levels
n/a
n/a
n/a
expected
long-term
rate of return on plan assets
7.50
7.50
7.50
non-u.s.pension
projected benefit obligation
discount rate
6.79
5.91
4.85
rate of increase in future compensation levels
3.85
5.38
4.98
non-u.s.pension
net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
5.91
4.85
4.81
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.38
4.98
4.75
expected
long-term
rate of return on plan assets
5.89
6.84
6.93
postretirement plans benefit obligation
discount rate
6.75
%
6.00
%
5.50
%
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
postretirement plans net periodic benefit cost
discount rate
6.00
5.50
5.25
rate of increase in future compensation levels
5.00
5.00
5.00
generally, the firm determined the discount rates for its
defined benefit plans by referencing indices for
long-term,
high-quality
bonds and ensuring that the discount rate does not exceed the
yield reported for those indices after adjustment for the
duration of the plans liabilities.
the firms approach in determining the
long-term
rate of return for plan assets is based upon historical
financial market relationships that have existed over time with
the presumption that this trend will generally remain constant
in the future.
for measurement purposes, an annual growth rate in the per
capita cost of covered healthcare benefits of 9.30% was assumed
for the year ending november2009. the rate was assumed to
decrease ratably to 5.00% for the year ending november2015
and remain at that level thereafter.
the assumed cost of healthcare has an effect on the amounts
reported for the firms postretirement plans. a 1% change
in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would have the
following effects:
1%increase
1%decrease
(in millions)
service plus interest costs
$
$
$
(9
)
$
(9
)
obligation
(70
)
(72
)
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the following table sets forth the composition of plan assets
for the u.s.and
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans by asset category:
as of november
u.s.
non-u.s.
u.s.
non-u.s.
pension
pension
pension
pension
equity securities
%
%
%
%
debt securities
other
total
%
%
%
%
the investment approach of the firms u.s.and major
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension plans involves employing a sufficient level of
flexibility to capture investment opportunities as they occur,
while maintaining reasonable parameters to ensure that prudence
and care are exercised in the execution of the investment
programs. the plans employ a total return on investment
approach, whereby a mix, which is broadly similar to the actual
asset allocation as of november2008, of equity securities,
debt securities and other assets, is targeted to maximize the
long-term
return on assets for a given level of risk. investment risk is
measured and monitored on an ongoing basis by the firms
retirement committee through periodic portfolio reviews,
meetings with investment managers and annual liability
measurements.
the firm expects to contribute a minimum of $73million to
its pension plans and $13million to its postretirement
plans in 2009.
the following table sets forth benefits projected to be paid
from the firms u.s.and
non-u.s.defined
benefit pension and postretirement plans (net of medicare
subsidy receipts) and reflects expected future service costs,
where appropriate:
u.s.
non-u.s.
post-
pension
pension
retirement
(in millions)
$
$
$
2014-2018
defined
contribution plans
the firm contributes to employer-sponsored u.s.and
non-u.s.defined
contribution plans. the firms contribution to these plans
was $208million, $258million and $230million
for the years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note14.
employee
incentive plans
stock
incentive plan
the firm sponsors a stock incentive plan, the goldman sachs
amended and restated stock incentive plan (amended sip), which
provides for grants of incentive stock options, nonqualified
stock options, stock appreciation rights, dividend equivalent
rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units, awards with
performance conditions and other
share-based
awards. in the second quarter of 2003, the amended sip was
approved by the firms shareholders, effective for grants
after april1,2003.
the total number of shares of common stock that may be issued
under the amended sip through 2008 may not exceed
250million shares and, in each year thereafter, may not
exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock,
determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding year,
increased by the number of shares available for awards in
previous years but not covered by awards granted in such years.
as of november2008 and november2007,
162.4million and 160.6million shares, respectively,
were available for grant under the amended sip.
other
compensation arrangements
the firm has maintained deferred compensation plans for eligible
employees. in general, under the plans, participants were able
to defer payment of a portion of their cash year-end
compensation. during the deferral period, participants were able
to notionally invest their deferrals in certain alternatives
available under the plans. generally, under current tax law,
participants are not subject to income tax on amounts deferred
or on any notional investment earnings until the returns are
distributed, and the firm is not entitled to a corresponding tax
deduction until the amounts are distributed. beginning with the
2008year, these deferred compensation plans were frozen
with respect to new contributions and the plans were terminated.
participants generally will receive distributions of their
benefits in 2009 except that no payments will be accelerated for
certain senior executives. the firm has recognized compensation
expense for the amounts deferred under these plans. as of
november2008 and november2007, $220million and
$281million, respectively, related to these plans was
included in other liabilities and accrued expenses
in the consolidated statements of financial condition.
the firm has a discount stock program through which
participating managing directors may be permitted to acquire
restricted stock units at an effective 25% discount (for
2008year-end compensation, the program was suspended, and
no individual was permitted to acquire discounted restricted
stock units thereunder). in prior years, the 25% discount was
effected by an additional grant of restricted stock units equal
to one-third
of the number of restricted stock units purchased by qualifying
participants. the purchased restricted stock units were 100%
vested when granted, but the shares underlying them generally
were subject to certain transfer restrictions (which were waived
in december2008 except for certain senior executives). the
shares underlying the restricted stock units that were granted
to effect the 25% discount generally vest in equal installments
on the second and third anniversaries following the grant date
and were not transferable before the third anniversary of the
grant date (transfer restrictions on vested awards were waived
in december2008 except for certain senior executives).
compensation expense related to these restricted stock units is
recognized over the vesting period. the total value of
restricted stock units granted for 2007 in order to effect the
25% discount was $66million.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
restricted
stock units
the firm issues restricted stock units to employees under the
amended sip, primarily in connection with year-end compensation
and acquisitions. restricted stock units are valued based on the
closing price of the underlying shares at the date of grant.
year-end restricted stock units generally vest and deliver as
outlined in the applicable restricted stock unit agreements. all
employee restricted stock unit agreements provide that vesting
is accelerated in certain circumstances, such as upon
retirement, death and extended absence. of the total restricted
stock units outstanding as of november2008 and
november2007, (i)12.0million units and
22.0million units, respectively, required future service
as a condition to the delivery of the underlying shares of
common stock and (ii)43.9million units and
51.6million units, respectively, did not require future
service. in all cases, delivery of the underlying shares of
common stock is conditioned on the grantees satisfying certain
vesting and other requirements outlined in the award agreements.
when delivering the underlying shares to employees, the firm
generally issues new shares of common stock. the activity
related to these restricted stock units is set forth below:
weighted average grant-date
restricted stock
fair value of restricted
units outstanding
stock units outstanding
future
no future
future
no future
service
service
service
service
required
required
required
required
outstanding,
november2007(1)
22,025,347
51,565,557
$
180.98
$
164.94
granted(2)(3)
1,787,746
103,474
154.32
154.13
forfeited
(898,950
)
(649,694
)
184.67
171.40
delivered(4)
(18,086,395
)
112.27
vested(3)
(10,950,279
)
10,950,279
152.06
152.06
outstanding, november2008
11,963,864
43,883,221
$
203.19
$
183.31
(1)
includes restricted stock units
granted to employees in december2007 as part of
compensation for fiscal 2007.
(2)
the weighted average grant-date
fair value of restricted stock units granted during the years
ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006 was $154.31, $224.13 and $196.99,
respectively.
(3)
the aggregate fair value of awards
vested during the years ended november2008,
november2007 and november2006 was
$1.03billion, $5.63billion and $4.40billion,
respectively.
(4)
includes restricted stock units
that were cash settled.
stock
options
stock options granted to employees generally vest as outlined in
the applicable stock option agreement and generally first become
exercisable on or after the third anniversary of the grant date.
other than the options granted in december2007 related to
2007 compensation, no options were granted during fiscal 2008.
year-end stock options for 2007 become exercisable in
january2011 and expire on november24,2017.
shares received on exercise prior to january2013 for
year-end 2007 options cannot be sold, transferred or otherwise
disposed of until january2013. all employee stock option
agreements provide that vesting is accelerated in certain
circumstances, such as upon retirement, death and extended
absence. in general, all stock options expire on the tenth
anniversary of the grant date, although they may be subject to
earlier termination or cancellation under certain circumstances
in accordance with the terms of the amended sip and the
applicable stock option agreement. the dilutive effect of the
firms outstanding stock options is included in
average common shares outstanding
diluted on the consolidated statements of earnings.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the activity related to these stock options is set forth below:
weighted
weighted
aggregate
average
options
average
intrinsic value
remaining
outstanding
exercise price
(in millions)
life (years)
outstanding,
november2007(1)
39,229,629
$
106.63
granted
exercised
(4,743,181
)
74.55
forfeited
(847,316
)
173.21
outstanding, november2008
33,639,132
$
109.47
$
4.23
exercisable, november2008
24,866,508
$
84.67
$
2.87
(1)
includes stock options granted to
employees in december2007 as part of compensation for
fiscal 2007, for which no future service was required.
the total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years
ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006 was $433million, $1.32billion and
$1.52billion, respectively.
the options outstanding as of november2008 are set forth
below:
weighted
weighted
average
options
average
remaining
exercise price
outstanding
exercise price
life (years)
$
45.00
$
59.99
1,285,788
$
52.97
0.50
60.00
74.99
75.00
89.99
11,898,382
81.03
2.93
90.00
104.99
11,682,338
91.86
3.07
105.00
119.99
120.00
134.99
2,791,500
131.64
7.00
135.00
194.99
195.00
209.99
5,981,124
202.27
8.56
outstanding, november2008
33,639,132
the weighted average fair value of options granted for 2007 and
2006 was $51.04 and $49.96 per option, respectively. fair value
was estimated as of the grant date based on a black-scholes
option-pricing model principally using the following weighted
average assumptions:
year ended november
2008(1)
risk-free
interest rate
n/a
4.0
%
4.6
%
expected volatility
n/a
35.0
27.5
dividend yield
n/a
0.7
0.7
expected life
n/a
7.5 years
7.5 years
(1)
there were no options granted
during fiscal 2008 other than those related to 2007 compensation
and included in the 2007 disclosures above.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the common stock underlying the options granted for 2007 and
2006 is subject to transfer restrictions for a period of
2years and 1year, respectively, from the date the
options become exercisable. the value of the common stock
underlying the options granted for 2007 and 2006 reflects a
liquidity discount of 24.0% and 17.5%, respectively, as a result
of these transfer restrictions. the liquidity discount was based
on the firms
pre-determined
written liquidity discount policies. the 7.5years expected
life of the options reflects the estimated impact of these sales
restrictions on the life of the awards.
the following table sets forth
share-based
compensation and the related tax benefit:
year ended november
(in millions)
share-based
compensation
$
1,587
$
4,549
$
3,669
excess tax benefit related to options exercised
excess tax benefit related to
share-based
compensation(1)
(1)
represents the tax benefit,
recognized in additional
paid-in
capital, on stock options exercised and the delivery of common
stock underlying restricted stock units.
as of november2008, there was $1.25billion of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested
share-based
compensation arrangements. this cost is expected to be
recognized over a weighted average period of 1.84years.
on december17,2008 the firm granted
20.6million restricted stock units and 36.0million
stock options to its employees. the restricted stock units and
options require future service and are subject to additional
vesting conditions as outlined in the award agreements.
generally shares underlying rsus are delivered and stock options
become exercisable shortly after vesting, but are subject to
certain transfer restrictions. these grants are not included in
the above tables.
note15.
transactions
with affiliated funds
the firm has formed numerous nonconsolidated investment funds
with
third-party
investors. the firm generally acts as the investment manager for
these funds and, as such, is entitled to receive management fees
and, in certain cases, advisory fees, incentive fees or
overrides from these funds. these fees amounted to
$3.14billion, $3.62billion and $3.37billion
for the years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively. as of november2008 and
november2007, the fees receivable from these funds were
$861million and $596million, respectively.
additionally, the firm may invest alongside the
third-party
investors in certain funds. the aggregate carrying value of the
firms interests in these funds was $14.45billion and
$12.90billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. in the ordinary course of
business, the firm may also engage in other activities with
these funds, including, among others, securities lending, trade
execution, trading, custody, and acquisition and bridge
financing. see note8 for the firms commitments
related to these funds.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note16.
income
taxes
the components of the net tax expense reflected in the
consolidated statements of earnings are set forth below:
year ended november
(in millions)
current taxes
u.s.federal
$
(278
)
$
2,934
$
3,736
state and local
non-u.s.
1,964
2,554
2,165
total current tax expense
1,777
5,876
6,528
deferred taxes
u.s.federal
(880
)
(635
)
state and local
(92
)
(262
)
non-u.s.
(791
)
(89
)
(608
)
total deferred tax (benefit)/expense
(1,763
)
(1,505
)
net tax expense
$
$
6,005
$
5,023
deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of
assets and liabilities. these temporary differences result in
taxable or deductible amounts in future years and are measured
using the tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such
differences are expected to reverse.
significant components of the firms deferred tax assets
and liabilities are set forth below:
as of november
(in millions)
deferred tax assets
compensation and benefits
$
3,732
$
3,869
fin48 asset
foreign tax credits
unrealized losses
other, net
1,481
6,266
4,866
valuation
allowance(1)
(93
)
(112
)
total deferred tax
assets(2)
$
6,173
$
4,754
deferred tax liabilities
depreciation and amortization
1,558
1,208
unrealized gains
1,279
total deferred tax
liabilities(2)
$
1,558
$
2,487
(1)
relates primarily to the ability to
utilize losses in various tax jurisdictions.
(2)
before netting within tax
jurisdictions.
the firm permanently reinvests eligible earnings of certain
foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly, does not accrue any
u.s.income taxes that would arise if such earnings were
repatriated. as of november2008, this policy resulted in
an unrecognized net deferred tax liability of $1.1billion
attributable to reinvested earnings of $11.6billion.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
during 2008, the valuation allowance was decreased by
$19million, primarily due to the utilization of net
operating losses previously considered more likely than not to
expire unused. net operating loss carryforwards were
$2.77billion and $2.12billion as of
november2008 and november2007, respectively.
the firm had federal net operating loss carryforwards, primarily
resulting from acquisitions, of $172million and
$139million as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. the firm recorded a related
net deferred income tax asset of $56million and
$44million as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. these carryforwards are
subject to annual limitations on utilization and will begin to
expire in 2016.
the firm had state and local net operating loss carryforwards,
primarily resulting from acquisitions, of $2.59billion and
$1.62billion as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. the firm recorded a related
net deferred income tax asset of $97million and
$21million as of november2008 and
november2007, respectively. these carryforwards are
subject to annual limitations on utilization and will begin to
expire in 2012.
the firm had foreign net operating loss carryforwards of
$5million and $306million as of november2008
and november2007, respectively. the firm recorded a
related net deferred income tax asset of $84million as of
november2007. these carryforwards are subject to
limitation on utilization and can be carried forward
indefinitely.
the firm had foreign tax credit carryforwards of
$334million as of november2008. these carryforwards
are subject to limitation on utilization and will begin to
expire in 2018.
the firm adopted the provisions of fin48 as of
december1,2007 and recorded a transition adjustment
resulting in a reduction of $201million to beginning
retained earnings.
the following table sets forth the changes in the firms
unrecognized tax benefits from december1,2007 to
november28,2008 (in millions):
balance at december1,2007
$
1,042
increases based on tax positions related to the current year
increases based on tax positions related to prior years
decreases related to tax positions of prior years
(67
)
decreases related to settlements
(38
)
balance at november2008
$
1,373
as of november2008, the firms liability for
unrecognized tax benefits reported in other liabilities
and accrued expenses in the consolidated statement of
financial condition was $1.4billion. the firm reported a
related deferred tax asset of $625million in other
assets in the consolidated statement of financial
condition. if recognized, the net tax benefit of
$748million would reduce the firms effective income
tax rate. as of november2008, the firms accrued
liability for interest expense related to income tax matters and
income tax penalties was $110.9million. the firm reports
interest expense related to income tax matters in
provision for taxes in the consolidated statements
of earnings and income tax penalties in other
expenses in the consolidated statements of earnings. the
firm recognized $36.7million of interest and income tax
penalties for the year ended november2008. the firm does
not expect unrecognized tax benefits to change significantly
during the twelve months subsequent to
november28,2008.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the firm is subject to examination by the u.s.internal
revenue service (irs) and other taxing authorities in
jurisdictions where the firm has significant business
operations, such as the united kingdom, japan, hong kong, korea
and various states, such as new york. the tax years under
examination vary by jurisdiction. the firm does not expect that
potential additional assessments from these examinations will be
material to its results of operations.
below is a table of the earliest tax years that remain subject
to examination by major jurisdiction:
earliest
tax year
subject to
jurisdiction
examination
u.s.federal
(1)
new york state and city
(2)
united kingdom
japan
hong kong
korea
(1)
irs examination of fiscal 2005,
2006 and 2007 began during 2008.
(2)
new york state and city examination
of fiscal 2004, 2005 and 2006 began in 2008.
all years subsequent to the above years remain open to
examination by the taxing authorities. the firm believes that
the liability for unrecognized tax benefits it has established
is adequate in relation to the potential for additional
assessments. the resolution of tax matters is not expected to
have a material effect on the firms financial condition
but may be material to the firms operating results for a
particular period, depending, in part, upon the operating
results for that period.
a reconciliation of the u.s.federal statutory income tax
rate to the firms effective income tax rate is set forth
below:
year ended november
u.s.federal statutory income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
increase related to state and local taxes, net of
u.s.income tax effects
1.8
1.6
tax credits
(4.3
)
(0.5
)
(0.6
)
foreign operations
(29.8
)
(1.6
)
(1.3
)
tax-exempt
income, including dividends
(5.9
)
(0.4
)
(0.4
)
other
5.6
(1)
(0.2
)(2)
0.2
effective income tax rate
0.6
%
34.1
%
34.5
%
(1)
primarily includes the effect of
fin48 liability increase.
(2)
primarily includes the effect of
audit settlements.
tax benefits of approximately $645million in
november2008, $908million in november2007 and
$653million in november2006, related to the delivery
of common stock underlying restricted stock units and the
exercise of options, were credited directly to additional
paid-in
capital in the consolidated statements of financial
condition and changes in shareholders equity.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note17.
regulation
on september21,2008, group inc. became a bank
holding company under the u.s.bank holding company act of
1956. as of that date, the federal reserve board became the
primary u.s.regulator of group inc., as a consolidated
entity. prior to september21,2008, group inc. was
subject to regulation by the sec as a consolidated supervised
entity (cse) and was subject to
group-wide
supervision and examination by the sec and to minimum capital
standards on a consolidated basis. on
september26,2008, the sec announced that it was
ending the cse program. the firms principal
u.s.broker-dealer,
gs&co., remains subject to regulation by the sec.
the firm is subject to regulatory capital requirements
administered by the u.s.federal banking agencies. the
firms bank depository institution subsidiaries, including
gs bank usa, are subject to similar capital guidelines. under
the federal reserve boards capital adequacy guidelines and
the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action (pca) that
is applicable to gsbank usa, the firm and its bank
depository institution subsidiaries must meet specific capital
guidelines that involve quantitative measures of assets,
liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items as calculated
under regulatory reporting practices. the firm and its bank
depository institution subsidiaries capital amounts, as
well as gsbank usas pca classification, are also
subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about
components, risk weightings and other factors. the firm
anticipates reporting capital ratios as follows:
before group inc. became a bank holding company, it was subject
to capital guidelines by the sec as a cse that were generally
consistent with those set out in the revised framework for the
international convergence of capital measurement and capital
standards issued by the basel committee on banking supervision
(baselii). the firm currently computes and reports its
firmwide capital ratios in accordance with the baselii
requirements as applicable to the firm when it was regulated as
a cse for the purpose of assessing the adequacy of its capital.
under the basel ii framework as it applied to the firm when it
was regulated as a cse, the firm evaluates its tier1
capital and total allowable capital as a percentage of
risk-weighted
assets (rwas). as of november2008, the firms total
capital ratio (total allowable capital as a percentage of rwas)
was 18.9% and the firms tier1 ratio (tier1
capital as a percentage of rwas) was 15.6%, in each case
calculated under the basel ii framework as it applied to the
firm when it was regulated as a cse. the firm expects to
continue to report to investors for a period of time its
baselii capital ratios as applicable to it when it was
regulated as acse.
the regulatory capital guidelines currently applicable to bank
holding companies are based on the capital accord of the basel
committee on banking supervision (baseli), with
baselii to be phased in over time. the firm is currently
working with the federal reserve board to put in place the
appropriate reporting and compliance mechanisms and
methodologies to allow reporting of the baseli capital
ratios as of the end of march 2009.
in addition, the firm is currently working to implement the
basel ii framework as applicable to it as a bank holding company
(as opposed to as a cse). u.s.banking regulators have
incorporated the basel ii framework into the existing
risk-based
capital requirements by requiring that internationally active
banking organizations, such as group inc., transition to basel
ii over the next several years.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the federal reserve board also has established minimum leverage
ratio guidelines. the firm was not subject to these guidelines
before becoming a bank holding company and, accordingly, is
currently working with the federal reserve board to finalize its
methodology for calculating this ratio. the tier1 leverage
ratio is defined as tier1 capital (as applicable to the
firm as a bank holding company) divided by adjusted average
total assets (which includes adjustments for disallowed goodwill
and certain intangible assets). the minimum tier1 leverage
ratio is 3% for bank holding companies that have received the
highest supervisory rating under federal reserve board
guidelines or that have implemented the federal reserve
boards
risk-based
capital measure for market risk. other bank holding companies
must have a minimum tier1 leverage ratio of 4%. bank
holding companies may be expected to maintain ratios well above
the minimum levels, depending upon their particular condition,
risk profile and growth plans. as of november2008, the
firms estimated tier1 leverage ratio was 6.1%. this
ratio represents a preliminary estimate and may be revised in
subsequent filings as the firm continues to work with the
federal reserve board to finalize the methodology for the
calculation.
the firms u.s.regulated
broker-dealer
subsidiaries include gs&co. and goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec). gs&co. and
gsec are registered
u.s.broker-dealers
and futures commission merchants subject to
rule15c3-1
of the sec and rule1.17 of the commodity futures trading
commission, which specify uniform minimum net capital
requirements, as defined, for their registrants, and also
effectively require that a significant part of the
registrants assets be kept in relatively liquid form.
gs&co. and gsec have elected to compute their minimum
capital requirements in accordance with the alternative
net capital requirement as permitted by
rule15c3-1.
as of november2008, gs&co. had regulatory net
capital, as defined by
rule15c3-1,
of $10.92billion, which exceeded the amounts required by
$8.87billion. as of november2008, gsec had
regulatory net capital, as defined by
rule15c3-1,
of $1.38billion, which exceeded the amounts required by
$1.29billion. in addition to its alternative minimum net
capital requirements, gs&co. is also required to hold
tentative net capital in excess of $1billion and net
capital in excess of $500million in accordance with the
market and credit risk standards of appendixe of
rule15c3-1.
gs&co. is also required to notify the sec in the event that
its tentative net capital is less than $5billion. as of
november2008 and november2007, gs&co. had
tentative net capital and net capital in excess of both the
minimum and the notification requirements.
as of november2008, gs bank usa, a new york
state-chartered bank and a member of the federal reserve system
and the fdic, is regulated by the federal reserve board and the
new york state banking department and is subject to minimum
capital requirements that (subject to certain exceptions) are
similar to those applicable to bank holding companies. gs bank
usa was formed in november2008 through the merger of the
firms existing utah industrial bank (named gs bank usa)
into the firms new york limited purpose trust company,
with the surviving company taking the name gs bank usa. as of
november2007, gs bank usas predecessor was a wholly
owned industrial bank regulated by the utah department of
financial institutions, was a member of the fdic and was subject
to minimum capital requirements. the firm computes the capital
ratios for gsbank usa in accordance with the baseli
framework for purposes of assessing the adequacy of its capital.
in order to be considered a well capitalized
depository institution under the federal reserve board
guidelines, gs bank usa must maintain a tier1 capital
ratio of at least 6%, a total capital ratio of at least 10% and
a tier1 leverage ratio of at least 5%. in connection with
the november 2008 asset transfer described below, gs bank usa
agreed with the federal reserve board to minimum capital ratios
in excess of these well capitalized levels.
accordingly, for a period of time, gsbank usa is expected
to maintain a tier1 capital ratio of at least 8%, a total
capital ratio of at least 11% and a tier1 leverage ratio
of at least 6%. in november2008, the firm contributed
subsidiaries with an aggregate of $117.16billion in assets
into gsbank usa (which brought total assets in
gsbank usa
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
to $145.06billion as of november 2008). as a result, the
firm is currently working with the federal reserve board to
finalize its methodology for the baseli calculations. as
of november 2008, under baseli, gs bank usas
estimated tier1 capital ratio was 8.9% and estimated total
capital ratio was 11.6%. in addition, gs bank usas
estimated tier1 leverage ratio was9.1%.
the deposits of gs bank usa are insured by the fdic to the
extent provided by law. the federal reserve board requires
depository institutions to maintain cash reserves with a federal
reserve bank. the reserve balance deposited by the firms
depository institution subsidiaries held at the federal reserve
bank was approximately $94million and $32million as
of november2008 and november2007, respectively. gs
bank europe, a wholly owned credit institution, is regulated by
the irish financial services regulatory authority and is subject
to minimum capital requirements. as of november2008, gs
bank usa and gs bank europe were both in compliance with all
regulatory capital requirements.
transactions between gs bank usa and group inc. and its
subsidiaries and affiliates (other than, generally, subsidiaries
of gs bank usa) are regulated by the federal reserve board.
these regulations generally limit the types and amounts of
transactions (including loans to and borrowings from gs bank
usa) that may take place and generally require those
transactions to be on an arms-length basis.
the firm has u.s.insurance subsidiaries that are subject
to state insurance regulation and oversight in the states in
which they are domiciled and in the other states in which they
are licensed. in addition, certain of the firms insurance
subsidiaries outside of the u.s.are regulated by the
bermuda monetary authority and by lloyds (which is, in
turn, regulated by the u.k.s financial services authority
(fsa)). the firms insurance subsidiaries were in
compliance with all regulatory capital requirements as of
november2008 and november2007.
the firms principal
non-u.s.regulated
subsidiaries include goldman sachs international (gsi) and
goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl). gsi, the firms
regulated u.k.
broker-dealer,
is subject to the capital requirements of the fsa. gsjcl, the
firms regulated japanese
broker-dealer,
is subject to the capital requirements imposed by japans
financial services agency. as of november2008 and
november2007, gsi and gsjcl were in compliance with their
local capital adequacy requirements. certain other
non-u.s.subsidiaries
of the firm are also subject to capital adequacy requirements
promulgated by authorities of the countries in which they
operate. as of november2008 and november2007, these
subsidiaries were in compliance with their local capital
adequacy requirements.
the regulatory requirements referred to above restrict group
inc.s ability to withdraw capital from its regulated
subsidiaries. as of november2008 and november2007,
approximately $26.92billion and $18.10billion,
respectively, of net assets of regulated subsidiaries were
restricted as to the payment of dividends to group inc. in
addition to limitations on the payment of dividends imposed by
federal and state laws, the federal reserve board and the fdic
have authority to prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends
by the banking organizations they supervise (including
gsbank usa) if, in the federal reserve boards
opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or
unsound practice in the light of the financial condition of the
banking organization. as of november 2008, gs bank usa was not
able to declare dividends to group inc. without regulatory
approval.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note18.
business
segments
in reporting to management, the firms operating results
are categorized into the following three business segments:
investment banking, trading and principal investments, and asset
management and securities services.
basis of
presentation
in reporting segments, certain of the firms business lines
have been aggregated where they have similar economic
characteristics and are similar in each of the following areas:
(i)the nature of the services they provide,
(ii)their methods of distribution, (iii)the types of
clients they serve and (iv)the regulatory environments in
which they operate.
the cost drivers of the firm taken as a whole
compensation, headcount and levels of business
activity are broadly similar in each of the
firms business segments. compensation and benefits
expenses within the firms segments reflect, among other
factors, the overall performance of the firm as well as the
performance of individual business units. consequently,
pre-tax
margins in one segment of the firms business may be
significantly affected by the performance of the firms
other business segments.
the firm allocates revenues and expenses among the three
business segments. due to the integrated nature of these
segments, estimates and judgments have been made in allocating
certain revenue and expense items. transactions between segments
are based on specific criteria or approximate
third-party
rates. total operating expenses include corporate items that
have not been allocated to individual business segments. the
allocation process is based on the manner in which management
views the business of the firm.
the segment information presented in the table below is prepared
according to the following methodologies:
revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are
included in determining
pre-tax
earnings.
net revenues in the firms segments include allocations of
interest income and interest expense to specific securities,
commodities and other positions in relation to the cash
generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying
positions. net interest is included within segment net revenues
as it is consistent with the way in which management assesses
segment performance.
overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments
are allocated ratably based on direct segment expenses.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
segment
operating results
management believes that the following information provides a
reasonable representation of each segments contribution to
consolidated
pre-tax
earnings and total assets:
as of or for the year ended november
(in millions)
investment
net revenues
$
5,185
$
7,555
$
5,629
banking
operating expenses
3,143
4,985
4,062
pre-tax earnings
$
2,042
$
2,570
$
1,567
segment assets
$
1,948
$
5,526
$
4,967
trading and
net revenues
$
9,063
$
31,226
$
25,562
principal
operating expenses
11,808
17,998
14,962
investments
pre-tax earnings/(loss)
$
(2,745
)
$
13,228
$
10,600
segment assets
$
645,267
$
744,647
$
566,499
asset management
net revenues
$
7,974
$
7,206
$
6,474
and securities
operating expenses
4,939
5,363
4,036
services
pre-tax earnings
$
3,035
$
1,843
$
2,438
segment assets
$
237,332
$
369,623
$
266,735
total
net
revenues(1)(2)
$
22,222
$
45,987
$
37,665
operating
expenses(3)
19,886
28,383
23,105
pre-tax
earnings(4)
$
2,336
$
17,604
$
14,560
total assets
$
884,547
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
(1)
net revenues include net interest
as set forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
1,512
1,535
asset management and securities services
3,302
2,475
1,947
total net interest
$
4,276
$
3,987
$
3,498
(2)
net revenues includes
non-interest
income as set forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking fees
$
5,179
$
7,555
$
5,613
equities commissions
4,998
4,579
3,518
asset management and other fees
4,672
4,731
4,527
trading and principal investments revenues
3,097
25,135
20,509
total
non-interest
income
$
17,946
$
42,000
$
34,167
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
trading and principal investments revenues include
$(61)million, $6million and $(7)million for
the years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively, of realized gains/(losses) on
securities held within the firms insurance subsidiaries
which are accounted for as
available-for-sale
under sfasno.115.
(3)
operating expenses include net
provisions for a number of litigation and regulatory proceedings
of $(4)million, $37million and $45million for
the years ended november2008, november2007 and
november2006, respectively, that have not been allocated
to the firms segments.
(4)
pre-tax
earnings include total depreciation and amortization as set
forth in the table below:
year ended november
(in millions)
investment banking
$
$
$
trading and principal investments
1,161
asset management and securities services
total depreciation and amortization
$
1,625
$
1,167
$
geographic
information
due to the highly integrated nature of international financial
markets, the firm manages its businesses based on the
profitability of the enterprise as a whole. since a significant
portion of the firms activities require cross-border
coordination in order to facilitate the needs of the firms
clients, the methodology for allocating the firms
profitability to geographic regions is dependent on the judgment
of management.
geographic results are generally allocated as follows:
investment banking: location of the client and investment
banking team.
fixed income, currency and commodities, and equities: location
of the trading desk.
principal investments: location of the investment.
asset management: location of the sales team.
securities services: location of the primary market for the
underlying security.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
the following table sets forth the total net revenues,
pre-tax
earnings and net earnings of the firm and its consolidated
subsidiaries by geographic region allocated on the methodology
described above, as well as the percentage of total net
revenues,
pre-tax
earnings and net earnings for each geographic region:
year ended november
($ in millions)
net revenues
americas(1)
$
15,485
%
$
23,412
%
$
20,361
%
emea(2)
5,910
13,538
9,354
asia
9,037
7,950
total net revenues
$
22,222
%
$
45,987
%
$
37,665
%
pre-tax
earnings
americas(1)
$
4,879
n.m.
%
$
7,673
%
$
7,515
%
emea(2)
n.m.
5,458
3,075
asia
(2,716
)
n.m.
4,510
4,015
corporate(3)
(37
)
(45
)
total
pre-tax
earnings
$
2,336
%
$
17,604
%
$
14,560
%
net earnings
americas(1)
$
3,371
n.m.
%
$
4,981
%
$
4,855
%
emea(2)
n.m.
3,735
2,117
asia
(1,746
)
n.m.
2,907
2,594
corporate(3)
(24
)
(29
)
total net earnings
$
2,322
%
$
11,599
%
$
9,537
%
(1)
substantially all relates to the
u.s.
(2)
emea (europe, middle east and
africa).
(3)
consists of net provisions for a
number of litigation and regulatory proceedings.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note19.
interest
income and interest expense
the following table sets forth the details of the firms
interest income and interest expense:
year ended november
(in millions)
interest
income(1)
deposits with banks
$
$
$
securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to
resell, at fair value, and federal funds sold
11,746
18,013
9,850
trading assets
13,150
13,120
10,717
other
interest(2)
10,549
14,716
14,460
total interest income
$
35,633
$
45,968
$
35,186
interest expense
deposits
$
$
$
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to
repurchase, at fair value
7,414
12,612
9,525
trading liabilities
2,789
3,866
3,125
short-term
borrowings(3)
1,864
3,398
2,905
long-term
borrowings(4)
13,687
14,147
9,777
other
interest(5)
4,847
7,281
6,210
total interest expense
$
31,357
$
41,981
$
31,688
net interest income
$
4,276
$
3,987
$
3,498
(1)
interest income is recorded on an
accrual basis based on contractual interest rates.
(2)
primarily includes interest income
on customer debit balances, securities borrowed and other
interest-earning assets.
(3)
includes interest on unsecured
short-term
borrowings and
short-term
other secured financings.
(4)
includes interest on unsecured
long-term
borrowings and
long-term
other secured financings.
(5)
primarily includes interest expense
on customer credit balances, securities loaned and other
interest-bearing liabilities.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note20.
parent
company
group
inc. condensed statements of earnings
year ended november
(in millions)
revenues
dividends from bank
subsidiary(1)
$
2,922
$
$
dividends from nonbank subsidiaries
3,716
4,273
5,076
undistributed earnings/(loss) of subsidiaries
(3,971
)
6,708
4,516
principal
investments(2)
(2,886
)
2,062
1,951
interest
income(2)
7,167
9,049
7,231
total revenues
6,948
22,110
19,059
interest
expense(2)
8,229
8,914
6,760
revenues, net of interest expense
(1,281
)
13,196
12,299
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other
expenses(2)
total operating expenses
1,061
pre-tax
earnings/(loss)
(1,874
)
12,135
11,715
provision/(benefit) for taxes
(4,196
)
2,178
net earnings
2,322
11,599
9,537
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to
common shareholders
$
2,041
$
11,407
$
9,398
group
inc. condensed statements of financial
condition
as of november
(in millions)
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,035
$
loans to and receivables from
subsidiaries(2)
bank
subsidiary(1)
19,247
1,626
nonbank subsidiaries
157,086
174,589
investments in subsidiaries and
associates(2)
bank
subsidiary(1)
13,322
4,028
nonbank subsidiaries
38,375
36,333
trading assets, at fair value
40,171
35,614
other
assets(2)
10,414
6,929
total assets
$
279,650
$
259,181
liabilities and shareholders equity
unsecured
short-term
borrowings(3)
with third parties
$
37,941
$
46,577
with subsidiaries
7,462
5,137
payables to subsidiaries
trading liabilities, at fair value
3,530
1,971
other liabilities
5,247
5,038
unsecured
long-term
borrowings(4)
with third
parties(2)
158,472
155,351
with
subsidiaries(2)
(5)
1,875
1,915
total liabilities
215,281
216,381
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock
16,471
3,100
common stock
restricted stock units and employee stock options
9,284
9,302
additional
paid-in
capital
31,071
22,027
retained earnings
39,913
38,642
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(202
)
(118
)
common stock held in treasury, at cost
(32,175
)
(30,159
)
total shareholders equity
64,369
42,800
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$
279,650
$
259,181
group
inc. condensed statements of cash flows
year ended november
(in millions)
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$
2,322
$
11,599
$
9,537
non-cash
items included in net earnings
undistributed (earnings)/loss of
subsidiaries(2)
3,971
(6,708
)
(4,516
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
(2,178
)
share-based
compensation
changes in operating assets and liabilities
trading assets, at fair value
(4,661
)
(17,795
)
(7,763
)
trading liabilities, at fair value
1,559
(85
)
net receivables from subsidiaries
(12,177
)
2,396
1,883
other, net
(6,588
)
5,448
4,187
net cash provided by/(used for) operating activities
(17,711
)
(3,627
)
3,929
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements
and equipment
(49
)
(29
)
proceeds from sales of property, leasehold
improvements and equipment
issuance of short-term loans to subsidiaries,
net of repayments
3,701
(22,668
)
(12,953
)
issuance of term loans to subsidiaries
(14,242
)
(48,299
)
(12,362
)
repayments of term loans by subsidiaries
24,925
41,143
3,967
dividends
received(2)
6,638
4,291
5,361
capital contributions to subsidiaries,
net(2)
(22,245
)
(4,517
)
(7,898
)
net cash used for investing activities
(1,272
)
(30,068
)
(23,855
)
cash flows from financing activities
unsecured
short-term
borrowings, net
(10,564
)
3,255
(6,621
)
other secured financing
(short-term),
net
(380
)
proceeds from issuance of
long-term
borrowings
35,645
53,041
44,043
repayment of
long-term
borrowings, including the current portion
(23,959
)
(13,984
)
(12,590
)
common stock repurchased
(2,034
)
(8,956
)
(7,817
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock,
preferred stock and restricted stock units
(850
)
(831
)
(754
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock
6,105
1,613
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock,
net of issuance costs
13,366
1,349
proceeds from issuance of common stock warrants
1,633
excess tax benefit related to
share-based
compensation
cash settlement of
share-based
compensation
(1
)
(137
)
net cash provided by financing activities
19,956
33,752
19,930
net increase in cash and cash equivalents
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$
1,035
$
$
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for
third-party
interest, net of capitalized interest, were $7.18billion,
$7.78billion and $6.11billion for the years ended
november2008, november2007 and november2006,
respectively.
cash payments for income taxes, net
of refunds, were $99million, $3.27billion and
$2.86billion for the years ended november2008,
november2007 and november2006, respectively.
(1)
gs bank usa. for purposes of identifying bank subsidiaries, the
reorganization described in note 17 is given effect as of the
earliest reporting period in this disclosure.
(2)
prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the current
presentation.
(3)
includes $11.67billion and $28.69billion at fair
value as of november2008 and november2007,
respectively.
(4)
includes $10.90billion and $10.29billion at fair
value as of november2008 and november2007,
respectively.
(5)
as of november 2008, unsecured
long-term
borrowings with subsidiaries by maturity date are
$506million in 2009, $512million in 2010,
$184million in 2011, $126million in 2012,
$142million in 2013 and $405million in
2014-thereafter.
table of contents
the goldman sachs
group, inc. and subsidiaries
notesto
consolidated financial statements(continued)
note21.
subsequent
events
on december15,2008, the board approved a change in
the firms fiscal year-end from the last friday of november
to the last friday of december. the change is effective for the
firms 2009 fiscal year. the firms 2009 fiscal year
began december27,2008 and will end
december25,2009, resulting in a
one-month
transition period that began november29,2008 and
ended december26,2008.
in december2008, there was continued deterioration in the
credit of lyondellbasell finance company, to which the firm had
provided bridge loan financing. on january6,2009,
certain legal entities within the lyondellbasell industries af
s.c.a. group filed for bankruptcy. as a result, the firm
incurred a loss of approximately $850million in
december2008 from marking the bridge and bank loan
facilities held in lyondellbasell finance company to expected
recovery levels.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
quarterly results
(unaudited)
the following represents the firms unaudited quarterly
results for 2008 and 2007. these quarterly results were prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
reflect all adjustments that are, in the opinion of management,
necessary for a fair statement of the results. these adjustments
are of a normal recurring nature.
2008 quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
18,629
$
17,643
$
13,625
$
3,682
interest expense
10,294
8,221
7,582
5,260
revenues, net of interest expense
8,335
9,422
6,043
(1,578
)
operating
expenses(1)
6,192
6,590
5,083
2,021
pre-tax
earnings/(loss)
2,143
2,832
(3,599
)
provision/(benefit) for taxes
(1,478
)
net earnings/(loss)
1,511
2,087
(2,121
)
preferred stock dividends
net earnings/(loss) applicable to common shareholders
$
1,467
$
2,051
$
$
(2,287
)
earnings/(loss) per common share
basic
$
3.39
$
4.80
$
1.89
$
(4.97
)
diluted
3.23
4.58
1.81
(4.97
)
dividends declared and paid per common share
0.35
0.35
0.35
0.35
2007 quarter
first
second
third
fourth
(in millions, except per share data)
total revenues
$
22,280
$
20,351
$
23,803
$
21,534
interest expense
9,550
10,169
11,469
10,793
revenues, net of interest expense
12,730
10,182
12,334
10,741
operating
expenses(1)
7,871
6,751
8,075
5,686
pre-tax
earnings
4,859
3,431
4,259
5,055
provision for taxes
1,662
1,098
1,405
1,840
net earnings
3,197
2,333
2,854
3,215
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$
3,148
$
2,287
$
2,806
$
3,166
earnings per common share
basic
$
7.08
$
5.25
$
6.54
$
7.49
diluted
6.67
4.93
6.13
7.01
dividends declared and paid per common share
0.35
0.35
0.35
0.35
(1)
the timing and magnitude of changes
in the firms bonus accruals can have a significant effect
on results in a given quarter.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
common stock
price range
the following table sets forth, for the quarters indicated, the
high and low sales prices per share of the firms common
stock.
sales price
high
low
high
low
high
low
first quarter
$
229.35
$
169.00
$
222.75
$
191.50
$
146.35
$
124.23
second quarter
203.39
140.27
232.41
189.85
169.31
139.18
third quarter
190.04
152.25
233.97
157.38
157.00
136.79
fourth quarter
172.45
47.41
250.70
175.00
203.35
145.66
as of january16, 2009, there were 9,909 holders of record
of the firms common stock.
on january16, 2009, the last reported sales price for the
firms common stock on the new york stock exchange was
$73.05 per share.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
selected
financial data
as of or for the year ended november
income statement data (in millions)
total revenues
$
53,579
$
87,968
$
69,353
$
43,391
$
29,839
interest expense
31,357
41,981
31,688
18,153
8,888
revenues, net of interest expense
22,222
45,987
37,665
25,238
20,951
compensation and benefits
10,934
20,190
16,457
11,758
9,681
other operating expenses
8,952
8,193
6,648
5,207
4,594
pre-tax
earnings
$
2,336
$
17,604
$
14,560
$
8,273
$
6,676
balance sheet data (in millions)
total assets
$
884,547
$
1,119,796
$
838,201
$
706,804
$
531,379
other secured financings
(long-term)
17,458
33,300
26,134
15,669
12,087
unsecured
long-term
borrowings
168,220
164,174
122,842
84,338
68,609
total liabilities
820,178
1,076,996
802,415
678,802
506,300
total shareholders equity
64,369
42,800
35,786
28,002
25,079
common share data (in millions,
except per share amounts)
earnings per common share
basic
$
4.67
$
26.34
$
20.93
$
11.73
$
9.30
diluted
4.47
24.73
19.69
11.21
8.92
dividends declared and paid per common share
1.40
1.40
1.30
1.00
1.00
book value per common
share(1)
98.68
90.43
72.62
57.02
50.77
average common shares outstanding
basic
437.0
433.0
449.0
478.1
489.5
diluted
456.2
461.2
477.4
500.2
510.5
selected data (unaudited)
employees
americas
17,276
17,383
15,477
14,466
13,846
non-americas
12,791
13,139
10,990
9,157
7,890
total
employees(2)
30,067
30,522
26,467
23,623
21,736
assets under management (in
billions)(3)
asset class
alternative
investments(4)
$
$
$
$
$
equity
fixed income
total
non-money
market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$
$
$
$
$
(1)
book value per common share is based on common shares
outstanding, including restricted stock units granted to
employees with no future service requirements, of
485.4million, 439.0million, 450.1million,
460.4million and 494.0million as of
november2008, november2007, november2006,
november2005 and november2004, respectively.
(2)
excludes 4,671, 4,572, 3,868, 7,382 and 485 employees as of
november2008, november2007, november2006,
november2005 and november2004, respectively, of
consolidated entities held for investment purposes.
(3)
substantially all assets under management are valued as of
calendar month-end.
(4)
primarily includes hedge funds, private equity, real estate,
currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
statistical
disclosures
distribution of assets, liabilities and shareholders
equity
the following table sets forth a summary of consolidated average
balances and interest rates for the years ended
november2008, november2007 and november2006.
for the year ended november
average
average
average
average
average
average
balance
interest
rate
balance
interest
rate
balance
interest
rate
(in millions, except rates)
assets
deposits with banks
$
5,887
$
3.19
%
$
3,516
$
3.38
%
$
3,728
$
4.27
%
u.s.
1,541
2.66
3.10
1,351
2.66
non-u.s.
4,346
3.38
2,775
3.46
2,377
5.17
securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to
resell, at fair value, and federal funds sold
421,157
11,746
2.79
348,691
18,013
5.17
308,509
9,850
3.19
u.s.
331,043
8,791
2.66
279,456
15,449
5.53
240,263
8,061
3.36
non-u.s.
90,114
2,955
3.28
69,235
2,564
3.70
68,246
1,789
2.62
trading
assets(1)(2)
328,208
13,150
4.01
336,412
13,120
3.90
265,878
10,717
4.03
u.s.
186,498
7,700
4.13
190,589
8,167
4.29
177,984
7,397
4.16
non-u.s.
141,710
5,450
3.85
145,823
4,953
3.40
87,894
3,320
3.78
other interest-earning
assets(3)
221,040
10,549
4.77
203,048
14,716
7.25
158,162
14,460
9.14
u.s.
131,778
4,438
3.37
97,830
6,480
6.62
96,517
9,321
9.66
non-u.s.
89,262
6,111
6.85
105,218
8,236
7.83
61,645
5,139
8.34
total interest-earning assets
976,292
35,633
3.65
891,667
45,968
5.16
736,277
35,186
4.78
cash and due from banks
7,975
3,926
3,348
other noninterest-earning
assets(2)
154,727
102,312
80,856
total assets
$
1,138,994
$
997,905
$
820,481
liabilities
interest-bearing deposits
$
26,455
2.86
$
13,227
5.12
$
2,853
5.12
u.s.
21,598
2.86
13,128
5.13
2,778
5.15
non-u.s.
4,857
2.86
3.03
4.00
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to
repurchase, at fair value
194,935
7,414
3.80
214,511
12,612
5.88
206,992
9,525
4.60
u.s.
107,361
3,663
3.41
95,391
7,697
8.07
118,020
7,055
5.98
non-u.s.
87,574
3,751
4.28
119,120
4,915
4.13
88,972
2,470
2.78
trading
liabilities(1)(2)
95,377
2,789
2.92
109,736
3,866
3.52
99,967
3,125
3.13
u.s.
49,152
1,202
2.45
61,510
2,334
3.79
61,005
1,814
2.97
non-u.s.
46,225
1,587
3.43
48,226
1,532
3.18
38,962
1,311
3.36
commercial paper
4,097
3.54
5,605
4.80
7,485
4.82
u.s.
3,147
3.84
4,871
4.97
6,859
4.83
non-u.s.
2.53
3.68
4.79
other
borrowings(4)(5)
99,351
1,719
1.73
89,924
3,129
3.48
58,277
2,544
4.37
u.s.
52,126
1,046
2.01
44,789
1,779
3.97
43,534
1,521
3.49
non-u.s.
47,225
1.43
45,135
1,350
2.99
14,743
1,023
6.94
long-term
borrowings(5)(6)
203,360
13,687
6.73
167,997
14,147
8.42
121,935
9,777
8.02
u.s.
181,775
12,306
6.77
158,694
13,317
8.39
110,186
9,396
8.53
non-u.s.
21,585
1,381
6.40
9,303
8.92
11,749
3.24
other interest-bearing
liabilities(7)
345,956
4,847
1.40
248,640
7,281
2.93
205,556
6,210
3.02
u.s.
214,780
2,184
1.02
142,002
3,666
2.58
114,874
2,932
2.55
non-u.s.
131,176
2,663
2.03
106,638
3,615
3.39
90,682
3,278
3.61
total interest-bearing liabilities
969,531
31,357
3.23
849,640
41,981
4.94
703,065
31,688
4.51
noninterest-bearing deposits
other noninterest-bearing
liabilities(2)
122,292
110,306
86,368
total liabilities
1,091,827
959,946
789,433
shareholders equity
preferred stock
5,157
3,100
2,400
common stock
42,010
34,859
28,648
total shareholders equity
47,167
37,959
31,048
total liabilities, preferred stock and
shareholders equity
$
1,138,994
$
997,905
$
820,481
interest rate spread
0.42
%
0.22
%
0.27
%
net interest income and net yield on
interest-earning assets
$
4,276
0.44
$
3,987
0.45
$
3,498
0.48
u.s.
(169
)
(0.03
)
0.07
1,623
0.31
non-u.s.
4,445
1.37
3,577
1.11
1,875
0.85
percentage of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing
liabilities attributable to
non-u.s.operations(8)
assets
33.33
%
36.23
%
29.90
%
liabilities
35.03
38.75
34.96
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
(1)
consists of cash trading instruments, including equity
securities and convertible debentures.
(2)
derivative instruments are included in other noninterest-earning
assets and other noninterest-bearing liabilities.
(3)
primarily consists of cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes and receivables from customers and
counterparties.
(4)
consists of short-term other secured financings and unsecured
short-term borrowings, excluding commercial paper.
(5)
interest rates include the effects of hedging in accordance with
sfasno. 133.
(6)
consists of long-term other secured financings and unsecured
long-term borrowings.
(7)
primarily consists of payables to customers and counterparties.
(8)
assets, liabilities and interest are attributed to u.s. and
non-u.s.
based on the principal place of operations of the legal entity
in which the assets and liabilities are held.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
changes in net
interest income, volume and rate analysis
the following table sets forth an analysis of the effect on net
interest income of volume and rate changes for the periods 2008
versus 2007 and 2007 versus 2006. in this analysis, changes due
to volume/rate variance have been allocated to volume.
for the year ended november
2008 versus 2007
2007 versus 2006
increase (decrease)
increase (decrease)
due to change in:
due to change in:
net
net
volume
rate
change
volume
rate
change
(in millions)
interest-earning assets
deposits with banks
$
$
(5
)
$
$
(5
)
$
(35
)
$
(40
)
u.s.
(3
)
(19
)
(13
)
non-u.s.
(2
)
(41
)
(27
)
securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to
resell, at fair value and federal funds sold
2,055
(8,322
)
(6,267
)
2,203
5,960
8,163
u.s.
1,370
(8,028
)
(6,658
)
2,167
5,221
7,388
non-u.s.
(294
)
trading assets
(327
)
2,508
(105
)
2,403
u.s.
(169
)
(298
)
(467
)
non-u.s.
(158
)
1,968
(335
)
1,633
other interest-earning assets
(4,218
)
(4,167
)
3,498
(3,242
)
u.s.
1,143
(3,185
)
(2,042
)
(2,928
)
(2,841
)
non-u.s.
(1,092
)
(1,033
)
(2,125
)
3,411
(314
)
3,097
change in interest income
1,853
(12,188
)
(10,335
)
8,204
2,578
10,782
interest-bearing liabilities
interest-bearing deposits
(299
)
(1
)
u.s.
(299
)
(57
)
non-u.s.
(1
)
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to
repurchase, at fair value
(943
)
(4,255
)
(5,198
)
(582
)
3,669
3,087
u.s.
(4,442
)
(4,034
)
(1,826
)
2,468
non-u.s.
(1,351
)
(1,164
)
1,244
1,201
2,445
trading liabilities
(371
)
(706
)
(1,077
)
u.s.
(302
)
(830
)
(1,132
)
non-u.s.
(69
)
(73
)
commercial paper
(61
)
(63
)
(124
)
(95
)
(92
)
u.s.
(66
)
(55
)
(121
)
(99
)
(89
)
non-u.s.
(8
)
(3
)
(7
)
(3
)
other borrowings
(1,587
)
(1,410
)
(374
)
u.s.
(880
)
(733
)
non-u.s.
(707
)
(677
)
(582
)
long-term
debt
2,349
(2,809
)
(460
)
3,852
4,370
u.s.
1,563
(2,574
)
(1,011
)
4,070
(149
)
3,921
non-u.s.
(235
)
(218
)
other interest-bearing liabilities
1,238
(3,672
)
(2,434
)
1,243
(172
)
1,071
u.s.
(2,222
)
(1,482
)
non-u.s.
(1,450
)
(952
)
(205
)
change in interest expense
2,767
(13,391
)
(10,624
)
6,222
4,071
10,293
change in net interest income
$
(914
)
$
1,203
$
$
1,982
$
(1,493
)
$
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
available-for-sale
securities portfolio
the following table sets forth the amortized cost, gross
unrealized gains and losses, and fair value of
available-for-sale
securities at november2008 and november2007:
gross
gross
amortized
unrealized
unrealized
fair
cost
gains
losses
value
(in millions)
available-for-sale
securities, november2008
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and
other money market instruments
$
$
$
$
u.s.governments, federal agency and sovereign obligations
(3
)
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
(49
)
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
(90
)
total
available-for-sale
securities
$
1,796
$
$
(142
)
$
1,682
available-for-sale
securities, november2007
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and
other money market instruments
$
$
$
$
u.s.governments, federal agency and sovereign obligations
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
(2
)
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
(14
)
total
available-for-sale
securities
$
1,172
$
$
(16
)
$
1,169
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
as of november 2008
due after
due after
one year
five years
due in one year
through
through
due after
or less
five years
ten years
ten years
total
amount
yield(1)
amount
yield(1)
amount
yield(1)
amount
yield(1)
amount
yield(1)
($ in millions)
fair value of
available-for-sale
securities
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and
other money market instruments
$
%
$
%
$
%
$
%
$
%
u.s.governments, federal agency and sovereign obligations
mortgage and other
asset-backed
loans and securities
corporate debt securities and other debt obligations
total
available-for-sale
securities
$
$
$
$
$
1,682
amortized cost of available-for-sale securities
$
$
$
$
$
1,796
(1)
yields are calculated on a weighted average basis.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
deposits
the following table sets forth a summary of the average balances
and average interest rates for the firms interest-bearing
deposits for the years ended november2008,
november2007 and november2006:
average balances
average interest rates
($ in millions)
u.s.:
savings(1)
$
20,214
$
13,096
$
2,745
2.82
%
5.12
%
5.14
%
time
1,384
3.40
9.96
5.42
total u.s.deposits
21,598
13,128
2,778
2.86
5.13
5.15
non-u.s.:
demand
4,842
2.83
3.03
4.00
time
13.00
total non-u.s. deposits
4,857
2.86
3.03
4.00
total deposits
$
26,455
$
13,227
$
2,853
2.86
%
5.12
%
5.12
%
(1)
amounts are available for
withdrawal upon short notice, generally within seven days.
as of november 2008, the firm had $55million of non-u.s.
time deposits greater than $100,000.
ratios
the following table sets forth selected financial ratios:
year ended november
net income to average assets
0.2
%
1.2
%
1.2
%
return on common shareholders
equity(1)
4.9
32.7
32.8
return on total shareholders
equity(2)
4.9
30.6
30.7
total average equity to average assets
4.1
3.8
3.8
dividend payout
ratio(3)
31.3
5.7
6.6
(1)
based on net income less preferred
stock dividends as a percentage of average common
shareholders equity.
(2)
based on net income as a percentage
of average total shareholders equity.
(3)
dividends declared per common share
as a percentage of net income per diluted share.
table of contents
supplemental
financial information
short-term
and other borrowed funds
(1)
the following table sets forth a summary of the firms
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to
repurchase and
short-term
borrowings as of or for the years ended november as indicated
below:
securities loaned and
securities sold under
agreements to repurchase
commercial paper
other funds borrowed
(2)(3)
($ in millions)
amounts outstanding at
year-end
$
79,943
$
187,802
$
169,700
$
1,125
$
4,343
$
1,489
$
72,758
$
99,624
$
70,705
average outstanding during the year
194,935
214,511
206,992
4,097
5,605
7,485
99,351
89,924
58,277
maximum month-end outstanding
256,596
270,991
278,560
12,718
8,846
18,227
109,927
105,845
82,353
weighted average interest rate
during the
year(3)
3.80
%
5.88
%
4.60
%
3.54
%
4.80
%
4.82
%
1.73
%
3.48
%
4.37
%
at year-end
3.27
5.15
5.52
2.79
4.81
4.99
2.06
(3)
3.11
(3)
3.93
(3)
(1)
includes borrowings maturing within
one year of the financial statement date and borrowings that are
redeemable at the option of the holder within oneyear of
the financial statement date.
(2)
includes
short-term
secured financings of $21.23billion as of
november2008, $32.41billion as of november2007
and $24.29billion as of november2006.
(3)
as of november2008,
november2007 and november2006, weighted average
interest rates include the effects of hedging in accordance with
sfasno.133.
cross-border
outstandings
cross-border outstandings are based upon the federal financial
institutions examination councils (ffiec) regulatory
guidelines for reporting cross-border risk. claims include cash,
receivables, securities purchased under agreements to resell,
securities borrowed and cash trading instruments, but exclude
derivative instruments and commitments. securities purchased
under agreements to resell and securities borrowed are presented
based on the domicile of the counterparty, without reduction for
related securities collateral held.
the following table sets forth cross-border outstandings for
each country in which cross-border outstandings exceed 0.75% of
consolidated assets as of november2008 in accordance with
the ffiec guidelines:
banks
governments
other
total
(in millions)
country
united kingdom
$
5,104
$
4,600
$
51,531
$
61,235
cayman islands
20,904
20,954
germany
3,973
2,518
7,825
14,316
france
2,264
1,320
9,791
13,375
japan
4,003
3,354
7,457
table of contents
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
there were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure during the last two fiscal
years.
item9a.
controls
and procedures
as of the end of the period covered by this report, an
evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs management,
with the participation of our chief executive officer and chief
financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in
rule13a-15(e)
under the exchange act). based upon that evaluation, our chief
executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that
these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of
the end of the period covered by this report. in addition, no
change in our internal control over financial reporting (as
defined in
rule13a-15(f)
under the exchange act)occurred during the fourth quarter
of our fiscal year ended november28,2008 that has
materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting and the report of independent registered public
accounting firm are set forth in partii, item8 of
our annual report on
form10-k.
item9b.
other
information
not applicable.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance
information relating to our executive officers is included on
pages 51 to 52 of our annual report on
form10-k.
information relating to our directors, including our audit
committee and audit committee financial experts and the
procedures by which shareholders can recommend director
nominees, and our executive officers will be in our definitive
proxy statement for our 2009 annual meeting of shareholders to
be held on may8,2009, which will be filed within
120days of the end of our fiscal year ended
november28,2008 (2009 proxy statement) and is
incorporated herein by reference. information relating to our
code of business conduct and ethics that applies to our senior
financial officers, as defined in the code, is included in
parti, item1 of our annual report on
form10-k.
item11.
executive
compensation
information relating to our executive officer and director
compensation and the compensation committee of our board of
directors will be in the 2009 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
information relating to security ownership of certain beneficial
owners of our common stock and information relating to the
security ownership of our management will be in the 2009 proxy
statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
table of contents
the following table provides information generally as of
november28,2008, the last day of fiscal 2008,
regarding securities to be issued on exercise of stock options,
and securities remaining available for issuance under our equity
compensation plans that were in effect during fiscal 2008.
number of securities
number of
remaining available
securities to be
for future issuance
issued upon
weighted-average
under equity
exercise of
exercise price of
compensation plans
outstanding
outstanding
(excluding securities
options, warrants
options, warrants
reflected in the
plan category
and rights
and rights
second column)
equity compensation plans approved by security holders
the goldman
sachs amended
and restated
stock incentive
plan(1)
33,639,132
(2)
$
109.47
(2)
216,990,058
(3)
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
none
total
33,639,132
(2)
216,990,058
(3)(4)
(1)
the goldman sachs amended and
restated stock incentive plan (sip) was approved by the
shareholders of goldman sachs at our 2003 annual meeting of
shareholders and is a successor plan to the goldman sachs 1999
stock incentive plan (1999 plan), which was approved by our
shareholders immediately prior to our initial public offering in
may1999 and under which no additional awards have been
granted since approval of the sip.
(2)
includes options that are subject
to vesting and other conditions.
(3)
of these shares,
54,852,028shares may be issued pursuant to outstanding
restricted stock units, including 54,824,666shares granted
under the sip and 27,362shares granted under the 1999
plan; 151,230shares may be issued pursuant to outstanding
performance-based units granted under the sip.
(4)
represents shares remaining to be
issued under the sip (217,388,173shares) and the 1999 plan
(27,362shares). the total number of shares of common stock
that may be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the sip
initially may not exceed 250,000,000shares. beginning
november29,2008 and each fiscal year thereafter, the
number of shares of common stock that may be delivered pursuant
to awards granted after april1,2003 under the sip
may not exceed 5% of our issued and outstanding shares of common
stock, determined as of the last day of the immediately
preceding fiscal year, increased by the number of shares that
were available for awards in previous fiscal years but were not,
at the date of determination, covered by awards granted in
previous years.
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
information regarding certain relationships and related
transactions and director independence will be in the 2009 proxy
statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.
principal
accountant fees and services
information regarding principal accountant fees and services
will be in the 2009 proxy statement and is incorporated herein
by reference.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibits
and financial statement schedules
(a)
documents filed as part of this report:
1.
consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed
in our annual report on
form10-k
are included in partii, item8 hereof.
2.
exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation (incorporated by reference to the
corresponding exhibit to the registrants registration
statement on form s-1 (no. 333-74449)).
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of the goldman sachs
group, inc.
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs group, inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit3.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on
form8-k,
filed december12, 2006).
4.1
indenture, dated as of may 19, 1999, between the goldman sachs
group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 6 to the registrants registration
statement on form 8-a, filed june 29, 1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated as of february 20, 2004,
between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york,
as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to the
registrants annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year
ended november 28, 2003).
4.3
warrant indenture, dated as of february 14, 2006, between the
goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.34 to the
registrants post-effective amendment no. 3 to form s-3,
filed on march 1, 2006).
4.4
senior debt indenture, dated as of december 4, 2007, among gs
finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as
guarantor, and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 4.69 to the registrants
post-effective amendment no. 10 to form s-3, filed on december
4, 2007).
4.5
form of floating rate senior debt security (tlgp) issued under
the senior debt indenture, dated as of july 16, 2008, between
the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york mellon,
as trustee.
4.6
form of fixed rate senior debt security (tlgp) issued under the
senior debt indenture, dated as of july 16, 2008, between the
goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york mellon, as
trustee.
4.7
form of floating rate medium-term note, seriesd (tlgp)
issued under the senior debt indenture, dated as of
july16, 2008, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and
the bank of new york mellon, as trustee.
4.8
form of fixed rate medium-term note, seriesd (tlgp) issued
under the senior debt indenture, dated as of july16, 2008,
between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york
mellon, as trustee.
4.9
senior debt indenture, dated as of july16, 2008, between
the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york mellon,
as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.82 to
the registrants post-effective amendment no.11 to
forms-3
(no.333-130074),
filed july17, 2008).
4.10
senior debt indenture, dated as of october10, 2008, among
gs finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as
guarantor, and the bank of new york mellon, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.70 to the
registrants registration statement on
forms-3
(no.333-154173),
filed october10, 2008).
certain instruments defining the rights of holders of
long-term debt securities of the registrant and its subsidiaries
are omitted pursuant to item 601(b)(4)(iii) of regulation
s-k.  the
registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon
request, copies of any such instruments.
table of contents
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive
plan.
10.2
the goldman sachs defined contribution plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.16 to the registrants registration
statement on form s-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.3
the goldman sachs amended and restated restricted partner
compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to
the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended february 24, 2006).
10.4
form of employment agreement for pre-ipo participating managing
directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.19 to the
registrants registration statement on form s-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.5
form of agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.20 to the
registrants registration statement on form s-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.6
form of option agreement (discretionary options) (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.24 to the registrants
registration statement on form s-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.7
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may 7, 1999, by and
among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.25 to the
registrants registration statement on form s-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.8
amended and restated shareholders agreement, dated june
22, 2004, among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various
parties (incorporated by reference to exhibit m to amendment
no.54 to schedule 13d, filed june 23, 2004, relating to
the registrants common stock (no.005-56295)).
10.9
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.27 to the registrants registration statement on
form s-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.10
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.28 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.11
registration rights instrument, dated as of december 10, 1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibit g to amendment no.1
to schedule 13d, filed december17,1999, relating to
the registrants common stock (no.005-56295)).
10.12
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december 10, 1999 (incorporated by reference to exhibit h to
amendment no.1 to schedule 13d, filed december 17, 1999,
relating to the registrants common stock
(no.005-56295)).
10.13
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.44 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended november26, 1999).
10.14
form of indemnification agreement, dated as of july 5, 2000
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended august 25, 2000).
10.15
amendment no.1, dated as of september 5, 2000, to the tax
indemnification agreement, dated as of may 7, 1999 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.3 to the registrants quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended august25,2000).
10.16
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december 21, 2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibit aa to
amendment no.12 to schedule 13d, filed january 23, 2001,
relating to the registrants common stock
(no.005-56295)).
10.17
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december 21, 2001 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.4 to
the registrants registration statement on form s-3
(no.333-74006)).
table of contents
10.18
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december 20, 2002 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.4 to
the registrants registration statement on form s-3
(no.333-101093)).
10.19
letter, dated february 6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to dr. ruth j. simmons (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.63 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended november 24, 2000).
10.20
letter, dated february 6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.john h. bryan (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.64 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended november 24, 2000).
10.21
letter, dated february 6, 2001, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.james a. johnson (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.65 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended november 24, 2000).
10.22
letter, dated december 18, 2002, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.william w. george (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.39 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended november 29, 2002).
10.23
letter, dated june 20, 2003, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.claes dahlbck (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended may 30, 2003).
10.24
supplemental registration rights instrument, dated as of
december 19, 2003 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.4 to
the registrants registration statement on form s-3
(no.333-110371)).
10.25
letter, dated march 31, 2004, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to ms. lois d. juliber (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended may 28, 2004).
10.26
letter, dated april 6, 2005, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.stephen friedman (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.1 to the registrants current report on form
8-k, filed april 8, 2005).
10.27
form of amendment, dated november 27, 2004, to agreement
relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated may 7,
1999 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.32 to the
registrants annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year
ended november 26, 2004).
10.28
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
(subject to transfer restrictions) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.29 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.29
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (not
subject to transfer restrictions) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.30 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.30
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program
(subject to transfer restrictions) (french alternative award)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.31 to the
registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.31
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (not
subject to transfer restrictions) (french alternative award)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.32 to the
registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.32
form of rsu award agreement for pmd discount stock program (u.k.
employee benefit trusts) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.33 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.33
form of year-end restricted stock award (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.34 to the registrants annual
report on form
10-k for the
fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
table of contents
10.34
form of year-end restricted stock award in connection with
outstanding rsu awards (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.35 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the
fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.35
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred
compensation plan for u.s.participating managing directors
(terminated as of december 15, 2008) (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.36 to the registrants annual report on form
10-k for the fiscal year ended november 30, 2007).
10.36
form of year-end option award agreement.
10.37
form of year-end rsu award agreement (not fully vested upon
grant).
10.38
form of year-end rsu award agreement (fully vested upon grant)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.37 to the
registrants annual report on form
10-k for the
fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.39
form of year-end rsu award agreement (french alternative
award).
10.40
amendments to 2005 and 2006 year-end rsu and option award
agreements  (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.44 to the
registrants annual report on form
10-k for the
fiscal year ended november30, 2007).
10.41
form of non-employee director option award agreement.
10.42
form of non-employee director rsu award agreement.
10.43
description of non-employee director compensation.
10.44
ground lease, dated august 23, 2005, between battery park city
authority d/b/a/ hugh l. carey battery park city authority, as
landlord, and goldman sachs headquarters llc, as tenant
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the
registrants current report on form 8-k, filed august 26,
2005).
10.45
general guarantee agreement, dated january 30, 2006, made by the
goldman sachs group, inc. (incorporated by reference to exhibit
10.45 to the registrants annual report on form 10-k for
the fiscal year ended november 25, 2005).
10.46
letter, dated november 10, 2006, from the goldman sachs group,
inc. to mr.rajat k. gupta (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 99.1 to the registrants current report on form
8-k, filed november 13, 2006).
10.47
goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance policy and
certificate with metropolitan life insurance company for
participating managing directors (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended august 25, 2006).
10.48
form of goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance
policy with pacific life & annuity company for
participating managing directors, including policy
specifications and form of restriction on policy owners
rights (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the
registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended august 25, 2006).
10.49
form of signature card for equity awards.
10.50
form of employment agreement for post-ipo participating managing
directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.50 to the
registrants annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year
ended november 24, 2006).
10.51
form of second amendment, dated november 25, 2006, to agreement
relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated may 7,
1999, as amended effective november27,2004
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.51 to the
registrants annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year
ended november 24, 2006).
10.52
description of pmd retiree medical program (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.2 to the registrants quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended february 29, 2008).
table of contents
10.53
letter, dated june 28, 2008, from the goldman sachs group, inc.
to mr.lakshmi n. mittal (incorporated by reference to
exhibit 99.1 to the registrants current report on form
8-k, filed june 30, 2008).
10.54
securities purchase agreement, dated september 29, 2008, between
the goldman sachs group, inc. and berkshire hathaway inc.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended august 29, 2008).
10.55
general guarantee agreement, dated october 21, 2008, made by the
goldman sachs group, inc. relating to the obligations of goldman
sachs bank usa  (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.85 to
the registrants post-effective amendment no.1 to
form s-3, filed october22,2008).
10.56
form of letter agreement between the goldman sachs group, inc.
and each of lloyd c. blankfein, gary d. cohn, jon winkelried and
david a. viniar (incorporated by reference to exhibit o to
amendment no.70 to schedule 13d, filed
october1,2008, relating to the registrants
common stock (no.005-56295)).
10.57
letter agreement, dated as of october 26, 2008, including
securities purchase agreement standard terms
incorporated by reference therein, between the goldman sachs
group, inc. and the united states department of the treasury
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the
registrants current report on form 8-k, filed october 28,
2008).
10.58
form of letter agreement, dated october 28, 2008, between the
goldman sachs group, inc. and its senior executive officers
relating to executive compensation limitations under the u.s.
treasury departments capital purchase program.
10.59
general guarantee agreement, dated november 24, 2008, made by
the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to the obligations of
goldman sachs bank (europe) plc.
10.60
guarantee agreement, dated november 28, 2008, between the
goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman sachs bank usa.
10.61
collateral agreement, dated november 28, 2008, between the
goldman sachs group, inc., goldman sachs bank usa and each other
party that becomes a  pledgor pursuant thereto.
10.62
form of performance-based one-time rsu award agreement.
10.63
form of make-whole one-time rsu award agreement.
10.64
form of incentive one-time rsu award agreement.
10.65
form of year-end supplemental rsu award agreement (employees in
france).
10.66
form of signature card for equity awards (employees in asia
outside china).
10.67
form of signature card for equity awards (employees in
china).
10.68
amendments to certain equity award agreements.
10.69
amendments to certain non-employee director equity award
agreements.
12.1
statement re: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges
and ratios of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred
stock dividends.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1
powers of attorney (included on signature page).
31.1
rule 13a-14(a) certifications.
32.1
section 1350 certifications.
99.1
report of independent registered public accounting firm on
selected financial data.
this exhibit is a management contract or a compensatory plan or
arrangement.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/david
a. viniar
name: david a. viniar
title: chief financial officer
date: january26, 2009
ii-1
table of contents
power of
attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each person whose
signature appears below constitutes and appoints lloyd c.
blankfein, gary d. cohn, jon winkelried, david a. viniar,
gregory k. palm and esta e. stecher, and each of them severally,
his or her true and lawful
attorney-in-fact
with power of substitution and resubstitution to sign in his or
her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to do any
and all things and execute any and all instruments that such
attorney may deem necessary or advisable under the securities
exchange act of 1934 and any rules, regulations and requirements
of the u.s.securities and exchange commission in
connection with our annual report on
form10-k
and any and all amendments hereto, as fully for all intents and
purposes as he or she might or could do in person, and hereby
ratifies and confirms all said
attorneys-in-fact
and agents, each acting alone, and his or her substitute or
substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue
hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of
1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
signature
capacity
date
/s/lloyd
c. blankfein
lloyd
c. blankfein
director, chairman and
chief executive officer
(principal executive officer)
january26, 2009
/s/john
h. bryan
john
h. bryan
director
january26, 2009
/s/gary
d. cohn
gary
d. cohn
director
january26, 2009
/s/claes
dahlbck
claes
dahlbck
director
january26, 2009
/s/stephen
friedman
stephen
friedman
director
january26, 2009
/s/william
w. george
william
w. george
director
january26, 2009
/s/rajat
k. gupta
rajat
k. gupta
director
january26, 2009
/s/james
a. johnson
james
a. johnson
director
january26, 2009
/s/lois
d. juliber
lois
d. juliber
director
january26, 2009
/s/lakshmi
n. mittal
lakshmi
n. mittal
director
january26, 2009
/s/ruth
j. simmons
ruth
j. simmons
director
january26, 2009
ii-2
table of contents
signature
capacity
date
/s/jon
winkelried
jon
winkelried
director
january26, 2009
/s/david
a. viniar
david
a. viniar
chief financial officer
(principal financial officer)
january26, 2009
/s/sarah
e. smith
sarah
e. smith
principal accounting officer
january26, 2009
ii-3
