10-k
d446679d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k  annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of  the securities exchange act of
for the fiscal year ended december31,2012
commission file number: 001-14965
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-4019460
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
200 west street new york, n.y.
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(212) 902-1000  (registrants telephone number, including area code)  securities registered
pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class:
nameofeachexchangeonwhichregistered:
common stock, par value $.01 per share
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesa
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of 6.20% non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesb
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesc
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesd
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesi
new york stock exchange
see exhibit 99.2 for debt and trust securities registered under section 12(b) of the act
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities act.
yes x no
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the act.
yes  no x
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.
yes x no
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every
interactive data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule405 of regulation s-t during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
yes x no
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and
will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of the annual report on form10-k or any amendment to the annual report on
form10-k. x
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a
smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting company in rule12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfilerx
acceleratedfiler
non-acceleratedfiler
smallerreportingcompany
(do not check if a smallerreportingcompany)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in
rule12b-2 of the exchange act). yes  no
x  as of june30,2012, the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant was approximately $45.3billion.
as of february15,2013, there were 465,503,097 shares of the registrants common stock outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference: portions of the goldman sachs group, inc.s proxy statement for its
2013 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in the annual report on form10-k in response to partiii, items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.  annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31,2012
index
form10-k itemnumber
pageno.
parti
item1
business
introduction
our business segments and segment operating results
investment banking
institutional client services
investing & lending
investment management
business continuity and information security
employees
competition
regulation
available information
cautionary statement pursuant to the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of
item1a
risk factors
item1b
unresolved staff comments
item2
properties
item3
legal proceedings
item4
mine safety disclosures
executive officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
part ii
item5
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equitysecurities
item6
selected financial data
item7
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item7a
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8
financial statements and supplementary data
item9
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a
controls and procedures
item9b
other information
partiii
item10
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11
executive compensation
item12
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholdermatters
item13
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item14
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
item15
exhibits and financial statement schedules
signatures
ii-1
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
part i  item1.business
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of financial
services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals.  when we use the terms goldman sachs, the firm, we, us and our, we mean the goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc.), a delaware corporation, and
its consolidated subsidiaries.  references to this form10-k are to our annual report on form10-k for
the year ended december31,2012. all references to 2012,2011 and 2010 refer to our years ended, or the dates, as the context requires, december31,2012, december31,2011 and december31,2010,
respectively.  group inc. is a bank holding company and a financial holding company regulated by the board of governors of the
federal reserve system (federal reserve board). our u.s. depository institution subsidiary, goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank usa), is a new york state-chartered bank.
as of december2012, we had offices in over 30 countries and 49% of our total staff
was based outside the americas (which includes the countries in north and south america). our clients are located worldwide, and we are an active participant in financial markets around the world. in 2012, we generated 41% of our net revenues
outside the americas. for more information on our geographic results, see note25 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k.
our business segments and segment operating results
we report our activities in four business segments: investment banking, institutional client services, investing& lending and
investment management. the chart below presents our four business segments.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the table below presents our segment operating results.
year ended december1
% of 2012
$ inmillions
netrevenues
investment banking
net revenues
$4,926
$4,355
$4,810
%
operating expenses
3,330
2,995
3,459
pre-tax earnings
$1,596
$1,360
$1,351
institutional client
services
net revenues
$18,124
$17,280
$21,796
%
operating expenses
12,480
12,837
14,994
pre-tax earnings
$5,644
$4,443
$6,802
investing&
lending
net revenues
$5,891
$2,142
$7,541
%
operating expenses
2,666
2,673
3,361
pre-tax earnings/(loss)
$3,225
$(531
)
$4,180
investment
management
net revenues
$5,222
$5,034
$5,014
%
operating expenses
4,294
4,020
4,082
pre-tax earnings
$928
$1,014
$932
total
net revenues
$34,163
$28,811
$39,161
operating
expenses2
22,956
22,642
26,269
pre-tax earnings
$11,207
$6,169
$12,892
1.
financial information concerning our business segments for 2012,2011 and 2010 is included in managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations and the financial statements and supplementary data, which are in partii, items 7 and 8, respectively, of this form10-k. see note25 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for a summary of our total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings by geographicregion.
2.
total operating expenses includes the following expenses that have not been allocated to our segments: (i)charitable contributions of $169million,
$103million and $345million for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively; and (ii)real estate-related exit costs of $17million, $14million and $28million for the
years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively. operating expenses related to net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings, previously not allocated to our segments, have now been allocated. this
allocation is consistent with the manner in which management currently views the performance of our segments. reclassifications have been made to previously reported segment amounts to conform to the currentpresentation.
investment banking
investment banking serves corporate and government clients around the world. we provide
financial advisory services and help companies raise capital to strengthen and grow their businesses. we seek to develop and maintain long-term relationships with a diverse global group of institutional clients, including governments, states and
municipalities. our goal is to deliver to our clients the entire resources of the firm in a seamless fashion, with investment banking serving as the main initial point of contact with goldman sachs.
financial advisory. financial advisory includes strategic advisory assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities, risk management, restructurings and spin-offs. in
particular, we help clients execute large, complex transactions for which we provide multiple services, including one-stop acquisition financing and cross-border structuring expertise. financial advisory also includes revenues from
derivative transactions directly related to these client advisory assignments.  we also assist our clients in managing their
asset and liability exposures and their capital. in addition, we may provide lending commitments and bank loan and bridge loan facilities in connection with our advisory assignments.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
underwriting. the other core activity of investment banking is helping companies raise capital to fund their businesses. as a financial intermediary, our job is to match the capital of our investing
clients who aim to grow the savings ofmillions of people with the needs of our corporate and government clients who need financing to generate growth, create jobs and deliver products and services. our
underwriting activities include public offerings and private placements, including domestic and cross-border transactions, of a wide range of securities and other financial instruments. underwriting also includes revenues from derivative
transactions entered into with corporate and government clients in connection with our underwriting activities.  equity underwriting. we underwrite common and preferred stock and convertible and exchangeable securities. we regularly receive
mandates for large, complex transactions and have held a leading position in worldwide public common stock offerings and worldwide initial public offerings for many years.  debt underwriting. we underwrite and originate various types of debt
instruments, including investment-grade and high-yield debt, bank loans and bridge loans, and emerging-and growth-market debt, which may be issued by, among others, corporate, sovereign, municipal and agency issuers. in addition, we underwrite
and originate structured securities, which include mortgage-related securities and other asset-backed securities.
institutional client services  institutional client services serves our clients who come to the firm to buy and sell financial products, raise funding and manage risk. we do this by acting as a market maker and offering market
expertise on a global basis. institutional client services makes markets and facilitates client transactions in fixed income, equity, currency and commodity products. in addition, we make markets in and clear client transactions on major stock,
options and futures exchanges worldwide. market makers provide liquidity and play a critical role in price discovery, which contributes to the overall efficiency of the capital markets. our willingness to make markets, commit capital and take risk
in a broad range of products is crucial to our clientrelationships.  our clients are primarily institutions that are
professional market participants, including investment entities whose ultimate customers include individual investors investing for their retirement, buying insurance or putting aside surplus cash in a deposit account.
through our global sales force, we maintain relationships with our clients, receiving
orders and distributing investment research, trading ideas, market information and analysis. as a market maker, we provide prices to clients globally acrossthousands of products in all major asset classes and markets. at times we take the
other side of transactions ourselves if a buyer or seller is not readily available and at other times we connect our clients to other parties who want to transact. much of this connectivity between the firm and its clients is maintained on
technology platforms and operates globally wherever and whenever markets are open for trading.  institutional client services
and our other businesses are supported by our global investment research division, which, as of december2012, provided fundamental research on more than 3,700 companies worldwide and more than 40 national economies, as well as on industries,
currencies andcommodities.  institutional client services generates revenues in fourways:
in large, highly liquid markets (such as markets for u.s. treasury bills, large capitalization s&p 500 stocks or certain mortgage pass-through
securities), we execute a high volume of transactions for our clients for modest spreads and fees.
in less liquid markets (such as mid-cap corporate bonds, growth market currencies or certain non-agency mortgage-backed securities), we execute
transactions for our clients for spreads and fees that are generally somewhat larger.
we also structure and execute transactions involving customized or tailor-made products that address our clients risk exposures, investment
objectives or other complex needs (such as a jet fuel hedge for an airline).
we provide financing to our clients for their securities trading activities, as well as securities lending and other prime brokerage services.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
institutional client services activities are organized by asset class and include both
cash and derivative instruments. cash refers to trading the underlying instrument (such as a stock, bond or barrel of oil). derivative refers to instruments that derive their value from underlying
asset prices, indices, reference rates and other inputs, or a combination of these factors (such as an option, which is the right or obligation to buy or sell a certain bond or stock index on a specified date in the future at a certain price, or an
interest rate swap, which is the agreement to convert a fixed rate of interest into a floating rate or vice versa).  fixed income, currency and commodities client execution. includes interest rate products, credit products, mortgages, currencies and commodities.
interest rate products. government
bonds, money market instruments such as commercial paper, treasury bills, repurchase agreements and other highly liquid securities and instruments, as well as interest rate swaps, options and otherderivatives.
credit products. investment-grade
corporate securities, high-yield securities, credit derivatives, bank and bridge loans, municipal securities, emerging market and distressed debt, and trade claims.
mortgages. commercial
mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives, residential mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives (including u.s. government agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations, other prime, subprime and alt-a securities and loans),
and other asset-backed securities, loans andderivatives.
currencies. most currencies,
including growth-market currencies.
commodities. oil and natural gas,
base, precious and other metals, electricity, coal, agricultural and other commodity products.
equities. includes equity client execution, commissions and fees, and securities services.
equities client execution. we make markets in equity securities and equity-related products, including convertible securities, options, futures and over-the-counter (otc) derivative instruments, on a global basis. as a principal,
we facilitate client transactions by providing liquidity to our clients with large blocks of stocks or options, requiring the commitment of our capital. in addition, we engage in insurance activities where we insure, reinsure and acquire portfolios
of insurance risk.  we also structure and execute derivatives on indices, industry groups, financial measures and individual
company stocks. we develop strategies and provide information about portfolio hedging and restructuring and asset allocation transactions for our clients. we also work with our clients to create specially tailored instruments to enable sophisticated
investors to establish or liquidate investment positions or undertake hedging strategies. we are one of the leading participants in the trading and development of equity derivative instruments.
our exchange-based market-making activities include making markets in stocks and exchange-traded funds. we are a designated market maker
(dmm) for stocks traded on the nyse, a registered market maker for etfs on nyse arca, a market maker in listed options on the international securities exchange, the chicago board options exchange, nyse arca, the boston options exchange, the
philadelphia stock exchange, the miami options exchange and nyse mkt, and a market maker in futures and options on the chicago mercantile exchange and the chicago board of trade.
commissions and fees. we generate commissions and fees from executing and clearing institutional client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide. we increasingly provide our clients with access to
electronic low-touch equity trading platforms, and electronic trades account for the majority of our equity trading activity. however, a majority of our net revenues in these activities continue to be derived from our traditional
high-touch handling of more complex trades. we expect both types of activity to remain important.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
securities services. includes financing, securities lending and other prime brokerage services.
financing services. we provide
financing to our clients for their securities trading activities through margin loans that are collateralized by securities, cash or other acceptable collateral. we earn a spread equal to the difference between the amount we pay for funds and the
amount we receive from our client.
securities lending services. we
provide services that principally involve borrowing and lending securities to cover institutional clients short sales and borrowing securities to cover our short sales and otherwise to make deliveries into the market. in addition, we are an
active participant in broker-to-broker securities lending and third-party agency lending activities.
other prime brokerage services. we
earn fees by providing clearing, settlement and custody services globally. in addition, we provide our hedge fund and other clients with a technology platform and reporting which enables them to monitor their security portfolios and manage
riskexposures.  investing& lending
our investing and lending activities, which are typically longer-term, include the firms investing and relationship lending
activities across various asset classes, primarily debt securities and loans, public and private equity securities, and real estate. these activities include investing directly in publicly and privately traded securities and in loans, and also
through certain investment funds that we manage. we manage a diversified global portfolio of investments in equity securities and debt and other investments in privately negotiated transactions, leveraged buyouts, acquisitions and investments in
funds managed by external parties. we also provide financing to ourclients.  icbc. we have an investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, the largest bank in china.
equity securities (excluding icbc). we make corporate, real estate and infrastructure equity-relatedinvestments.
debt securities and loans. we make corporate, real estate and infrastructure debt investments. in addition, we provide credit to corporate clients through loan facilities and to high-net-worth individuals primarily through secured
loans.  other.
our other investments primarily include our consolidated investment entities, which are entities we hold for investment purposes strictly for capital appreciation. these entities have a
defined exit strategy and are engaged in activities that are not closely related to our principal businesses. we also invest directly in distressed assets, currencies, commodities and other assets, including power generation facilities.
investment management  investment management provides investment and wealth advisory services to help clients preserve and grow their financial assets. our clients include institutions and high-net-worth individuals, as well as
retail investors who access our products through a network of third-party distributors around the world.  we manage client
assets across a broad range of asset classes and investment strategies, including equity, fixed income and alternative investments. alternative investments primarily include hedge funds, credit funds, private equity, real estate, currencies,
commodities, and asset allocation strategies. our investment offerings include those managed on a fiduciary basis by our portfolio managers as well as strategies managed by third-party managers. we offer our investments in a variety of structures,
including separately managed accounts, mutual funds, private partnerships, and other commingledvehicles.  we also provide
customized investment advisory solutions designed to address our clients investment needs. these solutions begin with identifying clients objectives and continue through portfolio construction, ongoing asset allocation and risk
management and investment realization. we draw from a variety of third-party managers as well as our proprietary offerings to implement solutions for clients.  we supplement our investment advisory solutions for high-net-worth clients with wealth advisory services that include income and liability management, trust and estate planning, philanthropic giving and
tax planning. we also use the firms global securities and derivatives market-making capabilities to address clients specific investment needs.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
management and other fees. the majority of revenues in management and other fees is comprised of asset-based fees on client assets. the fees that we charge vary by asset class and are affected by investment performance as well as
asset inflows and redemptions. other fees we receive include financial counseling fees generated through our wealth advisory services and fees related to the administration of real estate assets.
assets under supervision include assets under management and other client assets. assets under management include client assets where we
earn a fee for managing assets on a discretionary basis. this includes net assets in our mutual funds, hedge funds, credit funds and private equity funds (including real estate funds), and separately managed accounts for institutional and individual
investors. other client assets include client assets invested with third-party managers, private bank deposits and assets related to advisory relationships where we earn a fee for advisory and other services, but do not have discretion over the
assets. assets under supervision do not include the self-directed brokerage accounts of our clients.
incentive fees. in certain circumstances, we are also entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of a funds or a separately managed accounts return, or when the return exceeds a specified
benchmark or other performance targets. such fees include overrides, which consist of the increased share of the income and gains derived primarily from our private equity funds when the return on a funds investments over the life of the fund
exceeds certain threshold returns. incentive fees are recognized only when all material contingencies areresolved.
transaction revenues. we
receive commissions and net spreads for facilitating transactional activity in high-net-worth client accounts. in addition, we earn net interest income primarily associated with client deposits and margin lending activity undertaken by such clients.
the tables below present a breakdown of assets under supervision, including assets under management by asset class and by
distribution channel.
as of december
inbillions
alternative investments1
$133
$142
$148
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management (aum)
other client assets
total assets under supervision (aus)
$965
$895
$917
1.
primarily includes hedge funds, credit funds, private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
as of december
inbillions
directly distributed:
institutional
$293
$283
$286
high-net-worth individuals
third-party distributed:
institutional, high-net-worth individuals and retail
total aum
other client assets
total aus
$965
$895
$917
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
business continuity and information security
business continuity and information security, including cybersecurity, are high priorities for goldman sachs. our business continuity
program has been developed to provide reasonable assurance of business continuity in the event of disruptions at the firms critical facilities and to comply with regulatory requirements, including those of finra. because we are a bank holding
company, our business continuity program is also subject to review by the federal reserve board. the key elements of the program are crisis planning and management, people recovery, business recovery, systems and data recovery, and process
improvement. in the area of information security, we have developed and implemented a framework of principles, policies and technology to protect the information provided to us by our clients and that of the firm from cyber attacks and other
misappropriation, corruption or loss. safeguards are applied to maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information.
employees  management believes that a major strength and principal reason for the success of goldman sachs is the
quality and dedication of our people and the shared sense of being part of a team. we strive to maintain a work environment that fosters professionalism, excellence, diversity, cooperation among our employees worldwide and high standards of business
ethics.  instilling the goldman sachs culture in all employees is a continuous process, in which training plays an important
part. all employees are offered the opportunity to participate in education and periodic seminars that we sponsor at various locations throughout the world. another important part of instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee review
process. employees are reviewed by supervisors, co-workers and employees they supervise in a 360-degree review process that is integral to our team approach, and includes an evaluation of an employees performance with respect to risk
management, compliance and diversity. as of december2012, we had 32,400 totalstaff.
competition
the financial services industry and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect them to remain
so. our competitors are other entities that provide investment banking, securities and investment management services, as well as those entities that make investments in securities, commodities, derivatives, real estate, loans and other financial
assets. these entities include brokers and dealers, investment banking firms, commercial banks, insurance companies, investment advisers, mutual funds, hedge funds, private equity funds and merchant banks. we compete with some entities globally and
with others on a regional, product or niche basis. our competition is based on a number of factors, including transaction execution, products and services, innovation, reputation and price.
over time, there has been substantial consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial services industry and, in particular,
the credit crisis caused numerous mergers and asset acquisitions among industry participants. efforts by our competitors to gain market share have resulted in pricing pressure in our investment banking and client execution businesses and could
result in pricing pressure in other of our businesses. moreover, we have faced, and expect to continue to face, pressure to retain market share by committing capital to businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns that may not be
commensurate with their risks. in particular, corporate clients seek such commitments (such as agreements to participate in their commercial paper backstop or other loan facilities) from financial services firms in connection with investment banking
and other assignments.  consolidation and convergence have significantly increased the capital base and geographic reach of
some of our competitors, and have also hastened the globalization of the securities and other financial services markets. as a result, we have had to commit capital to support our international operations and to execute large global transactions. to
take advantage of some of our most significant opportunities, we will have to compete successfully with financial institutions that are larger and have more capital and that may have a stronger local presence and longer operating history outside the
united states.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
we have experienced intense price competition in some of our businesses in recent years.
for example, over the past several years the increasing volume of trades executed electronically, through the internet and through alternative trading systems, has increased the pressure on trading commissions, in that commissions for
low-touch electronic trading are generally lower than for high-touch non-electronic trading. it appears that this trend toward electronic and other low-touch, low-commission trading will continue. in addition, we
believe that we will continue to experience competitive pressures in these and other areas in the future as some of our competitors seek to obtain market share by further reducing prices.
the provisions of the u.s. dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act (dodd-frank act), the requirements promulgated by the
basel committee on banking supervision (basel committee) and other financial regulation could affect our competitive position to the extent that limitations on activities, increased fees and compliance costs or other regulatory requirements do not
apply, or do not apply equally, to all of our competitors or are not implemented uniformly across different jurisdictions. the impact of the dodd-frank act and other regulatory developments on our competitive position will depend to a large extent
on the manner in which the required rulemaking and regulatory guidance evolve, the extent of international convergence, and the development of market practice and structures under the new regulatory regimes as discussed further under
regulation below.  we also face intense competition in attracting and retaining qualified employees. our ability to
continue to compete effectively will depend upon our ability to attract new employees, retain and motivate our existing employees and to continue to compensate employees competitively amid intense public and regulatory scrutiny on the compensation
practices of large financial institutions. our pay practices and those of our principal competitors are subject to review by, and the standards of, the federal reserve board and regulators outside the united states, including the financial services
authority (fsa) in the united kingdom. see regulation banking regulation and regulation compensation practices below and risk factors our businesses may be adversely affected if we
are unable to hire and retain qualified employees in parti, item1a of this form10-k for more information on the regulation of our compensation practices.
regulation  as a participant in the banking, securities, investment management, otc derivatives, futures and options and insurance industries, we are subject to extensive regulation worldwide. regulatory bodies
around the world are generally charged with safeguarding the integrity of the securities and other financial markets and with protecting the interests of the customers of market participants, including depositors in banking entities and the
customers of broker-dealers, investment advisers, swap dealers and security-based swapdealers.  the financial services
industry has been the subject of intense regulatory scrutiny in recent years. our businesses have been subject to increasing regulation and supervision in the united states and other countries, and we expect this trend to continue in the future. in
particular, the dodd-frank act, which was enacted in july2010, significantly altered the financial regulatory regime within which we operate. the implications of the dodd-frank act for our businesses will depend to a large extent on the rules
that will be adopted by the federal reserve board, the fdic, the sec, the cftc and other agencies to implement the legislation, as well as the development of market practices and structures under the regime established by the legislation and the
implementing rules. other reforms have been adopted or are being considered by other regulators and policy makers worldwide, as discussed further throughout this section. we will continue to assess our business, risk management, and compliance
practices to conform to developments in the regulatoryenvironment.  bank holding company regulation
group inc. is a bank holding company under the bank holding company act of 1956 (bhc act) and a financial holding company under amendments
to the bhc act effected by the u.s. gramm-leach-bliley act of 1999 (glbact).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
supervision and regulation  as a bank holding company and a financial holding company under the bhc act, group inc. is subject to supervision and examination by the federal reserve board. under the system of functional
regulation established under the bhc act, the federal reserve board serves as the primary regulator of our consolidated organization, but generally defers to the primary regulators of our u.s. non-bank subsidiaries with respect to the
activities of those subsidiaries. such functionally regulated non-bank subsidiaries include broker-dealers registered with the sec, such as our principal u.s. broker-dealer, goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.), entities registered
with or regulated by the cftc with respect to futures-related and swaps-related activities, insurance companies regulated by state insurance authorities and investment advisers registered with the sec with respect to their investment
advisoryactivities.  as discussed further below, our subsidiary, gs bank usa, is supervised and regulated by the federal
reserve board, the fdic, the new york state department of financial services and the consumer financial protection bureau (cfpb). in addition, group inc. has two limited purpose trust company subsidiaries that are not permitted to and do not accept
deposits or make loans (other than as incidental to their trust activities) and are not insured by the fdic. the goldman sachs trust company, n.a., a national banking association that is limited to fiduciary activities, is regulated by the office of
the comptroller of the currency and is a member bank of the federal reserve system. the goldman sachs trust company of delaware, a delaware limited purpose trust company, is regulated by the office of the delaware state bankcommissioner.
activities  the bhc act
generally restricts bank holding companies from engaging in business activities other than the business of banking and certain closely related activities. financial holding companies, however, generally can engage in a broader range of financial and
related activities than are otherwise permissible for bank holding companies as long as they continue to meet the eligibility requirements for financial holding companies. these requirements include that the financial holding company and each of its
u.s. depository institution subsidiaries maintain their status as well-capitalized and well-managed. the broader range of permissible activities for financial holding companies includes underwriting, dealing and making
markets in
securities, insurance underwriting and making investments in non-financial companies. in addition, financial holding companies are permitted under the glb act to engage in certain commodities
activities in the united states that may otherwise be impermissible for bank holding companies, so long as the assets held pursuant to these activities do not equal 5% or more of their consolidatedassets.
the federal reserve board, however, has the authority to limit our ability to conduct activities that would otherwise be permissible for a
financial holding company, and will do so if we do not satisfactorily meet certain requirements of the federal reserve board. in addition, we are required to obtain prior federal reserve board approval before engaging in certain banking and other
financial activities both in the united states andabroad.  we may face additional limitations on our activities upon
implementation of those provisions of the dodd-frank act referred to as the volcker rule, which will prohibit proprietary trading (but will allow activities such as underwriting, market-making related activities and
risk-mitigation hedging activities) and will limit the sponsorship of, and investment in, hedge funds and private equity funds by banking entities, including bank holding companies. the volcker rule is expected to also limit certain types of
transactions between us and our sponsored funds, similar to the limitations on transactions between depository institutions and their affiliates as described below under  transactions with affiliates. in october2011, the
proposed rules to implement the volcker rulewere issued and included an extensive request for comments on the proposal. the proposed rules are highly complex, and many aspects of the volcker ruleremain unclear. the full impact of the
ruleon us will depend upon the detailed scope of the prohibitions, permitted activities, exceptions and exclusions, and will not be known with certainty until the rules are finalized and market practices and structures develop under the final
rules. currently, companies are expected to be required to be in compliance by july2014 (subject to possibleextensions).  while many aspects of the volcker ruleremain unclear, we evaluated the prohibition on proprietary trading and determined that businesses that engage in bright line
proprietary trading are most likely to be prohibited. in2011 and 2010, we liquidated substantially all of ourprincipal strategies and global macro proprietary tradingpositions.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
in addition, we have evaluated the limitations on sponsorship of, and investments in, hedge
funds and private equity funds. we earn management fees and incentive fees for investment management services from hedge funds and private equity funds, which are included in our investment management segment. we also make investments in funds, and
the gains and losses from these investments are included in our investing& lending segment; these gains and losses will be impacted by the volcker rule. the volcker rulelimitation on investments in hedge funds and private equity
funds requires us to reduce our investment in each hedge fund and private equity fund to 3% or less of the funds net asset value, and to reduce our aggregate investment in all such funds to 3% or less of our tier1 capital. our aggregate
net revenues from our investments in hedge funds and private equity funds were not material to our aggregate total net revenues over the period from 1999 through 2012. we continue to manage our existing private equity funds, taking into account the
transition periods under the volcker rule. with respect to our hedge funds, we currently plan to comply with the volcker ruleby redeeming certain of our interests in the funds. since march2012, we have been redeeming up to approximately
10% of certain hedge funds total redeemable units per quarter, and expect to continue to do so through june2014. in addition, we have limited our initial investment to 3% for certain new investments in hedge funds and private equity
funds.  the dodd-frank act also establishes the cfpb, which has broad authority to regulate providers of credit, payment and
other consumer financial products and services, and has oversight over certain of our products andservices.  capital and liquidity requirements
capital requirements are increasingly a factor in determining risk levels and assessing business opportunities and
strategies. as a bank holding company, we are subject to consolidated regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal reserveboard.  gs bank usa is subject to broadly similar capital requirements. under the federal reserve boardscapital adequacy requirements and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action that is
applicable to gs bank
usa, both group inc. and gs bank usa must meet specific regulatory capital requirements that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items. the
sufficiency of our capital levels and those of gs bank usa, as well as gs bank usas prompt corrective action classification, are also subject to qualitative judgments byregulators.
other regulated subsidiaries, including gs&co. and goldman sachs international (gsi), are also subject to capital requirements. we
expect group inc., gs bank usa, gs&co., gsi and other regulated subsidiaries to become subject to increased capital requirements overtime.  capital ratios. see note20 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of this form10-k for information on our tier1 capital ratio, tier1 capital, total capital ratio, total capital, risk-weighted assets (rwas) and tier1 leverage ratio, and for a discussion of minimum required
ratios. for information on our tier1 common ratio, see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations equity capital consolidated regulatory capital ratios in
partii, item7 of this form10-k.  changes in capital
requirements. changes to the market risk capital rules of the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies (the agencies) became
effective on january1,2013. these changes require the addition of several new model-based capital requirements, as well as an increase in capital requirements for securitization positions, and are designed to implement the new market
risk framework of the basel committee, as well as the prohibition on the use of external credit ratings, as required by the dodd-frank act. this revised market risk framework is a significant part of the regulatory capital changes that will
ultimately be included in our capital ratios under the guidelines issued by the basel committee in december2010 (basel3). see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
equity capital consolidated regulatory capital ratios in partii, item7 of this form10-k for information on the impact of these rules on our tier1 commonratio.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
we are also currently working to implement the requirements set out in the agencies
risk-based capital standards: advanced capital adequacy framework basel2, as applicable to us as a bank holding company and as an advanced approach banking organization (basel2). these requirements are based on the advanced
approaches under the revised framework for the international convergence of capital measurement and capital standards issued by the basel committee. basel2, among other things, revises the regulatory capital framework for credit risk and
equity investments, and introduces a new operational risk capital requirement. we will adopt basel2 once we are approved to do so by regulators. our capital adequacy ratio will also be impacted by the further changes outlined below under
basel3 and provisions of the dodd-frank act.  the collins amendment of the dodd-frank act requires
advanced approach banking organizations to continue, upon adoption of basel2, to calculate risk-based capital ratios under both basel2 and the federal reserve boards risk-based capital requirements currently applicable to bank
holding companies (basel1), which are based on the 1988 capital accord of the basel committee. for each of the tier1 and total capital ratios, the lower of the basel1 and basel2 ratios calculated will be used to determine
whether such advanced approach banking organizations meet their minimum risk-based capital requirements. furthermore, the june2012 proposals described below include provisions which, if enacted as proposed, would modify these minimum
risk-based capital requirements.  in june2012, the agencies proposed further modifications to their capital adequacy
regulations to address aspects of both the dodd-frank act and basel3. if enacted as proposed, the most significant changes that would impact us include (i)revisions to the definition of tier1 capital, including new deductions from
tier1 capital, (ii)higher minimum capital and leverage ratios, (iii)a new minimum ratio of tier1 common equity to rwas, (iv)new capital conservation and counter-cyclical capital buffers, (v)an additional leverage
ratio that includes measures of off-balance sheet exposures, (vi)revisions to the methodology for calculating rwas, particularly for credit risk capital requirements for derivatives and (vii)a new
standardized approach to the calculation of rwas that would replace the federal reserves current basel1 risk-based capital framework in 2015, including for purposes of
calculating the requisite capital floor under the collinsamendment.  in november2012, the agencies announced that
the proposed effective date of january1,2013 for these modifications would be deferred, but have not indicated a revised effective date. these proposals incorporate the phase-out of tier1 capital treatment for our junior
subordinated debt issued to trusts; such capital would instead be eligible as tier2 capital. under the collins amendment, this phase-out was scheduled to begin on january1,2013. due to the aforementioned deferral of the effective
date of the proposed capital rules, however, the application of this phase-out remains uncertain at this time.  both the basel
committee and u.s. banking regulators implementing the dodd-frank act have indicated that they will impose more stringent capital standards on systemically important financial institutions. in november2011, the basel committee published its
final provisions for assessing the global systemic importance of banking institutions and the range of additional tier1 common equity that should be maintained by banking institutions deemed to be globally systemically important. the
additional capital for these institutions would initially range from 1% to 2.5% of tier1 common equity and could be as much as 3.5% for a banking institution that increases its systemic footprint (e.g., by increasing total assets). in
november2012, the financial stability board (established at the direction of the leaders of the group of 20) indicated that we would be required to hold an additional 1.5% of tier1 common equity as a globally systemically important
banking institution under the basel committees methodology, based on 2011 financial data. the final determination of the amount of additional tier1 common equity that we will be required to hold will be based on our 2013 financial data
and the manner and timing of the u.s. banking regulators implementation of the basel committees methodology. the basel committee indicated that globally systemically important banking institutions will be required to meet the capital
surcharges on a phased-in basis from 2016 through 2019.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
in october2012, the basel committee also published its final provisions for
calculating incremental capital requirements for domestic systemically important banking institutions. the provisions are complementary to the framework outlined above for global systemically important banking institutions, but are more
principles-based in order to provide an appropriate degree of national discretion. the impact of these provisions on the regulatory capital requirements of gs bank usa and other of our subsidiaries, including gsi, will depend on how they are
implemented by the banking and non-banking regulators in the united states and other jurisdictions.  during the last year, the
basel committee has released other consultation papers that may result in further changes to regulatory capital requirements, including a fundamental review of the trading book and revisions to the basel securitization
framework. the full impact of these developments on the firm will not be known with certainty until after any resulting rules arefinalized.  in december2011, the federal reserve board proposed rules to implement the enhanced prudential standards and early remediation requirements contemplated by the dodd-frank act. the proposed rules
would apply to bank holding companies with $50billion or more in total consolidated assets such as us, as well as systemically important nonbank financial institutions. with respect to the enhanced prudential standards, the proposed rules
address, among other things, risk-based capital and leverage requirements, liquidity requirements, overall risk management requirements and concentration/credit exposure limits. the proposed rules do not include additional capital requirements for
globally systemically important banking institutions but contemplate the federal reserve boards adopting such requirements. the proposed rules require increased involvement by boards of directors in liquidity and risk management. the proposed
early remediation rules are modeled on the prompt corrective action regime, described below, but are designed to require
action beginning in earlier stages of a companys financial distress by mandating action on the basis of a range of triggers, including capital and leverage, stress test results, liquidity
and risk management. in addition, the proposed enhanced prudential standards impose single-counterparty credit limits, including more stringent requirements for credit exposure among major financial institutions, which (together with other
provisions incorporated into the basel3 capital rules) may affect our ability to transact or hedge with other financial institutions. other provisions in the june2012 proposals discussed above may affect our ability to make markets in
the stock of other financial institutions. although many of the proposals mirror initiatives to which bank holding companies are already subject, their full impact on us will not be known with certainty until the rules are finalized and market
practices and structures develop under the finalrules.  in october2012, the federal reserve board issued final
rules implementing the requirements of the dodd-frank act concerning supervisory stress tests to be conducted by the federal reserve board and semi-annual company-run stress tests for bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of
$50billion or more, such as us, as well as designated nonbank financial companies. the stress test rules require increased involvement by boards of directors in stress testing and, beginning in march2013, public disclosure of the results
of both the federal reserve boards annual stress tests and a bank holding companys semi-annual internal stress tests. certain stress test requirements are also applicable to gs bank usa, as discussed below.
the interaction among the dodd-frank act, other reform initiatives contemplated by the agencies, the basel committees proposed and
announced changes and other proposed or announced changes from other governmental entities and regulators (including the european union (eu) and the fsa) adds further uncertainty to our future capital and liquidity requirements and those of our
subsidiaries.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
liquidity ratios under basel3.
historically, regulation and monitoring of bank and bank holding company liquidity has been addressed as a supervisory matter, both in the united states and internationally, without
required formulaic measures. basel3 will require banks and bank holding companies to measure their liquidity against two specific liquidity tests that, although similar in some respects to liquidity measures historically applied by banks and
regulators for management and supervisory purposes, will be mandated by regulation. one test, referred to as the liquidity coverage ratio, is designed to ensure that the entity maintains an adequate level of unencumbered high-quality liquid assets
equal to the entitys expected net cash outflow for a 30-day time horizon (or, if greater, 25% of its expected total cash outflow) under an acute liquidity stress scenario. the other, referred to as the net stable funding ratio, is designed to
promote more medium- and long-term funding of the assets and activities of these entities over a one-year time horizon. these requirements may incentivize banking entities to increase their holdings of securities that qualify as high-quality liquid
assets and increase the use of long-term debt as a funding source. under the basel committees framework, the liquidity coverage ratio would be introduced on january1,2015; however there would be a phase-in period whereby firms
would have a 60% minimum in 2015, which would be raised 10%per year until it reaches 100% in 2019. the net stable funding ratio is not expected to be introduced as a requirement until january1,2018. while the principles behind the
new framework are broadly consistent with our current liquidity management framework, it is possible that the refinement and implementation of these standards could impact our liquidity and funding requirements and practices, including as the
agencies propose and adopt the basel3 liquidity framework in the united states.  we also expect that liquidity
requirements applicable to us and several of our subsidiaries will be impacted in the future by the various developments arising from the basel committee, the dodd-frank act and actions by other governmental entities and regulators.
payment of dividends and stock repurchases  dividend payments by group inc. to its shareholders and stock repurchases by group inc. are subject to the oversight of the federal reserve board. under rules adopted by the federal reserve board in
november2011, the dividend and share repurchase policies of large bank holding companies, such as group inc., are reviewed by the federal reserve board based on capital plans and stress tests submitted by
the bank holding company, and will be assessed against, among other things, the bank holding companys ability to meet and exceed minimum regulatory capital ratios under stressed scenarios,
its expected sources and uses of capital over the planning horizon (generally a period of two years) under baseline and stressed scenarios, and any potential impact of changes to its business plan and activities on its capital adequacy and
liquidity. the purpose of the capital plan review is to ensure that these institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for each institutions unique risks and that permit continued operations during times of
economic and financial stress. as part of the capital plan review, the federal reserve board will evaluate an institutions plan to make capital distributions, such as repurchasing or redeeming stock or increasing dividend payments, across a
range of macro-economic and firm-specific assumptions. as part of our 2012 comprehensive capital analysis and review submission, the federal reserve board informed us that it did not object to our proposed capital actions through the first quarter
of 2013, including the repurchase of outstanding common stock and increases in our quarterly common stock dividend.  federal
and state law impose limitations on the payment of dividends by our depository institution subsidiaries to group inc. in general, the amount of dividends that may be paid by gs bank usa or our national bank trust company subsidiary is limited to the
lesser of the amounts calculated under a recent earnings test and an undivided profits test. under the recent earnings test, a dividend may not be paid if the total of all dividends declared by the entity in any calendar year
is in excess of the current years net income combined with the retained net income of the two preceding years, unless the entity obtains prior regulatory approval. under the undivided profits test, a dividend may not be paid in excess of the
entitys undivided profits (generally, accumulated net profits that have not been paid out as dividends or transferred to surplus). the banking regulators have authority to prohibit or limit the payment of dividends if, in the
banking regulators opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in light of the financial condition of the bankingorganization.  in addition, certain of group inc.s non-bank subsidiaries are or will become subject to separate regulatory limitations on dividends and distributions, including our broker-dealer, swap-related and
insurance subsidiaries as describedbelow.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
source of strength  federal reserve board policy historically has required bank holding companies to act as a source of strength to their bank subsidiaries and to commit capital and financial resources to support those
subsidiaries. the dodd-frank act codifies this policy as a statutory requirement. this support may be required by the federal reserve board at times when we might otherwise determine not to provide it. capital loans by a bank holding company to a
subsidiary bank are subordinate in right of payment to deposits and to certain other indebtedness of the subsidiary bank. in addition, if a bank holding company commits to a federal bank regulator that it will maintain the capital of its bank
subsidiary, whether in response to the federal reserve boards invoking its source-of-strength authority or in response to other regulatory measures, that commitment will be assumed by the bankruptcy trustee and the bank will be entitled to
priority payment in respect of that commitment, ahead of other creditors of the bank holdingcompany.  the bhc act
provides for regulation of bank holding company activities by various functional regulators and prohibits the federal reserve board from requiring a payment by a holding company subsidiary to a depository institution if the functional regulator of
that subsidiary objects to such payment. in such a case, the federal reserve board could instead require the divestiture of the depository institution and impose operating restrictions pending the divestiture.
guarantees  group inc. has, subject
to certain exceptions, guaranteed the payment obligations of gs bank usa, along with those of gs&co. and goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p.(gsec).  compensation practices  our compensation practices are subject to oversight by the
federal reserve board and, with respect to some of our subsidiaries and employees, by other financial regulatory bodies worldwide. the scope and content of compensation regulation in the financial industry are continuing to develop, and we expect
that these regulations and resulting market practices will evolve over a number of years.
in june2010, the agencies jointly issued guidance designed to ensure that incentive
compensation arrangements at banking organizations take into account risk and are consistent with safe and sound practices. the guidance sets forth the following three key principles with respect to incentive compensation arrangements: the
arrangements should provide employees with incentives that appropriately balance risk and financial results in a manner that does not encourage employees to expose their organizations to imprudent risk; the arrangements should be compatible with
effective controls and risk management; and the arrangements should be supported by strong corporate governance. in addition, the federal reserve board has conducted a review of the incentive compensation policies and practices of a number of large,
complex banking organizations, including us. the june2010 guidance provides that supervisory findings with respect to incentive compensation will be incorporated, as appropriate, into the organizations supervisory ratings, which can
affect its ability to make acquisitions or perform other actions. the guidance also provides that enforcement actions may be taken against a banking organization if its incentive compensation arrangements or related risk management, control or
governance processes pose a risk to the organizations safety and soundness.  the financial stability board has released
standards for implementing certain compensation principles for banks and other financial companies designed to encourage sound compensation practices. these standards are to be implemented by local regulators. in europe, the third capital
requirements directive includes compensation provisions designed to implement the financial stability boards compensation standards within the eu. regulators in a number of countries, including the united kingdom, france and germany, have
adopted compensation regulations applicable to financial institutions pursuant to this directive. in addition, the european parliament has proposed further compensation rules to be included in the fourth capital requirements directive. these
requirements are in addition to the guidance issued by u.s. financial regulators discussed above and the dodd-frank act provision discussed below.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the dodd-frank act requires the u.s. financial regulators, including the federal reserve
board, to establish joint regulations or guidelines prohibiting incentive-based payment arrangements at specified regulated entities having at least $1billion in total assets (which would include group inc. and some of its depository
institution, broker-dealer and investment advisor subsidiaries) that encourage inappropriate risks by providing an executive officer, employee, director or principal shareholder with excessive compensation, fees, or benefits or that could lead to
material financial loss to the entity. in addition, these regulators must establish regulations or guidelines requiring enhanced disclosure to regulators of incentive-based compensation arrangements. the initial version of these regulations was
proposed by the u.s. financial regulators in early 2011 but the regulations have not yet been finalized. the proposed regulations incorporate the three key principles from the june2010 regulatory guidance discussed above. if the regulations
are adopted in the form initially proposed, they will restrict our flexibility with respect to the manner in which we may structurecompensation.
regulation of gs bank usa  our
subsidiary, gs bank usa, an fdic-insured, new york state-chartered bank and a member of the federal reserve system, is supervised and regulated by the federal reserve board, the fdic, the new york state department of financial services and the cfpb,
and is subject to minimum capital requirements (described below) that are calculated in a manner similar to those applicable to bank holding companies. a number of our activities are conducted partially or entirely through gs bank usa and its
subsidiaries, including: origination of bank loans; interest rate, credit, currency and other derivatives; leveraged finance; mortgage origination; structured finance; and agencylending.
under rules adopted by the agencies in 2012 under the dodd-frank act, gs bank usa is required to undertake stress tests, to submit the
results to the federal reserve board, and to make a summary of those results public. the rules require that the board of directors of gs bank usa, among other things, consider the results of the stress tests in the normal course of the banks
business including, but not limited to, its capital planning, assessment of capital adequacy and risk managementpractices.
the dodd-frank act contains derivative push-out provisions that, beginning in
july2013 (subject to possible extensions), will prevent us from conducting certain swaps-related activities through gs bank usa or another insured depository institution subsidiary, subject to exceptions for certain interest rate, currency and
cleared credit default swaps and for hedging or risk mitigation activities directly related to the banks business. these precluded activities may be conducted elsewhere within the firm, subject to certain requirements and potential
registration as a swap or security-based swap dealer. in addition, new york state banking law imposes lending limits (which have recently been amended to take into account credit exposure from derivative transactions) and other requirements that
could impact the manner and scope of gs bank usasactivities.  transactions with affiliates
transactions between gs bank usa or its subsidiaries, on the one hand, and group inc. or its other subsidiaries and affiliates, on the
other hand, are regulated by the federal reserve board under the federal reserve act. the statute and the related regulations limit the types and amounts of transactions (including credit extensions from gs bank usa or its subsidiaries to group inc.
or its other subsidiaries and affiliates) that may take place and generally require those transactions to be on market terms or better to gs bank usa. these regulations generally do not apply to transactions between gs bank usa and its subsidiaries.
the dodd-frank act significantly expands the coverage and scope of the regulations that limit affiliate transactions within a banking organization, including by applying these regulations to the credit exposure arising under derivative transactions,
repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements, and securities borrowing and lendingtransactions.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
deposit insurance  gs bank usa accepts deposits, and those deposits have the benefit of fdic insurance up to the applicable limits. the fdics deposit insurance fund is funded by assessments on insured depository
institutions, such as gs bank usa. the amounts of these assessments for larger depository institutions (generally those that have $10billion in assets or more), such as gs bank usa, are currently based on the average total consolidated assets
less the average tangible equity of the insured depository institution during the assessment period, the supervisory ratings of the insured depository institution and specified forward-looking financial measures used to calculate the assessment
rate. the assessment rate is subject to adjustment by the fdic.  prompt corrective action and capital ratios
the u.s. federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991 (fdicia), among other things, requires the federal banking agencies
to take prompt corrective action in respect of depository institutions that do not meet specified capital requirements. fdicia establishes five capital categories for fdic-insured banks: well-capitalized, adequately capitalized,
undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized and criticallyundercapitalized.  a depository institution is generally
deemed to be well-capitalized, the highest category, if it has a tier1 capital ratio of at least 6%, a total capital ratio of at least 10% and a tier1 leverage ratio of at least 5%. gs bank usa has agreed with the federal
reserve board to maintain minimum capital ratios in excess of these well-capitalizedlevels.  see note20
to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for information on the calculation of gs bank usas capital ratios under basel1 and for a discussion of minimum required ratios.
gs bank usa computes its capital ratios in accordance with the regulatory capital requirements currently applicable to state member banks,
which are based on basel1, as implemented by the federal reserve board. on january1,2013, gs bank usa also adopted the revised market risk regulatory capital framework outlined above.
gs bank usa will adopt basel2 once it is approved to do so by regulators. in
addition, the capital requirements for gs bank usa are expected to be impacted by the june2012 proposed modifications to the agencies capital adequacy regulations outlined above, including the requirement for a floor to the advanced
risk-based capital ratios. if enacted as proposed, these proposals would also change the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action that is applicable to gs bank usa by, among other things, introducing a common equity tier1 ratio
requirement, increasing the minimum tier1 capital ratio requirement and introducing a supplementary leverage ratio as a component of the prompt corrective action analysis.
an institution may be downgraded to, or deemed to be in, a capital category that is lower than is indicated by its capital ratios if it is
determined to be in an unsafe or unsound condition or if it receives an unsatisfactory examination rating with respect to certain matters. fdicia imposes progressively more restrictive constraints on operations, management and capital distributions,
as the capital category of an institution declines. failure to meet the capital requirements could also require a depository institution to raise capital. ultimately, critically undercapitalized institutions are subject to the appointment of a
receiver or conservator, as described under  insolvency of an insured depository institution or a bank holding company below.  the prompt corrective action regulations apply only to depository institutions and not to bank holding companies such as group inc. however, the federal reserve board is authorized to take appropriate
action at the holding company level, based upon the undercapitalized status of the holding companys depository institution subsidiaries. in certain instances relating to an undercapitalized depository institution subsidiary, the bank holding
company would be required to guarantee the performance of the undercapitalized subsidiarys capital restoration plan and might be liable for civil money damages for failure to fulfill its commitments on that guarantee. furthermore, in the event
of the bankruptcy of the holding company, the guarantee would take priority over the holding companys general unsecured creditors, as described under  source of strength above.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
insolvency of an insured depository institution or a bank holding company
if the fdic is appointed as conservator or receiver for an insured depository institution
such as gs bank usa, upon its insolvency or in certain other events, the fdic has broad powers, including the power:
to transfer any of the depository institutions assets and liabilities to a new obligor, including a newly formed bridge bank,
without the approval of the depository institutions creditors;
to enforce the terms of the depository institutions contracts pursuant to their terms without regard to any provisions triggered by the
appointment of the fdic in that capacity;or
to repudiate or disaffirm any contract or lease to which the depository institution is a party, the performance of which is determined by the fdic
to be burdensome and the disaffirmance or repudiation of which is determined by the fdic to promote the orderly administration of the depository institution.  in addition, under federal law, the claims of holders of domestic deposit liabilities and certain claims for administrative expenses against an insured depository institution would be afforded a priority
over other general unsecured claims, including deposits at non-u.s. branches, against such an institution, including claims of debt holders of the institution, in the liquidation or other resolution of such an institution by any
receiver. as a result, whether or not the fdic ever sought to repudiate any debt obligations of gs bank usa, the debt holders (other than depositors) would be treated differently from, and could receive, if anything, substantially less than, the
depositors of gs bankusa.
the dodd-frank act created a new resolution regime (known as orderly liquidation
authority) for bank holding companies and their affiliates, and systemically important non-bank financial companies. under the orderly liquidation authority, the fdic may be appointed as receiver for the systemically important institution, and
its failed non-bank subsidiaries, for purposes of liquidating the entity if, among other conditions, it is determined at the time of the institutions failure that it is in default or in danger of default and the failure poses a risk to the
stability of the u.s. financial system.  if the fdic is appointed as receiver under the orderly liquidation authority, then the
powers of the receiver, and the rights and obligations of creditors and other parties who have dealt with the institution, would be determined under the orderly liquidation authority, and not under the insolvency law that would otherwise apply. the
powers of the receiver under the orderly liquidation authority were generally based on the powers of the fdic as receiver for depository institutions under the federal deposit insurance act. substantial differences in the rights of creditors exist
between the orderly liquidation authority and the u.s. bankruptcy code, including the right of the fdic under the orderly liquidation authority to disregard the strict priority of creditor claims in some circumstances, the use of an administrative
claims procedure to determine creditors claims (as opposed to the judicial procedure utilized in bankruptcy proceedings), and the right of the fdic to transfer claims to a bridge entity. in addition, the orderly liquidation
authority limits the ability of creditors to enforce contractual cross-defaults against affiliates of the institution in receivership.  the orderly liquidation authority provisions of the dodd-frank act became effective upon enactment. the fdic has completed several rulemakings under the orderly liquidation authority, but may provide
additional guidance. new guidance may affect the manner in which the new authority is applied, particularly with respect to broker-dealer and futures commission merchant subsidiaries of bank holding companies.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
resolution plan  as required by the dodd-frank act, the federal reserve board and fdic have jointly issued a rulerequiring each bank holding company with over $50billion in assets and each designated
systemically important financial institution to provide to regulators an annual plan for its rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure (resolution plan). our resolution plan must, among other things,
demonstrate that gs bank usa is adequately protected from risks arising from our other entities. the regulators joint rulesets specific standards for the resolution plans, including requiring a detailed resolution strategy and analyses
of the companys material entities, organizational structure, interconnections and interdependencies, and management information systems, among other elements. we submitted our resolution plan to the regulators on june29,2012. gs
bank usa also submitted its resolution plan on june29,2012, as required by the fdic.  broker-dealer and securities regulation
goldman sachs broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to regulations that cover all aspects of the securities
business, including sales methods, trade practices, use and safekeeping of clients funds and securities, capital structure, recordkeeping, the financing of clients purchases, and the conduct of directors, officers and employees. in the
united states, the sec is the federal agency responsible for the administration of the federal securities laws. gs&co. is registered as a broker-dealer, a municipal advisor and an investment adviser with the sec and as a broker-dealer in all 50
states and the district of columbia. self-regulatory organizations, such as finra and the nyse, adopt rules that apply to, and examine, broker-dealers such as gs&co.  in addition, state securities and other regulators also have regulatory or oversight authority over gs&co. similarly, our businesses are also subject to regulation by various non-u.s. governmental and
regulatory bodies and self-regulatory authorities in virtually all countries where we have offices, as discussed further under other regulation below. gsec and one of its subsidiaries are registered u.s. broker-dealers and are regulated
by the sec,
the nyse and finra. for a discussion of net capital requirements applicable to gs&co. and gsec, see note20 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this
form10-k.  our exchange-based market-making activities are subject to extensive regulation by a number of securities
exchanges. as a dmm on the nyse and as a market maker on other exchanges, we are required to maintain orderly markets in the securities to which we are assigned. under the nyses dmm rules, this may require us to supply liquidity to these
markets when markets are declining.  the dodd-frank act will result in additional regulation by the sec, the cftc and other
regulators of our broker-dealer and regulated subsidiaries in a number of respects. the legislation calls for the imposition of expanded standards of care by market participants in dealing with clients and customers, including by providing the sec
with authority to adopt rules establishing fiduciary duties for broker-dealers and directing the sec to examine and improve sales practices and disclosure by broker-dealers and investment advisers.
our broker-dealer subsidiaries will also be affected by rules to be adopted by federal agencies pursuant to the dodd-frank act that
require any person who organizes or initiates an asset-backed security transaction to retain a portion (generally, at least five percent) of any credit risk that the person conveys to a third party. securitizations will also be affected by rules
proposed by the sec in september2011 to implement the dodd-frank acts prohibition against securitization participants engaging in any transaction that would involve or result in any material conflict of interest with an investor in
a securitization transaction. the proposed rules would except bona fide market-making activities and risk-mitigating hedging activities in connection with securitization activities from the general prohibition.
the sec, finra and regulators in various non-u.s. jurisdictions have imposed both conduct-based and disclosure-based requirements with
respect to research reports and research analysts and may impose additionalregulations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
swaps, derivatives and commodities regulation
the commodity futures, commodity options and swaps industry in the united states is subject
to regulation under the u.s. commodity exchange act. the cftc is the federal agency charged with the administration of the cea. in addition, the sec is the federal agency charged with the regulation of security-based swaps. several of goldman
sachs subsidiaries, including gs&co. and gsec, are registered with the cftc and act as futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators, commodity trading advisors or (as discussed below) swap dealers, and are subject to cftc
regulations. the rules and regulations of various self-regulatory organizations, such as the chicago board of trade and the chicago mercantile exchange, other futures exchanges and the national futures association, also govern the commodity futures,
commodity options and swaps activities of these entities. in addition, goldman sachs financial markets, l.p. (gsfm) is registered with the sec as an otc derivatives dealer and conducts certain otc derivatives activities.
the dodd-frank act provides for significantly increased regulation of and restrictions on derivative markets and transactions. in
particular, the dodd-frank act imposes the following requirements relating to swaps and security-based swaps:
real-time public and regulatory reporting of trade information for swaps and security-based swaps and large trader reporting for swaps;
registration of swap dealers and major swap participants with the cftc and of security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants
with the sec;
position limits that cap exposure to derivatives on certain physical commodities;
mandated clearing through central counterparties and execution through regulated exchanges or electronic facilities for certain swaps and
security-based swaps;
new business conduct standards and other requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers and major
security-based swap participants, covering their relationships with counterparties, internal oversight and compliance structures, conflict of interest rules, internal information barriers, general and trade-specific record-keeping and risk
management;
margin requirements for trades that are not cleared through a central counterparty; and
entity-level capital requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers, and major security-based swap
participants.  the terms swaps and security-based swaps are generally defined broadly
for purposes of these requirements, and can include a wide variety of derivative instruments in addition to those conventionally called swaps, including certain forward contracts, options, certain loan participations and guarantees of swaps, subject
to certain exceptions, and relate to a wide variety of underlying assets or obligations, including currencies, commodities, interest or other monetary rates, yields, indices, securities, credit events, loans and other financialobligations.
the cftc is responsible for issuing rules relating to swaps, swap dealers and major swap participants, and the sec is
responsible for issuing rules relating to security-based swaps, security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. certain of the requirements, including registration of swap dealers and real-time public trade reporting, have
taken effect already under cftc rules, and the sec and the cftc have finalized the definitions of a number of key terms. the cftc has finalized a number of other implementing rules and laid out a series of implementation deadlines in 2013 covering
rules for business conduct standards for swap dealers and clearing requirements.  the sec has proposed rules to impose margin,
capital and segregation requirements for security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. the sec has also proposed rules relating to registration of security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants,
trade reporting and real-time reporting, and business conduct requirements for security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants.  both agencies have proposed, but not yet finalized, rules that would govern the design of new trading venues for swaps and security-based swaps and establish the process for determining which products
must be traded on thesevenues.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
we have registered certain subsidiaries as swap dealers under the cftc rules,
including gs&co., gs bank usa, gsi and j. aron& company. we expect that these entities, and our businesses more broadly, will be subject to significant and developing regulation and regulatory oversight in connection with swap-related
activities. however, the full impact of the various u.s. and non-u.s. regulatory developments in this area will not be known with certainty until the rules are implemented and market practices and structures develop under the final rules.
final rules have not been adopted by the cftc or proposed by the sec with respect to derivative activities outside the united
states. under the cftcs proposed rules, a non-u.s. entity may need to register as a swap dealer if it effects swap transactions with u.s. persons, subject to certainexceptions.
similar regulations have been proposed or adopted in jurisdictions outside the united states (such as the european market infrastructure
regulation, which took effect in 2012 subject to ongoing implementation), including the introduction of standardized execution and clearing, margining and reporting requirements for otc derivatives. in july2012 and february 2013, the basel
committee and the international organization of securities commissions released consultative documents proposing margin requirements for non-centrally-clearedderivatives.  j. aron& company is authorized by the u.s. federal energy regulatory commission (ferc) to sell wholesale physical power at market-based rates. as a ferc-authorized power marketer, j.
aron& company is subject to regulation under the u.s. federal power act and ferc regulations and to the oversight of ferc. as a result of our investing activities, group inc. is also an exempt holding company under the u.s.
public utility holding company act of 2005 and applicable fercrules.  in addition, as a result of our power-related and
commodities activities, we are subject to energy, environmental and other governmental laws and regulations, as discussed under risk factors our commodities activities, particularly our power generation interests and our physical
commodities activities, subject us to extensive regulation, potential catastrophic events and environmental, reputational and other risks that may expose us to significant liabilities and costs in parti, item1a of this
form10-k.
insurance regulation  our u.s. insurance subsidiaries are subject to state insurance regulation and oversight in the states in which they are domiciled and in the other states in which they are licensed, and group inc. is
subject to oversight as an insurance holding company in states where our insurance subsidiaries are domiciled. state insurance regulations limit the ability of our insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends to group inc. in certain circumstances, and
could require regulatory approval for any change in control of group inc., which may include control of 10% or more of our voting stock. in addition, certain of our insurance subsidiaries are regulated by the bermuda monetary authority,
and rothesay life limited (rothesay life), our u.k. insurance subsidiary, is regulated by the fsa. as of december2012, all of our insurance subsidiaries were in compliance with applicable capitalrequirements.
investment management regulation
our investment management business is subject to significant regulation in numerous jurisdictions around the world relating to, among
other things, the safeguarding of client assets, offerings of funds, marketing activities, transactions among affiliates and our management of client funds. certain of our subsidiaries are registered with, and subject to oversight by, the sec as
investment advisers. sec officials have stated publicly that the sec may propose changes to the regulation of money market funds, which could include requiring a floating net asset value, capital buffers and/or restrictions on redemptions. certain
of such changes, if proposed and adopted, may negatively impact our money marketbusiness.  other regulation
the u.s. and non-u.s. government agencies, regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations, as well as state securities commissions
and other state regulators in the united states, are empowered to conduct administrative proceedings that can result in censure, fine, the issuance of cease and desist orders, or the suspension or expulsion of a broker-dealer or its directors,
officers or employees. in addition, a number of our other activities require us to obtain licenses, adhere to applicable regulations and be subject to the oversight of various regulators in the jurisdictions in which we conduct these activities.
from time to time, our subsidiaries have been subject to investigations and proceedings, and sanctions have been imposed for infractions of various regulations relating to ouractivities.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
in europe, goldman sachs provides investment services that are subject to oversight by
national regulators as well as the eu. these investment services are regulated in accordance with national laws, many of which implement eu directives, and increasingly by directly applicable eu regulations. these national and eu laws require, among
other things, compliance with certain capital adequacy standards, customer protection requirements and market conduct and trade reporting rules.  goldman sachs provides investment services in and from the united kingdom under the regulation of the fsa. gsi, our regulated u.k. broker-dealer subsidiary, is subject to the capital requirements imposed
by the fsa. other subsidiaries, including goldman sachs international bank (gsib), our regulated u.k. bank, are also regulated by the fsa. as of december2012, gsi and gsib were in compliance with the fsa capital requirements.
various other goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking, insurance and securities regulatory authorities of the european
countries in which they operate, including, among others, the federal financial supervisory authority (bafin) and the bundesbank in germany, the autorit de contrle prudentiel and the autorit des marchs financiers in
france, the federal financial markets service and the central bank of the russian federation and the swiss financial market supervisory authority.  the eu and national financial legislators and regulators have proposed or adopted numerous market reforms that may impact our businesses. these include stricter capital and liquidity requirements
(including increased capital requirements for market risk for certain of our eu subsidiaries as a result of the new market risk framework of the basel committee), risk retention and enhanced disclosure requirements for asset-backed security
offerings, reporting requirements and restrictions on short selling and credit default swaps, additional obligations and restrictions on the management and marketing of funds in the eu, and revised market structure, conduct of business and market
abuse rules. in addition, the european commission, the european securities market authority, the european banking authority and the european insurance and occupational pensions authority have announced or are
formulating regulatory standards and other measures which will impact our european operations. certain goldman sachs entities are also regulated by the european securities, derivatives and
commodities exchanges of which they are members.  goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl), our regulated japanese broker-dealer,
is subject to the capital requirements imposed by japans financial services agency. as of december2012, gsjcl was in compliance with its capital adequacy requirements. gsjcl is also regulated by the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka
securities exchange, the tokyo financial exchange, the japan securities dealers association, the tokyo commodity exchange, securities and exchange surveillance commission, bank of japan, the ministry of finance and the ministry of economy, trade and
industry, among others.  also, the securities and futures commission in hong kong, the monetary authority of singapore, the
china securities regulatory commission, the korean financial supervisory service, the reserve bank of india, the securities and exchange board of india, the australian securities and investments commission and the australian securities exchange,
among others, regulate various of our subsidiaries and also have capital standards and other requirements comparable to the rules of the sec. various other goldman sachs entities are regulated by the banking and regulatory authorities in countries
in which goldman sachs operates, including, among others, brazil and dubai.  the u.s. bank secrecy act (bsa), as amended by the
usa patriot act of 2001 (patriot act), contains anti-money laundering and financial transparency laws and mandated the implementation of various regulations applicable to all financial institutions, including standards for verifying client
identification at account opening, and obligations to monitor client transactions and report suspicious activities. through these and other provisions, the bsa and the patriot act seek to promote the identification of parties that may be involved in
terrorism, money laundering or other suspicious activities. anti-money laundering laws outside the united states contain some similar provisions.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
in addition, we are subject to laws and regulations worldwide, including the u.s. foreign
corrupt practices act and the u.k. bribery act, relating to corrupt and illegal payments to government officials and others. the obligation of financial institutions, including goldman sachs, to identify their clients, to monitor for and report
suspicious transactions, to monitor direct and indirect payments to government officials, to respond to requests for information by regulatory authorities and law enforcement agencies, and to share information with other financial institutions, has
required the implementation and maintenance of internal practices, procedures and controls that have increased, and may continue to increase, our costs, and any failure with respect to our programs in this area could subject us to substantial
liability and regulatoryfines.  as discussed above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to regulatory capital
requirements in jurisdictions throughout the world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency requirements or internal policies, including policies concerning the minimum amount
of capital a subsidiary should hold based upon its underlying risk.  certain of our businesses are subject to compliance with
regulations enacted by u.s. federal and state governments, the eu or other jurisdictions and/or enacted by various regulatory organizations or exchanges relating to the privacy of the information of clients, employees or others, and any failure to
comply with these regulations could expose us to liability and/or reputational damage.
available information
our internet address is www.gs.com and the investor relations section of our web site is located at www.gs.com/shareholders.
we make available free of charge through the investor relations section of our web site, annual reports on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q and current reports on form8-k and amendments to those reports filed or furnished
pursuant to section13(a) or 15(d) of the u.s. securities exchange act of 1934 (exchange act), as well as proxy statements, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the sec. also
posted on our web site, and available in print upon request of any shareholder to our investor relations department, are our certificate of incorporation and by-laws, charters for our audit committee, risk committee, compensation committee, and
corporate governance, nominating and public responsibilities committee, our policy regarding director independence determinations, our policy on reporting of concerns regarding accounting and other matters, our corporate governance guidelines and
our code of business conduct and ethics governing our directors, officers and employees. within the time period required by the sec, we will post on our web site any amendment to the code of business conduct and ethics and any waiver applicable to
any executive officer, director or senior financialofficer.  in addition, our web site includes information concerning
purchases and sales of our equity securities by our executive officers and directors, as well as disclosure relating to certain non-gaap financial measures (as defined in the secs regulation g) that we may make public orally, telephonically,
by webcast, by broadcast or by similar means from time totime.  our investor relations department can be contacted at the
goldman sachs group, inc.,200 west street, 29thfloor, new york, new york 10282, attn: investor relations, telephone: 212-902-0300, e-mail: gs-investor-relations@gs.com.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
cautionary statement pursuant to the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of1995
we have included or incorporated by reference in this form10-k, and from time to time
our management may make, statements that may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are not
historical facts, but instead represent only our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. these statements include statements other than historical information or statements
of current condition and may relate to our future plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may also include our belief regarding the effect of changes to the capital and leverage rules applicable to bank holding companies, the
impact of the dodd-frank act on our businesses and operations, and various legal proceedings as set forth under legal proceedings in note27 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this
form10-k, as well as statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our risk management and liquidity policies, statements about trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses, statements about our future status, activities or
reporting under u.s. or non-u.s. banking and financial regulation, and statements about our investment banking transaction backlog.  by identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and financial condition may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results
and financial condition indicated in these forward-looking statements. important factors that could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ from those indicated in the forward-looking statements include, among others, those
discussed below and under risk factors in parti, item1a of this form10-k.
in the case of statements about our investment banking transaction backlog, such statements
are subject to the risk that the terms of these transactions may be modified or that they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net revenues, if any, that we actually earn from these transactions may differ, possibly materially, from those
currently expected. important factors that could result in a modification of the terms of a transaction or a transaction not being completed include, in the case of underwriting transactions, a decline or continued weakness in general economic
conditions, outbreak of hostilities, volatility in the securities markets generally or an adverse development with respect to the issuer of the securities and, in the case of financial advisory transactions, a decline in the securities markets, an
inability to obtain adequate financing, an adverse development with respect to a party to the transaction or a failure to obtain a required regulatory approval. for a discussion of other important factors that could adversely affect our investment
banking transactions, see risk factors in parti, item1a of this form10-k.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item1a.risk factors
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in our businesses, including
market, liquidity, credit, operational, legal, regulatory and reputational risks. the following are some of the more important factors thatcould affect ourbusinesses.
our businesses have been and may continue to be adversely affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic conditions
generally.  our businesses, by their nature, do not produce predictable earnings, and all of our businesses are
materially affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic conditions generally, both directly and through their impact on client activity levels. since 2008, these conditions have changed suddenly and, for a period of time, very
negatively. in 2008 and through early 2009, the financial services industry and the securities markets generally were materially and adversely affected by significant declines in the values of nearly all asset classes and by a serious lack of
liquidity. in 2011 and 2012, concerns about european sovereign debt risk and its impact on the european banking system, and about u.s. growth and uncertainty regarding u.s. federal fiscal policies, resulted, at times, in significant volatility while
negatively impacting the levels of clientactivity.  since 2008, governments, regulators and central banks in the united
states and worldwide have taken numerous steps to increase liquidity and to restore investor and public confidence. in addition, numerous legislative and regulatory actions have been taken to deal with what regulators, politicians and others believe
to be the root causes of the financial crisis, including laws and regulations relating to financial institution capital requirements and compensation practices, restrictions on the type of activities in which financial institutions are permitted to
engage, and generally increased regulatory scrutiny. additional taxes have been, and may in the future be, imposed on us and certain other financial institutions and on financial transactions in which we engage. many of the regulations that are
required to implement this legislation (including the dodd-frank act) are still being developed or are not yet in effect; therefore, the exact impact that these regulations will have on our businesses, results of operations and cash flows is
presently unclear.
national and local governments continue to face difficult financial conditions due to
significant reductions in tax revenues, particularly from corporate and personal income taxes, as well as increased outlays for unemployment benefits due to high unemployment levels and the cost of stimulusprograms.
general uncertainty about economic, political and market activities, and the timing and final details of regulatory reform, as well as a
lack of consumer, investor and ceo confidence resulting in large part from such uncertainty, continues to negatively impact client activity which, together with low levels of volatility, has adversely affected many of our businesses.
our revenues, profitability and return on equity are significantly below 2007 levels, due primarily to the post-2008 economic, financial
and political conditions (including the uncertainty about future regulations) and their impact on the markets and the level of client activity. in addition, our revenues and profitability and those of our competitors have been and will continue to
be impacted by changes resulting from the financial crisis, including increased capital requirements, minimum liquidity levels and levels of regulatory oversight, as well as limitations on the type of and manner in which certain business activities
may be carried out by financial institutions. financial institution returns have also been negatively impacted by increased funding costs due in part to the withdrawal of perceived government support of such institutions in the event of future
financial crises.  the degree to which these and other changes resulting from the financial crisis will have a long-term impact
on the profitability of financial institutions will depend on the final interpretation and implementation of new regulations, the manner in which markets, market participants and financial institutions adapt to the new landscape, and the prevailing
economic and financial market conditions. however, there is a risk that such changes will, at least in the near-term, continue to negatively impact the absolute level of revenues, profitability and return on equity at our firm and at other financial
institutions.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our financial performance is highly dependent on the environment in which our businesses
operate. a favorable business environment is generally characterized by, among other factors, high global gross domestic product growth, transparent, liquid and efficient capital markets, low inflation, high business and investor confidence, stable
geopolitical conditions, regulatory certainty and strong business earnings. unfavorable or uncertain economic and market conditions can be caused by: concerns about sovereign defaults; uncertainty in u.s. federal fiscal policy; uncertainty about the
timing and nature of regulatory reforms; declines in economic growth, business activity or investor or business confidence; limitations on the availability or increases in the cost of credit and capital; increases in inflation, interest rates,
exchange rate volatility, default rates or the price of basic commodities; outbreaks of hostilities or other geopolitical instability; corporate, political or other scandals that reduce investor confidence in capital markets; extreme weather events
or other natural disasters or pandemics; or a combination of these or otherfactors.  our businesses have been and may be
adversely affected by declining asset values. this is particularly true for those businesses in which we have net long positions, receive fees based on the value of assets managed, or receive or postcollateral.
many of our businesses have net long positions in debt securities, loans, derivatives, mortgages, equities (including private
equity and real estate) and most other asset classes. these include positions we take when we act as a principal to facilitate our clients activities, including our exchange-based market-making activities, or commit large amounts of capital to
maintain positions in interest rate and credit products, as well as through our currencies, commodities and equities activities. because nearly all of these investing, lending and market-making positions are marked-to-market on a daily basis,
declines in asset values directly and immediately impact our earnings, unless we have effectively hedged our exposures to such declines. in certain circumstances (particularly in the case of leveraged loans and private equities or other
securities that are not freely tradable or lack established and liquid trading markets), it may not be possible or economic to hedge such exposures and to the extent that we do so the hedge may be ineffective or may greatly reduce our ability to
profit from increases in the values of the assets. sudden declines and significant volatility in the prices of assets may substantially
curtail or eliminate the trading markets for certain assets, which may make it very difficult to sell, hedge or value such assets. the inability to sell or effectively hedge assets reduces our
ability to limit losses in such positions and the difficulty in valuing assets may require us to maintain additional capital and increase our funding costs.  in our exchange-based market-making activities, we are obligated by stock exchange rules to maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing shares in a declining market. in markets where asset values
are declining and in volatile markets, this results in losses and an increased need forliquidity.  we receive asset-based
management fees based on the value of our clients portfolios or investment in funds managed by us and, in some cases, we also receive incentive fees based on increases in the value of such investments. declines in asset values reduce the value
of our clients portfolios or fund assets, which in turn reduce the fees we earn for managing such assets.  if financial
markets decline, revenues from our variable annuity products are likely to decrease. in addition, unanticipated changes in reinvestment returns, policy lapses or mortality rates may also impact earnings from our insuranceactivities.
we post collateral to support our obligations and receive collateral to support the obligations of our clients and
counterparties in connection with our client execution businesses. when the value of the assets posted as collateral declines, the party posting the collateral may need to provide additional collateral or, if possible, reduce its trading position. a
classic example of such a situation is a margin call in connection with a brokerage account. therefore, declines in the value of asset classes used as collateral mean that either the cost of funding positions is increased or the size of
positions is decreased. if we are the party providing collateral, this can increase our costs and reduce our profitability and if we are the party receiving collateral, this can also reduce our profitability by reducing the level of business done
with our clients and counterparties. in addition, volatile or less liquid markets increase the difficulty of valuing assets which can lead to costly and time-consuming disputes over asset values and the level of required collateral, as well as
increased credit risk to the recipient of the collateral due to delays in receiving adequate collateral.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our businesses have been and may be adversely affected by disruptions in the credit markets,
including reduced access to credit and higher costs of obtaining credit.  widening credit spreads, as well as
significant declines in the availability of credit, have in the past adversely affected our ability to borrow on a secured and unsecured basis and may do so in the future. we fund ourselves on an unsecured basis by issuing long-term debt, by
accepting deposits at our bank subsidiaries, by issuing promissory notes and commercial paper or by obtaining bank loans or lines of credit. we seek to finance many of our assets on a secured basis, including by entering into repurchase agreements.
any disruptions in the credit markets may make it harder and more expensive to obtain funding for our businesses. if our available funding is limited or we are forced to fund our operations at a higher cost, these conditions may require us to
curtail our business activities and increase our cost of funding, both of which could reduce our profitability, particularly in our businesses that involve investing, lending and market making.
our clients engaging in mergers and acquisitions often rely on access to the secured and unsecured credit markets to finance their
transactions. a lack of available credit or an increased cost of credit can adversely affect the size, volume and timing of our clients merger and acquisition transactions particularly large transactions and adversely
affect our financial advisory and underwritingbusinesses.  in addition, we may incur significant unrealized gains or
losses due solely to changes in our credit spreads or those of third parties, as these changes may affect the fair value of our derivative instruments and the debt securities that we hold orissue.
our market-making activities have been and may be affected by changes in the levels of market volatility.
certain of our market-making activities depend on market volatility to provide trading and arbitrage opportunities to our clients, and
decreases in volatility may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect the results of these activities. on the other hand, increased volatility, while it can increase trading volumes and spreads, also increases risk as measured by value-at-risk
(var) and may expose us to increased risks in connection with our market-making activities or cause us to reduce our market-making
positions in order to avoid increasing our var. limiting the size of our market-making positions can adversely affect our profitability. in periods when volatility is increasing, but asset values
are declining significantly, it may not be possible to sell assets at all or it may only be possible to do so at steep discounts. in such circumstances we may be forced to either take on additional risk or to incur losses in order to decrease our
var. in addition, increases in volatility increase the level of our rwas and increase our capital requirements, both of which in turn increase our funding costs.  our investment banking, client execution and investment management businesses have been adversely affected and may continue to be adversely affected by market uncertainty or lack of confidence among investors
and ceos due to general declines in economic activity and other unfavorable economic, geopolitical or market conditions.
our investment banking business has been and may continue to be adversely affected by market conditions. poor economic conditions and
other adverse geopolitical conditions can adversely affect and have adversely affected investor and ceo confidence, resulting in significant industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings and of financial advisory transactions, which
could have an adverse effect on our revenues and our profit margins. in particular, because a significant portion of our investment banking revenues is derived from our participation in large transactions, a decline in the number of large
transactions would adversely affect our investmentbanking business.  in certain circumstances, market uncertainty or
general declines in market or economic activity may affect our client execution businesses by decreasing levels of overall activity or by decreasing volatility, but at other times market uncertainty and even declining economic activity may result in
higher trading volumes or higher spreads orboth.  market uncertainty, volatility and adverse economic conditions, as well
as declines in asset values, may cause our clients to transfer their assets out of our funds or other products or their brokerage accounts and result in reduced net revenues, principally in our investment management business. to the extent that
clients do not withdraw their funds, they may invest them in products that generate less fee income.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our investment management business may be affected by the poor investment performance of our
investment products.  poor investment returns in our investment management business, due to either general market
conditions or underperformance (relative to our competitors or to benchmarks) by funds or accounts that we manage or investment products that we design or sell, affects our ability to retain existing assets and to attract new clients or additional
assets from existing clients. this could affect the management and incentive fees that we earn on assets under supervision or the commissions and net spreads that we earn for selling other investment products, such as structured notes
orderivatives.  we may incur losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and strategies.
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a risk and control framework encompassing a variety of separate but complementary
financial, credit, operational, compliance and legal reporting systems, internal controls, management review processes and other mechanisms. our risk management process seeks to balance our ability to profit from market-making, investing or lending
positions with our exposure to potential losses. while we employ a broad and diversified set of risk monitoring and risk mitigation techniques, those techniques and the judgments that accompany their application cannot anticipate every economic and
financial outcome or the specifics and timing of such outcomes. thus, we may, in the course of our activities, incur losses. market conditions in recent years have involved unprecedented dislocations and highlight the limitations inherent in using
historical data to manage risk.  the models that we use to assess and control our risk exposures reflect assumptions about the
degrees of correlation or lack thereof among prices of various asset classes or other market indicators. in times of market stress or other unforeseen circumstances, such as occurred during 2008 and early 2009, and to some extent in 2011 and 2012,
previously uncorrelated indicators may become correlated, or conversely previously correlated indicators may move in different directions. these types of market movements have at times limited the effectiveness of our hedging strategies and have
caused us to incur significant losses, and they may
do so in the future. these changes in correlation can be exacerbated where other market participants are using risk or trading models with assumptions or algorithms that are similar to ours. in
these and other cases, it may be difficult to reduce our risk positions due to the activity of other market participants or widespread market dislocations, including circumstances where asset values are declining significantly or no market exists
for certain assets.  to the extent that we have positions through our market-making or origination activities or we make
investments directly through our investing activities in securities, including private equity, that do not have an established liquid trading market or are otherwise subject to restrictions on sale or hedging, we may not be able to reduce our
positions and therefore reduce our risk associated with such positions. in addition, we invest our own capital in private equity, credit, real estate and hedge funds that we manage and limitations on our ability to withdraw some or all of our
investments in these funds, whether for legal, reputational or other reasons, may make it more difficult for us to control the risk exposures relating to these investments.  for a further discussion of our risk management policies and procedures, see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations risk
management in partii, item7 of this form10-k.  our liquidity, profitability and businesses may be adversely
affected by an inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets or by a reduction in our credit ratings or by an increase in our creditspreads.  liquidity is essential to our businesses. our liquidity may be impaired by an inability to access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an inability to access funds from our subsidiaries, an inability to
sell assets or redeem our investments, or unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this situation may arise due to circumstances that we may be unable to control, such as a general market disruption or an operational problem that affects third
parties or us, or even by the perception among market participants that we, or other market participants, are experiencing greater liquidityrisk.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the financial instruments that we hold and the contracts to which we are a party are often
complex, as we employ structured products to benefit our clients and ourselves, and these complex structured products often do not have readily available markets to access in times of liquidity stress. our investing and lending activities may lead
to situations where the holdings from these activities represent a significant portion of specific markets, which could restrict liquidity for our positions.  further, our ability to sell assets may be impaired if other market participants are seeking to sell similar assets at the same time, as is likely to occur in a liquidity or other market crisis. in
addition, financial institutions with which we interact may exercise set-off rights or the right to require additional collateral, including in difficult market conditions, which could further impair our access toliquidity.
our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a reduction in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and competitive
position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under certain provisions in some of our trading and collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions, counterparties could be
permitted to terminate contracts with goldman sachs or require us to post additional collateral. termination of our trading and collateralized financing contracts could cause us to sustain losses and impair our liquidity by requiring us to find
other sources of financing or to make significant cash payments or securities movements. certain rating agencies have indicated that the dodd-frank act could result in the rating agencies reducing their assumed level of government support and
therefore result in ratings downgrades for certain large financial institutions, including goldman sachs. as of december2012, each of moodys investors service, standard& poors ratings services and ratings and investment
information, inc. had issued a negative outlook on our long-term credit ratings. as of december2012, in the event of a one-notch and two-notch downgrade of our credit ratings our counterparties could have called for additional collateral or
termination payments in an aggregate amount of $1.5billion and $2.5billion, respectively.
our cost of obtaining long-term unsecured funding is directly related to our credit spreads
(the amount in excess of the interest rate of u.s. treasury securities (or other benchmark securities) of the same maturity that we need to pay to our debt investors). increases in our credit spreads can significantly increase our cost of this
funding. changes in credit spreads are continuous, market-driven, and subject at times to unpredictable and highly volatile movements. our credit spreads are also influenced by market perceptions of our creditworthiness. in addition, our credit
spreads may be influenced by movements in the costs to purchasers of credit default swaps referenced to our long-term debt. the market for credit default swaps, although very large, has proven to be extremely volatile and at times may lack a high
degree of structure ortransparency.  conflicts of interest are increasing and a failure to appropriately identify and address
conflicts of interest could adversely affect our businesses.  as we have expanded the scope of our businesses and our
client base, we increasingly must address potential conflicts of interest, including situations where our services to a particular client or our own investments or other interests conflict, or are perceived to conflict, with the interests of another
client, as well as situations where one or more of our businesses have access to material non-public information that may not be shared with other businesses within the firm and situations where we may be a creditor of an entity with which we also
have an advisory or otherrelationship.  in addition, our status as a bank holding company subjects us to heightened
regulation and increased regulatory scrutiny by the federal reserve board with respect to transactions between gs bank usa and entities that are or could be viewed as affiliates of ours.
we have extensive procedures and controls that are designed to identify and address conflicts of interest, including those designed to
prevent the improper sharing of information among our businesses. however, appropriately identifying and dealing with conflicts of interest is complex and difficult, and our reputation, which is one of our most important assets, could be damaged and
the willingness of clients to enter into transactions with us may be affected if we fail, or appear to fail, to identify, disclose and deal appropriately with conflicts of interest. in addition, potential or perceived conflicts could give rise to
litigation or regulatory enforcement actions.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
group inc. is a holding company and is dependent for liquidity on payments from its
subsidiaries, many of which are subject to restrictions.  group inc. is a holding company and, therefore, depends on
dividends, distributions and other payments from its subsidiaries to fund dividend payments and to fund all payments on its obligations, including debt obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including our broker-dealer, bank and insurance
subsidiaries, are subject to laws that restrict dividend payments or authorize regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to group inc. in addition, our broker-dealer, bank and insurance subsidiaries are subject
to restrictions on their ability to lend or transact with affiliates and to minimum regulatory capital requirements, as well as restrictions on their ability to use funds deposited with them in brokerage or bank accounts to fund their businesses.
additional restrictions on related-party transactions, increased capital and liquidity requirements and additional limitations on the use of funds on deposit in bank or brokerage accounts, as well as lower earnings, can reduce the amount of funds
available to meet the obligations of group inc. and even require group inc. to provide additional funding to such subsidiaries. restrictions or regulatory action of that kind could impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on its
obligations, including debt obligations, or dividend payments. in addition, group inc.s right to participate in a distribution of assets upon a subsidiarys liquidation or reorganization is subject to the prior claims of the
subsidiarys creditors.  as a result of the 2008 financial crisis, there has been a trend towards increased regulation and
supervision of our subsidiaries by the governments and regulators in the countries in which those subsidiaries are incorporated or do business. concerns about protecting clients and creditors of financial institutions that are controlled by persons
or entities located outside of the country in which such entities are incorporated or do business have caused or may cause a number of governments and regulators to take additional steps to ring fence such entities in order to protect
clients and creditors of such entities in the event of financial difficulties involving such entities. the result has been and may continue to be additional limitations on our ability to efficiently move capital and liquidity among our affiliated
entities, thereby increasing the overall level of capital and liquidity required by the firm on a consolidated basis.
furthermore, group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of certain of its
subsidiaries, including gs&co., gs bank usa and gsec subject to certain exceptions, and has pledged significant assets to gs bank usa to support obligations to gs bank usa. in addition, group inc. guarantees many of the obligations of its other
consolidated subsidiaries on a transaction-by-transaction basis, as negotiated with counterparties. these guarantees may require group inc. to provide substantial funds or assets to its subsidiaries or their creditors or counterparties at a time
when group inc. is in need of liquidity to fund its own obligations. see business regulation in parti, item1 of this form10-k for a further discussion of regulatoryrestrictions.
our businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely affected by deterioration in the credit quality of, or defaults by, third parties
who owe us money, securities or other assets or whose securities or obligations we hold.  we are exposed to the risk
that third parties that owe us money, securities or other assets will not perform their obligations. these parties may default on their obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational failure or other reasons. a failure of a
significant market participant, or even concerns about a default by such an institution, could lead to significant liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other institutions, which in turn could adversely affect us.
we are also subject to the risk that our rights against third parties may not be enforceable in all circumstances. in addition,
deterioration in the credit quality of third parties whose securities or obligations we hold could result in losses and/or adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or otherwise use those securities or obligations for liquidity purposes. a
significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our counterparties could also have a negative impact on our results. while in many cases we are permitted to require additional collateral from counterparties that experience financial difficulty,
disputes may arise as to the amount of collateral we are entitled to receive and the value of pledged assets. the termination of contracts and the foreclosure on collateral may subject us to claims for the improper exercise of our rights. default
rates, downgrades and disputes with counterparties as to the valuation of collateral increase significantly in times of market stress and illiquidity.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
as part of our clearing and prime brokerage activities, we finance our clients
positions, and we could be held responsible for the defaults or misconduct of our clients. although we regularly review credit exposures to specific clients and counterparties and to specific industries, countries and regions that we believe may
present credit concerns, default risk may arise from events or circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our market-making, underwriting, investing and lending activities.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our market-making, underwriting, investing and
lending activities. the number and size of such transactions may affect our results of operations in a given period. moreover, because of concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic and market conditions are generally favorable
for our competitors. disruptions in the credit markets can make it difficult to hedge these credit exposures effectively or economically. in addition, we extend large commitments as part of our credit origination activities. the dodd-frank act will
require issuers of asset-backed securities and any person who organizes and initiates an asset-backed securities transaction to retain economic exposure to the asset, which could significantly increase the cost to us of engaging in securitization
activities. our inability to reduce our credit risk by selling, syndicating or securitizing these positions, including during periods of market stress, could negatively affect our results of operations due to a decrease in the fair value of the
positions, including due to the insolvency or bankruptcy of the borrower, as well as the loss of revenues associated with selling such securities or loans.  in the ordinary course of business, we may be subject to a concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty, borrower or issuer, including sovereign issuers, and a failure or downgrade of, or
default by, such entity could negatively impact our businesses, perhaps materially, and the systems by which we set limits and monitor the level of our credit exposure to individual entities, industries and countries may not function as we have
anticipated. while our activities expose us to many different industries and counterparties, we routinely execute a high volume of transactions with counterparties engaged in financial services activities, including brokers and dealers,
commercial banks, clearing houses, exchanges and investment funds. this has resulted in significant credit concentration with respect to these counterparties. provisions of the dodd-frank act are
expected to lead to increased centralization of trading activity through particular clearing houses, central agents or exchanges, which may increase our concentration of risk with respect to these entities.
the financial services industry is highly competitive.  the financial services industry and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect them to remain so. we compete on the basis of a number of factors, including transaction execution, our
products and services, innovation, reputation, creditworthiness and price. over time, there has been substantial consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial services industry. this trend accelerated over recent years as a result
of numerous mergers and asset acquisitions among industry participants. this trend has also hastened the globalization of the securities and other financial services markets. as a result, we have had to commit capital to support our international
operations and to execute large global transactions. to the extent we expand into new business areas and new geographic regions, we will face competitors with more experience and more established relationships with clients, regulators and industry
participants in the relevant market, which could adversely affect our ability to expand. governments and regulators have recently adopted regulations, imposed taxes or otherwise put forward various proposals that have or may impact our ability to
conduct certain of our businesses in a cost-effective manner or at all in certain or all jurisdictions, including proposals relating to restrictions on the type of activities in which financial institutions are permitted to engage. these or other
similar rules, many of which do not apply to all our u.s. or non-u.s. competitors, could impact our ability to competeeffectively.  pricing and other competitive pressures in our businesses have continued to increase, particularly in situations where some of our competitors may seek to increase market share by reducing prices. for
example, in connection with investment banking and other assignments, we have experienced pressure to extend and price credit at levels that may not always fully compensate us for the risks we take.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
we face enhanced risks as new business initiatives lead us to transact with a broader array of
clients and counterparties and expose us to new asset classes and new markets.  a number of our recent and planned
business initiatives and expansions of existing businesses may bring us into contact, directly or indirectly, with individuals and entities that are not within our traditional client and counterparty base and expose us to new asset classes and new
markets. for example, we continue to transact business and invest in new regions, including a wide range of emerging and growth markets. furthermore, in a number of our businesses, including where we make markets, invest and lend, we directly or
indirectly own interests in, or otherwise become affiliated with the ownership and operation of public services, such as airports, toll roads and shipping ports, as well as power generation facilities, physical commodities and other commodities
infrastructure components, both within and outside the united states. recent market conditions may lead to an increase in opportunities to acquire distressed assets and we may determine opportunistically to increase our exposure to these types
ofassets.  these activities expose us to new and enhanced risks, including risks associated with dealing with
governmental entities, reputational concerns arising from dealing with less sophisticated counterparties and investors, greater regulatory scrutiny of these activities, increased credit-related, sovereign and operational risks, risks arising from
accidents or acts of terrorism, and reputational concerns with the manner in which these assets are being operated orheld.
derivative transactions and delayed settlements may expose us to unexpected risk and
potentiallosses.  we are party to a large number of derivative transactions, including credit derivatives. many
of these derivative instruments are individually negotiated and non-standardized, which can make exiting, transferring or settling positions difficult. many credit derivatives require that we deliver to the counterparty the underlying security, loan
or other obligation in order to receive payment. in a number of cases, we do not hold the underlying security, loan or other obligation and may not be able to obtain the underlying security, loan or other obligation. this could cause us to forfeit
the payments due to us under these contracts or result in settlement delays with the attendant credit and operational risk as well as increased costs to the firm. derivative transactions may also involve the risk that they are not authorized or
appropriate for a counterparty, that documentation has not been properly executed or that executed agreements may not be enforceable against thecounterparty.  derivative contracts and other transactions, including secondary bank loan purchases and sales, entered into with third parties are not always confirmed by the counterparties or settled on a timely basis.
while the transaction remains unconfirmed or during any delay in settlement, we are subject to heightened credit and operational risk and in the event of a default may find it more difficult to enforce our rights. in addition, as new and more
complex derivative products are created, covering a wider array of underlying credit and other instruments, disputes about the terms of the underlying contracts could arise, which could impair our ability to effectively manage our risk exposures
from these products and subject us to increased costs. the provisions of the dodd-frank act requiring central clearing of credit derivatives and other otc derivatives, or a market shift toward standardized derivatives, could reduce the risk
associated with such transactions, but under certain circumstances could also limit our ability to develop derivatives that best suit the needs of our clients and ourselves and adversely affect our profitability and increase our credit exposure to
such platform.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our businesses may be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain qualified
employees.  our performance is largely dependent on the talents and efforts of highly skilled individuals; therefore,
our continued ability to compete effectively in our businesses, to manage our businesses effectively and to expand into new businesses and geographic areas depends on our ability to attract new talented and diverse employees and to retain and
motivate our existing employees. factors that affect our ability to attract and retain such employees include our compensation and benefits, and our reputation as a successful business with a culture of fairly hiring, training and promoting
qualified employees.  competition from within the financial services industry and from businesses outside the financial
services industry for qualified employees has often been intense. this is particularly the case in emerging and growth markets, where we are often competing for qualified employees with entities that have a significantly greater presence or more
extensive experience in the region.  as described further in business regulation banking
regulation and regulation compensation practices in parti, item1 of this form10-k, our compensation practices are subject to review by, and the standards of, the federal reserve board. as a large
financial and banking institution, we are subject to limitations on compensation practices (which may or may not affect our competitors) by the federal reserve board, the fsa, the fdic or other regulators worldwide. these limitations, including any
imposed by or as a result of future legislation or regulation, may require us to alter our compensation practices in ways that could adversely affect our ability to attract and retain talented employees.
our businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive regulation
around theworld.  as a participant in the financial services industry and a bank holding company, we are subject
to extensive regulation in jurisdictions around the world. we face the risk of significant intervention by regulatory and taxing authorities in all jurisdictions in which we conduct our businesses. among other things, as a result of regulators
enforcing existing laws and regulations, we could be fined, prohibited from engaging in some of our business activities, subject to limitations or conditions on our business activities or subjected to new or substantially higher taxes or other
governmental charges in connection with the conduct of our business or with respect to our employees. in many cases, our activities may be subject to overlapping and divergent regulation in different jurisdictions.
there is also the risk that new laws or regulations or changes in enforcement of existing laws or regulations applicable to our businesses
or those of our clients, including capital, liquidity and margin requirements, tax burdens and compensation restrictions, could be imposed on a limited subset of financial institutions (either based on size, activities, geography or other criteria),
which may adversely affect our ability to compete effectively with other institutions that are not affected in the same way. in addition, regulation imposed on financial institutions or market participants generally, such as taxes on financial
transactions, could adversely impact levels of market activity more broadly, and thus impact ourbusinesses.  these
developments could impact our profitability in the affected jurisdictions, or even make it uneconomic for us to continue to conduct all or certain of our businesses in such jurisdictions, or could cause us to incur significant costs associated with
changing our business practices, restructuring our businesses, moving all or certain of our businesses and our employees to other locations or complying with applicable capital requirements, including liquidating assets or raising capital in a
manner that adversely increases our funding costs or otherwise adversely affects our shareholders and creditors.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
u.s. and non-u.s. regulatory developments, in particular the dodd-frank act and
basel3, have significantly altered the regulatory framework within which we operate and may adversely affect our competitive position and profitability. among the aspects of the dodd-frank act most likely to affect our businesses are: the
prohibition on proprietary trading and the limitation on the sponsorship of, and investment in, hedge funds and private equity funds by bank holding companies and other banking entities; increased capital requirements; increased regulation of and
restrictions on otc derivatives markets and transactions; limitations on incentive compensation; the prohibition on engaging in certain swaps-based activities through an insured depository institution; limitations on affiliate transactions; the
annual updating of a resolution plan; increased deposit insurance assessments; and increased standards of care for broker-dealers in dealing with clients. the implementation of higher capital requirements, the liquidity coverage ratio and the net
stable funding ratio under basel3 may adversely affect our profitability and competitive position, particularly if the requirements do not apply, or do not apply equally, to our competitors or are not implemented uniformly
acrossjurisdictions.  in addition, the attorneys general of a number of states have filed lawsuits against financial
institutions alleging, among other things, that the centralized system of recording mortgages and designating a common entity as the mortgage holder is in violation of state law, and other authorities have brought similar actions or indicated that
they are contemplating bringing such actions. if this system and related practices are deemed invalid, it may call into question the validity or enforceability of certain mortgage-related obligations under securitizations and other transactions in
which we have participated, negatively impact the market for mortgages and mortgage-related products and our mortgage-related activities, or subject us to additional costs or penalties.
for a discussion of the extensive regulation to which our businesses are subject, see business regulation in
parti, item1 of this form10-k.
we may be adversely affected by increased governmental and regulatory scrutiny or
negativepublicity.  governmental scrutiny from regulators, legislative bodies and law enforcement agencies with
respect to matters relating to compensation, our business practices, our past actions and other matters has increased dramatically in the past several years. the financial crisis and the current political and public sentiment regarding financial
institutions has resulted in a significant amount of adverse press coverage, as well as adverse statements or charges by regulators or other government officials. press coverage and other public statements that assert some form of wrongdoing often
result in some type of investigation by regulators, legislators and law enforcement officials or in lawsuits. responding to these investigations and lawsuits, regardless of the ultimate outcome of the proceeding, is time-consuming and expensive and
can divert the time and effort of our senior management from our business. penalties and fines sought by regulatory authorities have increased substantially over the last several years, and certain regulators have been more likely in recent years to
commence enforcement actions or to advance or support legislation targeted at the financial services industry. adverse publicity, governmental scrutiny and legal and enforcement proceedings can also have a negative impact on our reputation and on
the morale and performance of our employees, which could adversely affect our businesses and results ofoperations.  a failure
in our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third parties, could impair our liquidity, disrupt our businesses, result in the disclosure of confidential information, damage our reputation and cause losses.
our businesses are highly dependent on our ability to process and monitor, on a daily basis, a very large number of transactions, many of
which are highly complex, across numerous and diverse markets in many currencies. these transactions, as well as the information technology services we provide to clients, often must adhere to client-specific guidelines, as well as legal and
regulatory standards.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
as our client base and our geographical reach expands, developing and maintaining our
operational systems and infrastructure becomes increasingly challenging. our financial, accounting, data processing or other operational systems and facilities may fail to operate properly or become disabled as a result of events that are wholly or
partially beyond our control, such as a spike in transaction volume, adversely affecting our ability to process these transactions or provide these services. we must continuously update these systems to support our operations and growth and to
respond to changes in regulations and markets. this updating entails significant costs and creates risks associated with implementing new systems and integrating them with existingones.
in addition, we also face the risk of operational failure, termination or capacity constraints of any of the clearing agents, exchanges,
clearing houses or other financial intermediaries we use to facilitate our securities transactions, and as our interconnectivity with our clients grows, we increasingly face the risk of operational failure with respect to our clients systems.
in recent years, there has been significant consolidation among clearing agents, exchanges and clearing houses and an
increasing number of derivative transactions are now or in the near future will be cleared on exchanges, which has increased our exposure to operational failure, termination or capacity constraints of the particular financial intermediaries that we
use and could affect our ability to find adequate and cost-effective alternatives in the event of any such failure, termination or constraint. industry consolidation, whether among market participants or financial intermediaries, increases the risk
of operational failure as disparate complex systems need to be integrated, often on an accelerated basis.  furthermore, the
interconnectivity of multiple financial institutions with central agents, exchanges and clearing houses, and the increased centrality of these entities, increases the risk that an operational failure at one institution or entity may cause an
industry-wide operational failure that could materially impact our ability to conduct business. any such failure, termination or constraint could adversely affect our ability to effect transactions, service our clients, manage our exposure to risk
or expand our businesses or result in financial loss or liability to our clients, impairment of our liquidity, disruption of our businesses, regulatory intervention or reputational damage.
despite the resiliency plans and facilities we have in place, our ability to conduct
business may be adversely impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses and the communities in which we are located. this may include a disruption involving electrical, satellite, undersea cable or other communications,
internet, transportation or other services facilities used by us or third parties with which we conduct business. these disruptions may occur as a result of events that affect only our buildings or systems or those of such third parties, or as a
result of events with a broader impact globally, regionally or in the cities where those buildings or systems are located.
nearly all of our employees in our primary locations, including the new york metropolitan area, london, bangalore, hong kong, tokyo and
salt lake city, work in close proximity to one another, in one or more buildings. notwithstanding our efforts to maintain business continuity, given that our headquarters and the largest concentration of our employees are in the new york
metropolitan area and our two principal office buildings in the new york area both are located on the waterfront of the hudson river, depending on the intensity and longevity of the event, a catastrophic event impacting our new york metropolitan
area offices, including a terrorist attack, extreme weather event or other hostile or catastrophic event, could very negatively affect our business. if a disruption occurs in one location and our employees in that location are unable to occupy our
offices or communicate with or travel to other locations, our ability to service and interact with our clients may suffer, and we may not be able to successfully implement contingency plans that depend on communication or travel.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our operations rely on the secure processing, storage and transmission of confidential and
other information in our computer systems and networks. we are regularly the target of attempted cyber attacks, including denial-of-service attacks, and must continuously monitor and develop our systems to protect our technology infrastructure and
data from misappropriation or corruption. although we take protective measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances warrant, our computer systems, software and networks may be vulnerable to unauthorized access, misuse, computer viruses or
other malicious code and other events that could have a security impact. if one or more of such events occur, this potentially could jeopardize our or our clients or counterparties confidential and other information processed and stored
in, and transmitted through, our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause interruptions or malfunctions in our, our clients, our counterparties or third parties operations, which could impact their ability to transact with
us or otherwise result in significant losses or reputational damage. the increased use of mobile technologies can heighten these and other operational risks. we expect to expend significant additional resources on an ongoing basis to modify our
protective measures and to investigate and remediate vulnerabilities or other exposures, and we may be subject to litigation and financial losses that are either not insured against or not fully covered through any insurance maintained by us.
we routinely transmit and receive personal, confidential and proprietary information by email and other electronic means. we
have discussed and worked with clients, vendors, service providers, counterparties and other third parties to develop secure transmission capabilities and protect against cyber attacks, but we do not have, and may be unable to put in place, secure
capabilities with all of our clients, vendors, service providers, counterparties and other third parties and we may not be able to ensure that these third parties have appropriate controls in place to protect the confidentiality of the information.
an interception, misuse or mishandling of personal, confidential or proprietary information being sent to or received from a client, vendor, service provider, counterparty or other third party could result in legal liability, regulatory action and
reputational harm.
substantial legal liability or significant regulatory action against us could have material
adverse financial effects or cause us significant reputational harm, which in turn could seriously harm our businessprospects.  we face significant legal risks in our businesses, and the volume of claims and amount of damages and penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory proceedings against financial institutions remain high.
see legal proceedings in parti, item3 of this form10-k for a discussion of certain legal proceedings in which we are involved. our experience has been that legal claims by customers and clients increase in a market
downturn and that employment-related claims increase following periods in which we have reduced ourstaff.  the growth of
electronic trading and the introduction of new trading technology may adversely affect our business and may increasecompetition.  technology is fundamental to our business and our industry. the growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new technologies is changing our businesses and presenting us with new challenges.
securities, futures and options transactions are increasingly occurring electronically, both on our own systems and through other alternative trading systems, and it appears that the trend toward alternative trading systems will continue and
probably accelerate. some of these alternative trading systems compete with us, particularly our exchange-based market-making activities, and we may experience continued competitive pressures in these and other areas. in addition, the increased use
by our clients of low-cost electronic trading systems and direct electronic access to trading markets could cause a reduction in commissions and spreads. as our clients increasingly use our systems to trade directly in the markets, we may incur
liabilities as a result of their use of our order routing and execution infrastructure. we have invested significant resources into the development of electronic trading systems and expect to continue to do so, but there is no assurance that the
revenues generated by these systems will yield an adequate return on our investment, particularly given the relatively lower commissions arising from electronictrades.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our commodities activities, particularly our power generation interests and our physical
commodities activities, subject us to extensive regulation, potential catastrophic events and environmental, reputational and other risks that may expose us to significant liabilities and costs.
we engage in, or invest in entities that engage in, the production, storage, transportation, marketing and trading of numerous
commodities, including crude oil, oil products, natural gas, electric power, agricultural products, metals (base and precious), minerals (including uranium), emission credits, coal, freight, liquefied natural gas and related products and indices.
these activities subject us to extensive and evolving federal, state and local energy, environmental and other governmental laws and regulations worldwide, including environmental laws and regulations relating to, among others, air quality, water
quality, waste management, transportation of hazardous substances, natural resources, site remediation and health and safety. additionally, rising climate change concerns may lead to additional regulation that could increase the operating costs and
profitability of our investments.  we may incur substantial costs in complying with current or future laws and regulations
relating to our commodities-related activities and investments, particularly electric power generation, transportation and storage of physical commodities and wholesale sales and trading of electricity and natural gas. compliance with these laws and
regulations could require us to commit significant capital toward environmental monitoring, installation of pollution control equipment, renovation of storage facilities or transport vessels, payment of emission fees and carbon or other taxes, and
application for, and holding of, permits andlicenses.
our commodities-related activities are also subject to the risk of unforeseen or
catastrophic events, many of which are outside of our control, including breakdown or failure of power generation equipment, transmission lines, transport vessels, storage facilities or other equipment or processes or other mechanical malfunctions,
fires, leaks, spills or release of hazardous substances, performance below expected levels of output or efficiency, terrorist attacks, extreme weather events or other natural disasters or other hostile or catastrophic events. in addition, we rely on
third-party suppliers or service providers to perform their contractual obligations and any failure on their part, including the failure to obtain raw materials at reasonable prices or to safely transport or store commodities, could adversely affect
our activities. also, we may not be able to obtain insurance to cover some of these risks and the insurance that we have may be inadequate to cover ourlosses.  the occurrence of any of such events may prevent us from performing under our agreements with clients, may impair our operations or financial results and may result in litigation, regulatory action,
negative publicity or other reputationalharm.  in conducting our businesses around the world, we are subject to political,
economic, legal, operational and other risks that are inherent in operating in manycountries.  in conducting our
businesses and maintaining and supporting our global operations, we are subject to risks of possible nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental actions, as well as the
outbreak of hostilities or acts of terrorism. in many countries, the laws and regulations applicable to the securities and financial services industries and many of the transactions in which we are involved are uncertain and evolving, and it may be
difficult for us to determine the exact requirements of local laws in every market. any determination by local regulators that we have not acted in compliance with the application of local laws in a particular market or our failure to develop
effective working relationships with local regulators could have a significant and negative effect not only on our businesses in that market but also on our reputation generally. we are also subject to the enhanced risk that transactions we
structure might not be legally enforceable in all cases.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our businesses and operations are increasingly expanding into new regions throughout the
world, including emerging and growth markets, and we expect this trend to continue. various emerging and growth market countries have experienced severe economic and financial disruptions, including significant devaluations of their currencies,
defaults or threatened defaults on sovereign debt, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or negative growth rates in their economies, as well as military activity or acts of terrorism. the possible effects of any of these conditions
include an adverse impact on our businesses and increased volatility in financial markets generally.  while business and other
practices throughout the world differ, our principal legal entities are subject in their operations worldwide to rules and regulations relating to corrupt and illegal payments and money laundering, as well as laws relating to doing business with
certain individuals, groups and countries, such as the u.s. foreign corrupt practices act, the usa patriot act and u.k. bribery act. while we have invested and continue to invest significant resources in training and in compliance monitoring, the
geographical diversity of our operations, employees, clients and customers, as well as the vendors and other third parties that we deal with, greatly increases the risk that we may be found in violation of such rules or regulations and any such
violation could subject us to significant penalties or adversely affect our reputation.
in addition, there have been a number of highly publicized cases around the world,
involving actual or alleged fraud or other misconduct by employees in the financial services industry in recent years, and we run the risk that employee misconduct could occur. this misconduct has included and may include in the future the theft of
proprietary information, including proprietary software. it is not always possible to deter or prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we take to prevent and detect this activity have not been and may not be effective in all cases.
we may incur losses as a result of unforeseen or catastrophic events, including the emergence of a pandemic, terrorist attacks,
extreme weather events or other naturaldisasters.  the occurrence of unforeseen or catastrophic events, including
the emergence of a pandemic or other widespread health emergency (or concerns over the possibility of such an emergency), terrorist attacks, extreme weather events or other natural disasters, could create economic and financial disruptions, could
lead to operational difficulties (including travel limitations) that could impair our ability to manage ourbusinesses.
in our life and our property catastrophe insurance activities, losses related to unforeseen or catastrophic events could significantly
exceed the related reserves and reinsuranceproceeds.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item1b.unresolved staff comments
there are no material unresolved written comments that were received from the sec staff 180days or more before the end of our fiscal
year relating to our periodic or current reports under the exchange act.  item2.properties
our principal executive offices are located at 200 west street, new york, new york and comprise approximately
2.1million gross square feet. the building is located on a parcel leased from battery park city authority pursuant to a ground lease. under the lease, battery park city authority holds title to all improvements, including the office building,
subject to goldman sachs right of exclusive possession and use until june2069, the expiration date of the lease. under the terms of the ground lease, we made a lump sum ground rent payment in june2007 of $161million for rent
through the term of the lease.  we have offices at 30 hudson street in jersey city, new jersey, which we own and which include
approximately 1.6million gross square feet of office space, and we own over 700,000 square feet of additional commercial space spread among four locations in new york and new jersey. we also have offices with approximately 450,000 rentable
square feet in the new york metropolitan area.  we have additional offices in the united states and elsewhere in the americas,
which together comprise approximately 2.0million rentable square feet of leasedspace.  in europe, the middle east
and africa, we have offices that total approximately 1.8million rentable square feet of leased and owned space. our european headquarters is located in london at peterborough court, pursuant to a lease expiring in 2026. in total, we have
offices with approximately 1.2million rentable square feet in london, relating to various properties.
in asia (including india), australia and new zealand, we have offices with approximately
1.9million rentable square feet. our headquarters in this region are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in hong kong, at the cheung kong center. in tokyo, we currently have offices with approximately 340,000 rentable square feet,
the majority of which have leases that will expire in 2018. in hong kong, we currently have offices with approximately 340,000 rentable square feet, the majority of which have leases that will expire in 2017.
see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsoff-balance-sheet
arrangements and contractual obligationscontractual obligations in partii, item7 of this form10-k for a discussion of exit costs we may incur in the future to the extent we (i)reduce our space capacity
or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties in the locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of existing space that had been held for potential growth.  item3.legal proceedings  we
are involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of our businesses. many of these proceedings are in early stages, and many of these cases seek an indeterminate
amount of damages. however, we believe, based on currently available information, that the results of such proceedings, in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, but may be material to our operating
results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such period. given the range of litigation and investigations presently under way, our litigation expenses can be expected to remain high. see
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operationsuse of estimates in partii, item7 of this form10-k. see note27 to the consolidated financial statements
in partii, item8 of this form10-k for information on certain judicial, regulatory and legal
proceedings.  item4.mine safety disclosures
not applicable.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
executive officers of the goldman sachs group,inc.
set forth below are the name, age, present title, principal occupation and certain
biographical information for our executive officers. all of our executive officers have been appointed by and serve at the pleasure of our board ofdirectors.  lloyd c. blankfein, 58  mr.blankfein has been our chairman and chief executive
officer since june2006, and a director since april2003.  alan m. cohen, 62
mr.cohen has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs and our global head of compliance since february2004.
gary d. cohn, 52
mr.cohn has been our president and chief operating officer (or co-chief operating officer) and a director since june2006.
edith w. cooper, 51
ms.cooper has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs since april2011 and our global head of human capital
management since march2008. from 2002 to 2008, she served in various positions at the firm, including sales management within the securities division.  j. michael evans, 55  mr.evans has been our global head of growth markets since
january2011 and a vice chairman of goldman sachs since february2008. from 2004 to june2012, mr.evans was chairman of goldman sachs asia pacific.
gregory k. palm, 64  mr.palm has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs since may1999, and our general counsel and head or co-head of the legal department since may1992.
john f.w. rogers, 56
mr.rogers has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs since april2011 and chief of staff and secretary to the board
of directors of goldman sachs since december2001.  harvey m. schwartz, 48
mr.schwartz has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs and our chief financial officer since january2013. from
february2008 to january2013, mr.schwartz was global co-head of the securities division.  mark schwartz, 58
mr.schwartz has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs and chairman of goldman sachs asia pacific since rejoining the firm in
june2012. from 2006 to june2012, he was chairman of missionpoint capital partners, an investment firm he co-founded.  michael s. sherwood,
47  mr.sherwood has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs since february2008 and co-chief executive officer of
goldman sachs international since 2005.  john s. weinberg, 56  mr.weinberg has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs since june2006. he has been co-head of goldman sachs investment banking division since december2002.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
part ii
item5.market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer
purchases of equity securities
the principal market on which our common stock is traded is the nyse. information relating
to the high and low sales prices per share of our common stock, as reported by the consolidated tape association, for each full quarterly period during 2011 and 2012 is set forth under the heading supplemental financial
informationcommon stock price range in partii, item8 of this form10-k. as of february15,2013, there were 13,297 holders of record of our commonstock.
during 2011 and 2012, dividends of $0.35 per common share were declared on january18,2011, april18,2011,
july18,2011, october17,2011 and january17,2012, dividends of $0.46 per common share were declared on april16,2012 and july16,2012 and a dividend of $0.50per common share was declared
on october15,2012. the holders of our common stock share proportionately on a per share basis in all dividends and other distributions on common stock declared by the board of directors of group inc.(board).
the declaration of dividends by group inc. is subject to the discretion of our board. our
board will take into account such matters as general business conditions, our financial results, capital requirements, contractual, legal and regulatory restrictions on the payment of dividends by us to our shareholders or by our subsidiaries to us,
the effect on our debt ratings and such other factors as our board may deem relevant. see businessregulation in parti, item1 of this form10-k for a discussion of potential regulatory limitations on our
receipt of funds from our regulated subsidiaries and our payment of dividends to shareholders of groupinc.  the table
below sets forth the information with respect to purchases made by or on behalf of group inc. or any affiliated purchaser (as defined in rule10b-18(a)(3) under the exchange act), of our common stock during the fourth quarter of our
year ended december2012.
period
totalnumberofsharespurchased
averagepricepaid pershare
totalnumberofsharespurchased as partofpublicly announcedplans or programs
maximumnumberofsharesthatmayyetbepurchased under theplans or programs
month #1
(october1,2012 to october31,2012)
2,698,223
$121.96
2,698,223
31,486,968
month #2
(november1,2012 to november30,2012)
6,343,995
119.01
6,343,995
25,142,973
month #3
(december1,2012 to december31,2012)
3,654,122
120.66
3,654,122
21,488,851
total
12,696,340
12,696,340
1.
on march21,2000, we announced that our board had approved a repurchase program, pursuant to which up to 15million shares of our common stock
may be repurchased. this repurchase program was increased by an aggregate of 325million shares by resolutions ofourboard adopted on june18,2001, march18,2002, november20,2002,
january30,2004, january25,2005, september16,2005, september11,2006, december17,2007 and july18,2011. we use our share repurchase program to help maintain the appropriate level
of common equity. the repurchase program is effected primarily through regular open-market purchases, the amounts and timing of which are determined primarily by the firms current and projected capital position (i.e., comparisons of our
desired level and composition of capital to our actual level and composition of capital), but which may also be influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of our common stock. the repurchase program has no
set expiration or termination date. any repurchase of our common stock requires approval by the federal reserveboard.
information relating to compensation plans under which our equity securities are authorized
for issuance is presented in partiii, item12 of this form10-k.
item6. selected financial data
the selected financial data table is set forth under partii, item8 of this form10-k.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
item7.managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results ofoperations  index
pageno.
introduction
executive overview
business environment
critical accounting policies
use of estimates
results of operations
regulatory developments
balance sheet and funding sources
equity capital
off-balance-sheet arrangements and contractual obligations
overview and structure of risk management
liquidity risk management
market risk management
credit risk management
operational risk management
recent accounting developments
certain risk factors that mayaffect our
businesses
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
introduction
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc.) is a leading global investment banking,
securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of financial services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals. founded in 1869,
the firm is headquartered in new york and maintains offices in all major financial centers around the world.  we report our
activities in four business segments: investment banking, institutional client services, investing& lending and investment management. see results of operations below for further information about our business segments.
when we use the terms goldman sachs, the firm, we, us and our, we
mean group inc., a delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.  references to this form10-k are
to our annual report on form10-k for the year ended december31,2012. all references to 2012,2011 and 2010 refer to our years ended, or the dates, as the context requires, december31,2012,
december31,2011 and december31,2010, respectively. any reference to a future year refers to a year ending on december31 of that year. certain reclassifications have been made to previously reported amounts to conform to
the currentpresentation.
in this discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, we
have included information that may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are not historical facts,
but instead represent only our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. this information includes statements other than historical information or statements of current
condition and may relate to our future plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may also include statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our risk management and liquidity policies, statements about trends in or growth
opportunities for our businesses, statements about our future status, activities or reporting under u.s. or non-u.s. banking and financial regulation, and statements about our investment banking transaction backlog. by identifying these statements
for you in this manner, we are alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and financial condition may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results and financial condition indicated in these forward-looking statements.
important factors that could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ from those indicated in these forward-looking statements include, among others, those discussed below under certain risk factors that mayaffect our
businesses as well as risk factors in parti, item1a of this form10-k and cautionary statement pursuant to the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of 1995 in parti, item1 of this
form10-k.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
executive overview
the firm generated net earnings of $7.48billion for 2012, compared with
$4.44billion and $8.35billion for 2011 and 2010, respectively. our diluted earnings per common share were $14.13 for 2012, compared with $4.511 for 2011 and $13.182 for 2010. return on average common shareholders equity (roe)3 was 10.7% for 2012, compared with 3.7%1 for 2011 and 11.5%2 for 2010.
book value per common share increased approximately 11% to $144.67 and tangible book value per common
share4 increased approximately 12% to $134.06
compared with the end of 2011. during the year, the firm repurchased 42.0million shares of its common stock for a total cost of $4.64billion. our tier1 capital ratio under basel1 was 16.7% and our tier1 common ratio
under basel15 was 14.5% as of december 2012.
the firm generated net revenues of $34.16billion for 2012. these results reflected significantly higher net revenues in
investing& lending, as well as higher net revenues in institutional client services, investment banking and investment management compared with 2011.  an overview of net revenues for each of our business segments is provided below.
investment banking  net revenues in investment banking increased compared with 2011, reflecting significantly higher net revenues in our underwriting business, due to strong net revenues in debt underwriting. net revenues in
debt underwriting were significantly higher compared with 2011, primarily reflecting higher net revenues from investment-grade and leveraged finance activity. net revenues in equity underwriting were lower compared with 2011, primarily reflecting a
decline in industry-wide initial public offerings. net revenues in financial advisory were essentially unchanged compared with 2011.  institutional
client services  net revenues in institutional client services increased compared with 2011, reflecting higher net revenues
in fixed income, currency and commodities client execution.  the increase in fixed income, currency and commodities client
execution compared with 2011 reflected strong net revenues in mortgages, which were significantly higher compared with 2011. in addition, net revenues in credit products and interest rate products were solid and higher compared with 2011. these
increases were partially offset by significantly lower net revenues in commodities and slightly lower net revenues in currencies. although broad market concerns persisted during 2012, fixed income, currency and commodities client execution operated
in a generally improved environment characterized by tighter credit spreads and less challenging market-making conditions compared with 2011.
1.
excluding the impact of the preferred dividend of $1.64billion in the first quarter of 2011 (calculated as the difference between the carrying value and
the redemption value of the preferred stock), related to the redemption of our 10% cumulative perpetual preferred stock, seriesg (seriesg preferred stock) held by berkshire hathaway inc. and certain of its subsidiaries (collectively,
berkshire hathaway), diluted earnings per common share were $7.46 and roe was 5.9% for 2011. we believe that presenting our results for 2011 excluding this dividend is meaningful, as it increases the comparability of period-to-period results.
diluted earnings per common share and roe excluding this dividend are non-gaap measures and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other companies. see results of operations financial overview below for
further information about our calculation of diluted earnings per common share and roe excluding the impact of this dividend.
2.
excluding the impact of the $465million related to the u.k. bank payroll tax, the $550million related to the sec settlement and the
$305million impairment of our new york stock exchange (nyse) designated market maker (dmm) rights, diluted earnings per common share were $15.22 and roe was 13.1% for 2010. we believe that presenting our results for 2010 excluding the impact
of these items is meaningful, as it increases the comparability of period-to-period results. diluted earnings per common share and roe excluding these items are non-gaap measures and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other
companies. see results of operations financial overview below for further information about our calculation of diluted earnings per common share and roe excluding the impact of these items.
3.
see results of operations financial overview below for further information about our calculation of roe.
4.
tangible book value per common share is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other companies. see equity
capital other capital metrics below for further information about our calculation of tangible book value per common share.
5.
tier1 common ratio is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other companies. see equity
capital consolidated regulatory capital ratios below for further information about our tier1 common ratio.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
net revenues in equities were essentially unchanged compared with 2011. net revenues in
securities services were significantly higher compared with 2011, reflecting a gain of approximately $500million on the sale of our hedge fund administration business. in addition, equities client execution net revenues were higher than 2011,
primarily reflecting significantly higher results in cash products, principally due to increased levels of client activity. these increases were offset by lower commissions and fees, reflecting lower market volumes. during 2012, equities operated in
an environment generally characterized by an increase in global equity prices and lower volatility levels.  the net loss
attributable to the impact of changes in our own credit spreads on borrowings for which the fair value option was elected was $714million ($433million and $281million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client
execution and equities client execution, respectively) for 2012, compared with a net gain of $596million ($399million and $197million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution,
respectively) for 2011.  investing& lending  net revenues in investing& lending were $5.89billion and $2.14billion for 2012 and 2011, respectively. during 2012, investing& lending net revenues were positively impacted
by tighter credit spreads and an increase in global equity prices. results for 2012 included a gain of $408million from our investment in the ordinary shares of industrial and commercial bank of china limited (icbc), net gains of
$2.39billion from other investments in equities, primarily in private equities, net gains and net interest income of $1.85billion from debt securities and loans, and other net revenues of $1.24billion, principally related to our
consolidated investment entities.
results for 2011 included a loss of $517million from our investment in the ordinary
shares of icbc and net gains of $1.12billion from other investments in equities, primarily in private equities, partially offset by losses from public equities. in addition, investing& lending included net revenues of
$96million from debt securities and loans. this amount includes approximately $1billion of unrealized losses related to relationship lending activities, including the effect of hedges, offset by net interest income and net gains from
other debt securities and loans. results for 2011 also included other net revenues of $1.44billion, principally related to our consolidated investment entities.  investment management  net revenues in investment management
increased compared with 2011, due to significantly higher incentive fees, partially offset by lower transaction revenues and slightly lower management and other fees. during the year, assets under supervision1 increased $70billion to $965billion. assets under
management increased $26billion to $854billion, reflecting net market appreciation of $44billion, primarily in fixed income and equity assets, partially offset by net outflows of $18billion. net outflows in assets under
management included outflows in equity, alternative investment and money market assets, partially offset by inflows in fixed income assets2. other client assets increased $44billion to $111billion, primarily due to net inflows2, principally in client assets invested with third-party managers and
assets related to advisory relationships.  our businesses, by their nature, do not produce predictable earnings. our results in
any given period can be materially affected by conditions in global financial markets, economic conditions generally and other factors. for a further discussion of the factors that may affect our future operating results, see certain risk
factors that mayaffect our businesses below, as well as risk factors in part i, item1a of this form10-k.
1.
assets under supervision include assets under management and other client assets. assets under management include client assets where we earn a fee for
managing assets on a discretionary basis. other client assets include client assets invested with third-party managers, private bank deposits and assets related to advisory relationships where we earn a fee for advisory and other services, but do
not have discretion over the assets.
2.
includes $34billion of fixed income asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of dwight asset management company llc (dwight asset management),
including $17billion in assets under management and $17billion in other client assets, and $5billion of fixed income and equity asset outflows in connection with our liquidation of goldman sachs asset management korea co., ltd.
(goldman sachs asset management korea, formerly known as macquarie imm investment management), all related to assets under management, for the year ended december2012.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
business environment
global economic conditions generally weakened in 2012, as real gross domestic product (gdp)
growth slowed in most major economies. market sentiment was affected by continued broad market concerns and uncertainties, although positive developments helped to improve market conditions. these developments included certain central bank actions
to ease monetary policy and address funding risks for european financial institutions. in addition, the u.s. economy posted stable to improving economic data, including favorable developments in unemployment and housing. these improvements resulted
in tighter credit spreads, higher global equity prices and lower levels of volatility. however, concerns about the outlook for the global economy and continued political uncertainty, particularly the political debate in the united states surrounding
the fiscal cliff, generally resulted in client risk aversion and lower activity levels. also, uncertainty over financial regulatory reform persisted. these concerns weighed on investment banking activity, as completed mergers and acquisitions
activity declined compared with 2011, and equity and equity-related underwriting activity remained low, particularly in initial public offerings. however, industry-wide debt underwriting activity improved compared with 2011. for a further discussion
of how market conditions may affect our businesses, see certain risk factors that mayaffect our businesses below as well as risk factors in part i, item1a of this form10-k.
global  during 2012, real gdp
growth declined in most advanced economies and emerging markets. in advanced economies, the slowdown primarily reflected a decline in consumer expenditure and fixed investment growth, particularly in europe, as well as a deceleration in
international trade compared with 2011. in emerging markets, growth in domestic demand weakened, although the contribution from government spending was generally positive. unemployment levels declined slightly in some economies compared with 2011,
but increased in others, particularly in the euro area. the rate of unemployment continued to
remain elevated in many advanced economies. during 2012, the u.s. federal reserve, the bank of england and the bank of japan left interest rates unchanged, while the european central bank reduced
its interest rate. in addition, the peoples bank of china lowered its one-year benchmark lending rate during the year. the price of crude oil generally declined during 2012. the u.s. dollar weakened against both the euro and the british pound,
while it strengthened against the japanese yen.  united states  in the united states, real gdp increased by 2.2% in 2012, compared with an increase of 1.8% in 2011. growth was supported by an acceleration in residential investment and a smaller decrease in state and
local government spending, which were partially offset by a slowdown in consumer spending and business investment. both house prices and housing starts increased. industrial production expanded in 2012, despite the negative impact of hurricane sandy
during the fourth quarter. business and consumer confidence declined during parts of the year, primarily reflecting increased global economic concerns and heightened uncertainties, but ended the year higher compared with the end of 2011. measures of
core inflation on average were higher compared with 2011. the unemployment rate declined during 2012, but remained elevated. the u.s. federal reserve maintained its federal funds rate at a target range of zero to 0.25% during the year and extended
its program to lengthen the maturity of the u.s. treasury debt it holds. in addition, the u.s. federal reserve announced an open-ended program to purchase u.s. treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities, as well as a commitment to keep
short-term interest rates exceptionally low until the unemployment rate falls to 6.5% or inflation rises materially. the yield on the 10-year u.s. treasury note fell by 11 basis points during 2012 to 1.78%. in equity markets, the nasdaq composite
index, the s&p 500 index and the dow jones industrial average increased by 16%, 13% and 7%, respectively, compared with the end of2011.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
europe  in the euro area, real gdp declined by 0.5% in 2012, compared with an increase of 1.5% in 2011. the contraction was principally due to a sharp fall in domestic demand, primarily reflecting downturns in
consumer spending and fixed investment. business and consumer confidence declined and measures of core inflation increased slightly during the year. the unemployment rate increased substantially, particularly in spain and italy. these negative
developments reflected the impact that the sovereign debt crisis had on the regions economic growth, particularly during the first half of the year, as concerns about greeces debt situation and the fiscal outlook in spain and italy
intensified. to address these issues, the european central bank injected liquidity in the eurosystem through its longer-term refinancing operations (ltros), decreased its main refinancing operations rate by 25 basis points to 0.75%, and announced a
program to make outright purchases of sovereign bonds in the secondary markets. the euro appreciated by 2% against the u.s. dollar. in the united kingdom, real gdp increased by 0.2% in 2012 compared with an increase of 0.9% in 2011. the bank of
england maintained its official bank rate at 0.50% and increased the size of its asset purchase program. the british pound appreciated by 4% against the u.s. dollar. long-term government bond yields generally declined during the year. in equity
markets, the dax index, the cac 40 index, the euro stoxx 50 index, and the ftse 100 index increased by 29%, 15%, 14% and 6%, respectively, compared with the end of2011.  asia  in japan, real gdp increased by 1.9% in 2012, compared with a decline of 0.6%
in 2011. fixed investment growth increased, particularly from the public sector, helped by reconstruction efforts following the earthquake and tsunami in 2011. however, the trade balance continued to deteriorate during 2012. measures of inflation
remained negative or close to zero during the year. the bank of japan maintained its target overnight call rate at a range of zero to 0.10% during the year, increased the size of its asset purchase program, and announced measures to facilitate
outright purchases of government and corporate bonds. the yield on 10-year japanese government bonds fell by 20 basis points during the year to 0.79%. the japanese yen depreciated by 13% against
the u.s. dollar and, in equity markets, the nikkei 225 index increased by 23%. in china, real gdp increased by 7.8% in 2012, compared with an increase of 9.3% in 2011. growth slowed as household consumption and fixed investment growth moderated. in
addition, growth in industrial production declined. measures of inflation declined during the year. the peoples bank of china lowered its one-year benchmark lending rate by 56basis points to 6.00% and reduced the reserve requirement
ratio by 100 basis points during the year. the chinese yuan appreciated slightly against the u.s. dollar and, in equity markets, the shanghai composite index increased by 3%. in india, real gdp increased by an estimated 5.4% in 2012, compared with
an increase of 7.5% in 2011. growth decelerated, primarily reflecting a slowdown in domestic demand growth and a deterioration in the trade balance. the rate of wholesale inflation declined compared with 2011, but remained elevated. the indian rupee
depreciated by 4% against the u.s. dollar and, in equity markets, the bse sensex index increased 26%. equity markets in hong kong and south korea were higher, as the hang seng index increased 23% and the kospi composite index increased 9%,
respectively, compared with the end of2011.  other markets  in brazil, real gdp increased by an estimated 1.0% in 2012, compared with an increase of 2.7% in 2011. growth decelerated, primarily reflecting a decline in private consumption growth and a downturn in
fixed investment. the brazilian real depreciated by 9% against the u.s. dollar and, in equity markets, the bovespa index increased by 7% compared with the end of 2011. in russia, real gdp increased by 3.4% in 2012, compared with 4.3% in 2011. growth
slowed, primarily reflecting a decline in domestic demand growth, particularly during the second half of the year. the russian ruble appreciated by 5% against the u.s. dollar and, in equity markets, the micex index increased by 5% compared with the
end of2011.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
critical accounting policies
fair value
fair value hierarchy. financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value (i.e., inventory), as well as
certain other financial assets and financial liabilities, are reflected in our consolidated statements of financial condition at fair value (i.e., marked-to-market), with related gains or losses generally recognized in our consolidated statements of
earnings. the use of fair value to measure financial instruments is fundamental to our risk management practices and is our most critical accountingpolicy.  the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement
date. in determining fair value, the hierarchy under u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (u.s. gaap) gives (i)the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities
(level1 inputs), (ii)the next priority to inputs other than level1 inputs that are observable, either directly or indirectly (level2 inputs), and (iii)the lowest priority to inputs that cannot be observed in market
activity (level3 inputs). assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to their fair value measurement.  the fair values for substantially all of our financial assets and financial liabilities are based on observable prices and inputs and are classified in levels1 and 2 of the fair value hierarchy.
certain level2 and level3 financial assets and financial liabilities may require appropriate valuation adjustments that a market participant would require to arrive at fair value for factors such as counterparty and the firms
credit quality, funding risk, transfer restrictions, liquidity and bid/offer spreads. valuation adjustments are generally based on marketevidence.
instruments categorized within level3 of the fair value hierarchy are those which
require one or more significant inputs that are not observable. as of december2012 and december2011, level3 assets represented 5.0% and 5.2%, respectively, of the firms total assets. absent evidence to the contrary,
instruments classified within level3 of the fair value hierarchy are initially valued at transaction price, which is considered to be the best initial estimate of fair value. subsequent to the transaction date, we use other methodologies to
determine fair value, which vary based on the type of instrument. estimating the fair value of level3 financial instruments requires judgments to be made. these judgments include:
determining the appropriate valuation methodology and/or model for each type of level3 financial instrument;
determining model inputs based on an evaluation of all relevant empirical market data, including prices evidenced by market transactions, interest
rates, credit spreads, volatilities and correlations; and
determining appropriate valuation adjustments related to illiquidity or counterparty credit quality.
regardless of the methodology, valuation inputs and assumptions are only changed when corroborated by substantive evidence.
controls over valuation of financial instruments. market makers and investment professionals in our revenue-producing units are responsible for pricing our financial instruments. our control
infrastructure is independent of the revenue-producing units and is fundamental to ensuring that all of our financial instruments are appropriately valued at market-clearing levels. in the event that there is a difference of opinion in situations
where estimating the fair value of financial instruments requires judgment (e.g., calibration to market comparables or trade comparison, as described below), the final valuation decision is made by senior managers in control and support functions
that are independent of the revenue-producing units (independent control and support functions). this independent price verification is critical to ensuring that our financial instruments are properly valued.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
price verification. all financial instruments at fair value in levels1, 2 and 3 of the fair value hierarchy are subject to our independent price verification process. the objective of price verification is to have an
informed and independent opinion with regard to the valuation of financial instruments under review. instruments that have one or more significant inputs which cannot be corroborated by external market data are classified within level3 of the
fair value hierarchy. price verification strategies utilized by our independent control and support functions include:
trade comparison.
analysis of trade data (both internal and external where available) is used to determine the most relevant pricing inputs and valuations.
external price comparison.
valuations and prices are compared to pricing data obtained from third parties (e.g., broker or dealers, markit, bloomberg, idc, trace). data obtained from various sources is compared to ensure consistency and validity. when broker or dealer
quotations or third-party pricing vendors are used for valuation or price verification, greater priority is generally given to executablequotations.
calibration to market
comparables. market-based transactions are used to corroborate the valuation of positions with similar characteristics, risks andcomponents.
relative value analyses.
market-based transactions are analyzed to determine the similarity, measured in terms of risk, liquidity and return, of one instrument relative to another or, for a given instrument, of one maturity relative to another.
collateral analyses.
margin disputes on derivatives are examined and investigated to determine the impact, if any, on our valuations.
execution of trades.
where appropriate, trading desks are instructed to execute trades in order to provide evidence of market-clearing levels.
backtesting.
valuations are corroborated by comparison to values realized upon sales.  see notes5 through 8
to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about fair value measurements.
review of net revenues. independent control and support functions ensure adherence to our pricing policy through a combination of daily procedures, including the explanation and attribution of net revenues based on the
underlying factors. through this process we independently validate net revenues, identify and resolve potential fair value or trade booking issues on a timely basis and seek to ensure that risks are being properly categorized and quantified.
review of valuation models. the firms independent model validation group, consisting of quantitative professionals who are separate from model developers, performs an independent model approval process. this process
incorporates a review of a diverse set of model and trade parameters across a broad range of values (including extreme and/or improbable conditions) in order to criticallyevaluate:
the models suitability for valuation and risk management of a particular instrument type;
the models accuracy in reflecting the characteristics of the related product and its significant risks;
the suitability of the calculation techniques incorporated in the model;
the models consistency with models for similar products;and
the models sensitivity to input parameters and assumptions.
new or changed models are reviewed and approved prior to being put into use. models are evaluated and re-approved annually to assess the
impact of any changes in the product or market and any market developments in pricingtheories.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
level3 financial assets at fair
value. the table below presents financial assets measured at fair value and the amount of such assets that are classified within level3 of the fair valuehierarchy.
total level3 financial assets were $47.10billion and $47.94billion as of december2012 and december2011,
respectively.
see notes5 through 8 to the consolidated financial statements in partii,
item8 of this form10-k for further information about changes in level3 financial assets and fair valuemeasurements.
as of december2012
as of december2011
inmillions
total at
fairvalue
level3
total
total at
fairvalue
level3
total
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time depositsand other money marketinstruments
$6,057
$
$13,440
$
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
93,241
87,040
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
62,250
49,205
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities:
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
9,805
3,389
6,699
3,346
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
8,216
1,619
7,592
1,709
bank loans and bridge loans
22,407
11,235
19,745
11,285
corporate debt securities
20,981
2,821
22,131
2,480
state and municipal obligations
2,477
3,089
other debt obligations
2,251
1,185
4,362
1,451
equities and convertible debentures
96,454
14,855
65,113
13,667
commodities
11,696
5,762
total cash instruments
335,835
35,749
284,178
34,685
derivatives
71,176
9,920
80,028
11,900
financial instruments owned, at fair value
407,011
45,669
364,206
46,585
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
30,484
42,014
securities purchased under agreements to resell
141,331
187,789
securities borrowed
38,395
47,621
receivables from customers and counterparties
7,866
9,682
other
assets1
13,426
total
$638,513
$47,095
$651,312
$47,937
1.
consists of assets classified as held for sale related to our reinsurance business, primarily consisting of securities accounted for as available-for-sale and
insurance separate account assets, which were previously included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes, respectively. see note12 to the consolidated
financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about assets held for sale.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
goodwill. goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of net assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the acquisition date. goodwill is assessed annually for impairment, or
more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an impairment may exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying
amount. if the results of the qualitative assessment are not conclusive, a quantitative goodwill impairment test is performed by comparing the estimated fair value of each reporting unit with its estimated net book value.
estimating the fair value of our reporting units requires management to make judgments. critical inputs to the fair value estimates
include (i)projected earnings, (ii)estimated long-term growth rates and (iii)cost of equity. the net book value of each reporting unit reflects an allocation of total shareholders equity and represents the estimated amount of
shareholders equity required to support the activities of the reporting unit under guidelines issued by the basel committee on banking supervision (basel committee) in december2010.
our market capitalization was below book value during 2012. accordingly, we performed a quantitative impairment test during the fourth
quarter of 2012 and determined that goodwill was not impaired. the estimated fair value of our reporting units in which we hold substantially all of our goodwill significantly exceeded the estimated carrying values. we believe that it is appropriate
to consider market capitalization, among other factors, as an indicator of fair value over a reasonable period of time.  if the
more recent improvement in market conditions does not continue, and we return to a prolonged period of weakness in the business environment or financial markets, our goodwill could be impaired in the future. in addition, significant changes to
critical inputs of the goodwill impairment test (e.g., cost of equity) could cause the estimated fair value of our reporting units to decline, which could result in an impairment of goodwill in the future.
see note13 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for further information
about ourgoodwill.
identifiable intangible
assets. we amortize our identifiable intangible assets (i)over their estimated lives, (ii)based on economic usage or (iii)in proportion to estimated gross profits or
premium revenues. identifiable intangible assets are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying value may not be fully recoverable.
an impairment loss, generally calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset or asset
group, is recognized if the sum of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset group is less than the corresponding carrying value. see note13 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of
this form10-k for the carrying value and estimated remaining lives of our identifiable intangible assets by major asset class and impairments of our identifiable intangible assets.
a prolonged period of market weakness could adversely impact our businesses and impair the value of our identifiable intangible assets. in
addition, certain events could indicate a potential impairment of our identifiable intangible assets, including (i)decreases in revenues from commodity-related customer contracts and relationships, (ii)decreases in cash receipts from
television broadcast royalties, (iii)an adverse action or assessment by a regulator or (iv)adverse actual experience on the contracts in our variable annuity and life insurance business. management judgment is required to evaluate
whether indications of potential impairment have occurred, and to test intangibles for impairment if required.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
use of estimates
the use of generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make certain
estimates and assumptions. in addition to the estimates we make in connection with fair value measurements, and the accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, the use of estimates and assumptions is also important in determining
provisions for losses that may arise from litigation, regulatory proceedings and tax audits.  we estimate and provide for
potential losses that may arise out of litigation and regulatory proceedings to the extent that such losses are probable and can be reasonably estimated. in accounting for income taxes, we estimate and provide for potential liabilities that may
arise out of tax audits to the extent that uncertain tax positions fail to meet the recognition standard under fasb accounting standards
codification 740. see note24 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about accounting for income taxes.
significant judgment is required in making these estimates and our final liabilities may ultimately be materially different.
our total estimated liability in respect of litigation and regulatory proceedings is determined on a case-by-case basis and represents an estimate of probable losses after considering, among other factors, the progress of each case or proceeding,
our experience and the experience of others in similar cases or proceedings, and the opinions and views of legal counsel. see notes18 and 27 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for
information on certain judicial, regulatory and legalproceedings.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
results of operations
the composition of our net revenues has varied over time as financial markets and the scope
of our operations have changed. the composition of net revenues can also vary over the shorter term due to fluctuations in u.s. and global economic and market conditions. see certain risk factors that mayaffect our businesses below
and risk
factors in part i, item1a of this form10-k for a further discussion of the impact of economic and market conditions on our results of operations.
financial overview  the table below
presents an overview of our financial results.
year ended december
$ inmillions, except per share amounts
net revenues
$34,163
$28,811
$39,161
pre-tax earnings
11,207
6,169
12,892
net earnings
7,475
4,442
8,354
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
7,292
2,510
7,713
diluted earnings per common share
14.13
4.51
13.18
return on average common shareholders equity1
10.7
%
3.7
%2
11.5
%3
1.
roe is computed by dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by average monthly common shareholders equity. the table below presents our
average common shareholders equity.
average for the
year ended december
inmillions
total shareholders equity
$72,530
$72,708
$74,257
preferred stock
(4,392
)
(3,990
)
(6,957
)
common shareholders equity
$68,138
$68,718
$67,300
2.
excluding the impact of the preferred dividend of $1.64billion in the first quarter of 2011 (calculated as the difference between the carrying value and
the redemption value of the preferred stock), related to the redemption of our seriesg preferred stock, diluted earnings per common share were $7.46 and roe was 5.9% for 2011. we believe that presenting our results for 2011 excluding this
dividend is meaningful, as it increases the comparability of period-to-period results. diluted earnings per common share and roe excluding this dividend are non-gaap measures and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other
companies. the tables below present the calculation of net earnings applicable to common shareholders, diluted earnings per common share and average common shareholders equity excluding the impact of this dividend.
inmillions, except per share amount
year ended
december2011
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$2,510
impact of the seriesg preferred stock dividend
1,643
net earnings applicable to common shareholders, excluding the impact of the seriesg preferred stock dividend
4,153
divided by: average diluted common shares outstanding
556.9
diluted earnings per common share, excluding the impact of the seriesg preferred stock
dividend
$7.46
inmillions
averagefortheyear endeddecember2011
total shareholders equity
$72,708
preferred stock
(3,990
)
common shareholders equity
68,718
impact of the seriesg preferred stock dividend
1,264
common shareholders equity, excluding the impact of the seriesg preferred stock
dividend
$69,982
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
3.
excluding the impact of the $465million related to the u.k. bank payroll tax, the $550million related to the sec settlement and the
$305million impairment of our nyse dmm rights, diluted earnings per common share were $15.22 and roe was 13.1% for 2010. we believe that presenting our results for 2010 excluding the impact of these items is meaningful, as it increases the
comparability of period-to-period results. diluted earnings per common share and roe excluding these items are non-gaap measures and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other companies. the tables below present the calculation
of net earnings applicable to common shareholders, diluted earnings per common share and average common shareholders equity excluding the impact of theseitems.
inmillions, except per share amount
year endeddecember2010
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$7,713
impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax
pre-tax impact of the sec settlement
tax impact of the sec settlement
(6
)
pre-tax impact of the nyse dmm rights impairment
tax impact of the nyse dmm rights impairment
(118
)
net earnings applicable to common shareholders, excluding the impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax,the sec settlement and the nyse dmm
rightsimpairment
8,909
divided by: average diluted common shares outstanding
585.3
diluted earnings per common share, excluding the impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax, the sec
settlementand the nyse dmm rightsimpairment
$15.22
inmillions
average for theyear endeddecember2010
total shareholders equity
$74,257
preferred stock
(6,957
)
common shareholders equity
67,300
impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax
impact of the sec settlement
impact of the nyse dmm rights impairment
common shareholders equity, excluding the impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax, the sec
settlementand the nyse dmm rightsimpairment
$67,966
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
net revenues  2012 versus 2011. net revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were
$34.16billion for 2012,19% higher than 2011, reflecting significantly higher other principal transactions revenues, as well as higher market-making revenues, investment banking revenues and investment management revenues compared with
2011. these increases were partially offset by significantly lower net interest income and lower commissions and fees compared with 2011.  2011 versus 2010. net revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were
$28.81billion for 2011, 26% lower than 2010, reflecting significantly lower other principal transactions revenues and market-making revenues, as well as lower investment banking revenues and net interest income. these decreases were partially
offset by higher commissions and fees compared with 2010. investment management revenues were essentially unchanged compared with 2010.  non-interest
revenues  investment banking  during 2012, investment banking revenues reflected an operating environment generally characterized by continued concerns about the outlook for the global economy and political uncertainty. these concerns
weighed on investment banking activity, as completed mergers and acquisitions activity declined compared with 2011, and equity and equity-related underwriting activity remained low, particularly in initial public offerings. however, industry-wide
debt underwriting activity improved compared with 2011, as credit spreads tightened and interest rates remained low. if macroeconomic concerns continue and result in lower levels of client activity, investment banking revenues would likely be
negativelyimpacted.  2012 versus 2011. investment banking revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $4.94billion for 2012, 13% higher than 2011, reflecting significantly higher revenues in our underwriting business, due to
strong revenues in debt underwriting. revenues in debt underwriting were significantly higher compared with 2011, primarily reflecting higher revenues from investment-grade and leveraged finance activity. revenues in equity underwriting were lower
compared with 2011, primarily reflecting a decline in industry-wide initial public offerings. revenues in financial advisory were essentially unchanged compared with 2011.
2011 versus 2010. investment banking revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $4.36billion for 2011, 9% lower than 2010, primarily reflecting lower revenues in our underwriting business. revenues in
equity underwriting were significantly lower than 2010, principally due to a decline in industry-wide activity. revenues in debt underwriting were essentially unchanged compared with 2010. revenues in financial advisory decreased slightly compared
with 2010.  investment management  during 2012, investment management revenues reflected an operating environment generally characterized by improved asset prices, resulting in appreciation in the value of client assets. however, the mix
of assets under supervision has shifted slightly from asset classes that typically generate higher fees to asset classes that typically generate lower fees compared with 2011. in the future, if asset prices were to decline, or investors continue to
favor asset classes that typically generate lower fees or investors continue to withdraw their assets, investment management revenues would likely be negatively impacted. in addition, continued concerns about the global economic outlook could result
in downward pressure on assets undersupervision.  2012 versus 2011.
investment management revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $4.97billion for 2012, 6% higher compared with 2011, due to significantly higher incentive fees,
partially offset by slightly lower management and other fees.  2011 versus
2010. investment management revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $4.69billion for 2011, essentially unchanged compared with 2010, primarily due to higher
management and other fees, reflecting favorable changes in the mix of assets under management, offset by lower incentive fees.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
commissions and fees  although global equity prices increased during 2012, commissions and fees reflected an operating environment characterized by lower market volumes primarily due to lower volatility levels, concerns about
the outlook for the global economy and continued political uncertainty. if macroeconomic concerns continue and result in lower market volumes, commissions and fees would likely continue to be negativelyimpacted.
2012 versus 2011.
commissions and fees on the consolidated statements of earnings were $3.16billion for 2012, 16% lower than 2011, reflecting lower marketvolumes.
2011 versus 2010.
commissions and fees on the consolidated statements of earnings were $3.77billion for 2011, 6% higher than 2010, primarily reflecting higher market volumes, particularly during the
third quarter of2011.  market making  during 2012, market-making revenues reflected an operating environment generally characterized by continued broad market concerns and uncertainties, although positive developments helped to improve market
conditions. these developments included certain central bank actions to ease monetary policy and address funding risks for european financial institutions. in addition, the u.s. economy posted stable to improving economic data, including favorable
developments in unemployment and housing. these improvements resulted in tighter credit spreads, higher global equity prices and lower levels of volatility. however, concerns about the outlook for the global economy and continued political
uncertainty, particularly the political debate in the united states surrounding the fiscal cliff, generally resulted in client risk aversion and lower activity levels. also, uncertainty over financial regulatory reform persisted. if these concerns
and uncertainties continue over the long term, market-making revenues would likely be negativelyimpacted.  2012 versus 2011. market-making revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $11.35billion for 2012, 22% higher than 2011,
primarily reflecting significantly higher revenues in mortgages and higher revenues in interest rate products, credit products and equity cash products, partially offset by significantly lower revenues in commodities. in addition, market-making
revenues included significantly higher revenues in securities services compared with 2011, reflecting a gain of approximately $500million on the sale of our hedge fund administrationbusiness.
2011 versus 2010. market-making revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $9.29billion for 2011, 32% lower than 2010. although activity levels during 2011 were generally consistent with 2010 levels,
and results were solid during the first quarter of 2011, the environment during the remainder of 2011 was characterized by broad market concerns and uncertainty, resulting in volatile markets and significantly wider credit spreads, which contributed
to difficult market-making conditions and led to reductions in risk by us and our clients. as a result of these conditions, revenues across most of our major market-making activities were lower during 2011 compared with2010.
other principal transactions
during 2012, other principal transactions revenues reflected an operating environment characterized by tighter credit spreads and an
increase in global equity prices. however, concerns about the outlook for the global economy and uncertainty over financial regulatory reform persisted. if equity markets decline or credit spreads widen, other principal transactions revenues would
likely be negativelyimpacted.  2012 versus 2011. other principal transactions revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $5.87billion and $1.51billion for 2012 and 2011, respectively. results for 2012 included a gain from our
investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, net gains from other investments in equities, primarily in private equities, net gains from debt securities and loans, and revenues related to our consolidated investmententities.
2011 versus 2010. other
principal transactions revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $1.51billion and $6.93billion for 2011 and 2010, respectively. results for 2011 included a loss from our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc and net
gains from other investments in equities, primarily in private equities, partially offset by losses from public equities. in addition, revenues in other principal transactions included net losses from debt securities and loans, primarily reflecting
approximately $1billion of unrealized losses related to relationship lending activities, including the effect of hedges, partially offset by net gains from other debt securities and loans. results for 2011 also included revenues related to our
consolidated investment entities. results for 2010 included a gain from our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, net gains from other investments in equities, net gains from debt securities and loans, and revenues related to consolidated
investment entities.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
net interest income  2012 versus 2011. net interest income on the consolidated statements of earnings was
$3.88billion for 2012, 25% lower than 2011. the decrease compared with 2011 was primarily due to lower average yields on financial instruments owned, at fair value, and collateralizedagreements.
2011 versus 2010. net
interest income on the consolidated statements of earnings was $5.19billion for 2011, 6% lower than 2010. the decrease compared with 2010 was primarily due to higher interest expense related to our long-term borrowings and higher dividend
expense related to financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, partially offset by an increase in interest income from higher yielding collateralizedagreements.  operating expenses  our operating expenses are primarily influenced by compensation,
headcount and levels of business activity.
compensation and benefits includes salaries, discretionary compensation, amortization of equity awards and other items such as benefits. discretionary compensation is significantly impacted by,
among other factors, the level of net revenues, overall financial performance, prevailing labor markets, business mix, the structure of our share-based compensation programs and the externalenvironment.
in the context of more difficult economic and financial conditions, the firm launched an initiative during the second quarter of 2011 to
identify areas where we can operate more efficiently and reduce our operating expenses. during 2012 and 2011, we announced targeted annual run rate compensation and non-compensation reductions of approximately $1.9billion in aggregate.
the table below presents our operating expenses and totalstaff.
year ended december
$ inmillions
compensation and benefits
$12,944
$12,223
$15,376
u.k. bank payroll
tax
brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees
2,208
2,463
2,281
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
1,738
1,865
1,889
occupancy
1,030
1,086
professional fees
insurance reserves1
other expenses
2,435
2,072
2,559
total non-compensation expenses
10,012
10,419
10,428
total operating expenses
$22,956
$22,642
$26,269
total staff at
period-end2
32,400
33,300
35,700
1.
related revenues are included in market making on the consolidated statements of earnings.
2.
includes employees, consultants and temporary staff.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
2012 versus 2011. operating expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $22.96billion for 2012, essentially unchanged compared with 2011. compensation and benefits expenses on the consolidated
statements of earnings were $12.94billion for 2012, 6% higher compared with $12.22billion for 2011. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2012 was 37.9%, compared with 42.4% for 2011. total staff decreased 3% during
2012.  non-compensation expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $10.01billion for 2012, 4% lower
compared with 2011. the decrease compared with 2011 primarily reflected the impact of expense reduction initiatives, lower brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees, lower occupancy expenses and lower impairment charges. these decreases
were partially offset by higher other expenses and increased reserves related to our reinsurance business. the increase in other expenses compared with 2011 primarily reflected higher net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings and
higher charitable contributions. net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings were $448million during 2012 (including a settlement with the board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal reserve board) regarding the
independent foreclosure review). charitable contributions were $225million during 2012, including $159million to goldman sachs gives, our donor-advised fund, and $10million to the goldman sachs foundation. compensation was reduced
to fund the charitable contribution to goldman sachs gives. the firm asks its participating managing directors to make recommendations regarding potential charitable recipients for this contribution.
2011 versus 2010.
operating expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $22.64billion for 2011, 14% lower than 2010. compensation and benefits expenses on the consolidated statements of
earnings were $12.22billion for 2011, a 21% decline compared with $15.38billion for 2010. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2011 was 42.4%, compared with 39.3%1 (which excludes the impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax) for
2010. operating expenses for 2010 included $465million related to the u.k. bank payroll tax. total staff decreased 7% during 2011.  non-compensation expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $10.42billion for 2011, essentially unchanged compared with 2010. non-compensation expenses for 2011 included higher
brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees, increased reserves related to our reinsurance business and higher market development expenses compared with 2010. these increases were offset by lower other expenses during 2011. the decrease in
other expenses primarily reflected lower net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings (2010 included $550million related to a settlement with the sec). in addition, non-compensation expenses during 2011 included impairment charges
of approximately $440million, primarily related to consolidated investments and litton loan servicing lp. charitable contributions were $163million during 2011, including $78million to goldman sachs gives and $25million to
the goldman sachs foundation. compensation was reduced to fund the charitable contribution to goldman sachs gives. the firm asks its participating managing directors to make recommendations regarding potential charitable recipients for this
contribution.
1.
we believe that presenting our ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues excluding the impact of the $465million u.k. bank payroll tax is
meaningful, as excluding it increases the comparability of period-to-period results. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues excluding the impact of this item is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap
measures used by other companies. the table below presents the calculation of the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues including and excluding the impact of this item.
$ inmillions
year ended
december2010
compensation and benefits (which excludes the impact of the $465million u.k. bank payroll tax)
$15,376
ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues
39.3
%
compensation and benefits, including the impact of the $465million u.k. bank payroll tax
$15,841
ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues, including the impact of the $465million
u.k. bank payroll tax
40.5
%
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
provision for taxes
the effective income tax rate for 2012 was 33.3%, up from 28.0% for 2011. the increase from
28.0% to 33.3% was primarily due to the earnings mix and a decrease in the impact of permanent benefits.
the effective income tax rate for 2011 was 28.0%, down from 35.2% for
2010. excluding the impact of the $465million u.k. bank payroll tax and the $550million sec settlement, substantially all of which was non-deductible, the effective income tax rate for 2010 was 32.7%1. the decrease from 32.7% to 28.0% was primarily due to an
increase in permanent benefits as a percentage of earnings and the earnings mix.
1.
we believe that presenting our effective income tax rate for 2010 excluding the impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax and the sec settlement, substantially all
of which was non-deductible, is meaningful as excluding these items increases the comparability of period-to-period results. the effective income tax rate excluding the impact of these items is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar
non-gaap measures used by other companies. the table below presents the calculation of the effective income tax rate excluding the impact of these amounts.
year ended december2010
$ inmillions
pre-taxearnings
provision for
taxes
effectiveincome
tax rate
as reported
$12,892
$4,538
35.2
%
add back:
impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax
impact of the sec settlement
as adjusted
$13,907
$4,544
32.7
%
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
segment operating results  the table below presents the net revenues, operating expenses and pre-tax earnings of our segments.
year ended december
inmillions
investment banking
net revenues
$4,926
$4,355
$4,810
operating expenses
3,330
2,995
3,459
pre-tax earnings
$1,596
$1,360
$1,351
institutional client services
net revenues
$18,124
$17,280
$21,796
operating expenses
12,480
12,837
14,994
pre-tax earnings
$5,644
$4,443
$6,802
investing& lending
net revenues
$5,891
$2,142
$7,541
operating expenses
2,666
2,673
3,361
pre-tax earnings/(loss)
$3,225
$(531
)
$4,180
investment management
net revenues
$5,222
$5,034
$5,014
operating expenses
4,294
4,020
4,082
pre-tax earnings
$928
$1,014
$932
total
net revenues
$34,163
$28,811
$39,161
operating expenses
22,956
22,642
26,269
pre-tax earnings
$11,207
$6,169
$12,892
total operating expenses in the table above include the following expenses that have not
been allocated to oursegments:
charitable contributions of $169million, $103million and $345million for the years ended december2012, december2011
and december2010, respectively;and
real estate-related exit costs of $17million, $14million and $28million for the years ended december2012, december2011
and december2010, respectively. real estate-related exit costs are included in depreciation and amortization and occupancy in the consolidated statements ofearnings.
operating expenses related to net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings, previously not allocated to our segments, have now
been allocated. this allocation is consistent with the manner in which management currently views the performance of our segments. reclassifications have been made to previously reported segment amounts to conform to the currentpresentation.
net revenues in our segments include allocations of interest income and interest expense to
specific securities, commodities and other positions in relation to the cash generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying positions. see note25 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this
form10-k for further information about our businesssegments.  the cost drivers of goldman sachs taken as a
whole compensation, headcount and levels of business activity are broadly similar in each of our business segments. compensation and benefits expenses within our segments reflect, among other factors, the overall performance
of goldman sachs as well as the performance of individual businesses. consequently, pre-tax margins in one segment of our business may be significantly affected by the performance of our other business segments. a discussion of segment operating
resultsfollows.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
investment banking
our investment banking segment is comprised of:
financial advisory.
includes strategic advisory assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities, risk management, restructurings and spin-offs, and derivative
transactions directly related to these client advisoryassignments.
underwriting. includes
public offerings and private placements, including domestic and cross-border transactions, of a wide range of securities, loans and other financial instruments, and derivative transactions directly related to these client
underwritingactivities.  the table below presents the operating results of our investment bankingsegment.
year ended december
inmillions
financial advisory
$1,975
$1,987
$2,062
equity underwriting
1,085
1,462
debt underwriting
1,964
1,283
1,286
total underwriting
2,951
2,368
2,748
total net revenues
4,926
4,355
4,810
operating expenses
3,330
2,995
3,459
pre-tax earnings
$1,596
$1,360
$1,351
the table below presents our financial advisory and underwriting
transactionvolumes.1
year ended december
inbillions
announced mergers and acquisitions
$707
$634
$500
completed mergers and acquisitions
equity and equity-related offerings2
debt
offerings3
1.
source: thomson reuters. announced and completed mergers and acquisitions volumes are based on full credit to each of the advisors in a transaction. equity
and equity-related offerings and debt offerings are based on full credit for single book managers and equal credit for joint book managers. transaction volumes may not be indicative of net revenues in a given period. in addition, transaction volumes
for prior periods may vary from amounts previously reported due to the subsequent withdrawal or a change in the value of atransaction.
2.
includes rule144a and public common stock offerings, convertible offerings and rightsofferings.
3.
includes non-convertible preferred stock, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and taxable municipal debt. includes publicly registered and
rule144a issues. excludes leveragedloans.
2012 versus 2011. net revenues in investment banking were $4.93billion for 2012, 13% higher than2011.  net revenues in financial advisory were $1.98billion, essentially unchanged compared with 2011. net revenues in our underwriting business were $2.95billion, 25% higher than 2011, due to strong
net revenues in debt underwriting. net revenues in debt underwriting were significantly higher compared with 2011, primarily reflecting higher net revenues from investment-grade and leveraged finance activity. net revenues in equity underwriting
were lower compared with 2011, primarily reflecting a decline in industry-wide initial publicofferings.  during 2012,
investment banking operated in an environment generally characterized by continued concerns about the outlook for the global economy and political uncertainty. these concerns weighed on investment banking activity, as completed mergers and
acquisitions activity declined compared with 2011, and equity and equity-related underwriting activity remained low, particularly in initial public offerings. however, industry-wide debt underwriting activity improved compared with 2011, as credit
spreads tightened and interest rates remained low. if macroeconomic concerns continue and result in lower levels of client activity, net revenues in investment banking would likely be negativelyimpacted.
our investment banking transaction backlog increased compared with the end of 2011. the increase compared with the end of 2011 was due to
an increase in potential debt underwriting transactions, primarily reflecting an increase in leveraged finance transactions, and an increase in potential advisory transactions. these increases were partially offset by a decrease in potential equity
underwriting transactions compared with the end of 2011, reflecting uncertainty in marketconditions.  our investment
banking transaction backlog represents an estimate of our future net revenues from investment banking transactions where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than not. we believe changes in our investment banking transaction
backlog may be a useful indicator of client activity levels which, over the long term, impact our net revenues. however, the time frame for completion and corresponding revenue recognition of transactions in our backlog varies based on the nature of
the assignment, as certain transactions may remain in our backlog for longer periods of time and others may enter and leave within the same reporting period. in addition, our transaction backlog is subject to certain limitations, such as assumptions
about the likelihood that individual client transactions will occur in thefuture. transactions may be cancelled or modified, and transactions not included in the estimate may alsooccur.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
operating expenses were $3.33billion for 2012, 11% higher than 2011, due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses, primarily resulting from higher net revenues. pre-tax earnings were $1.60billion in 2012, 17% higher than2011.  2011 versus 2010. net revenues in investment banking were $4.36billion for 2011, 9%
lower than2010.  net revenues in financial advisory were $1.99billion, 4% lower than 2010. net revenues in our
underwriting business were $2.37billion, 14% lower than 2010, reflecting significantly lower net revenues in equity underwriting, principally due to a decline in industry-wide activity. net revenues in debt underwriting were essentially
unchanged compared with2010.  investment banking operated in an environment generally characterized by significant
declines in industry-wide underwriting and mergers and acquisitions activity levels during the second half of 2011. these declines reflected increased concerns regarding the weakened state of global economies, including heightened european sovereign
debt risk, which contributed to a significant widening in credit spreads, a sharp increase in volatility levels and a significant decline in global equity markets during the second half of2011.
our investment banking transaction backlog increased compared with the end of 2010. the increase compared with the end of 2010 was due to
an increase in potential equity underwriting transactions, primarily reflecting an increase in client mandates to underwrite initial public offerings. estimated net revenues from potential debt underwriting transactions decreased slightly compared
with the end of 2010. estimated net revenues from potential advisory transactions were essentially unchanged compared with the end of2010.  operating expenses were $3.00billion for 2011, 13% lower than 2010, due to decreased compensation and benefits expenses, primarily resulting from lower net revenues. pre-tax earnings were
$1.36billion in 2011, essentially unchanged compared with2010.  institutional client services
our institutional client services segment is comprisedof:  fixed income, currency and commodities client execution. includes client execution
activities related to making markets in interest rate products, credit products, mortgages, currencies andcommodities.
we generate market-making revenues in these activities, in threeways:
in large, highly liquid markets (such as markets for u.s. treasury bills or certain mortgage pass-through certificates), we execute a high volume of
transactions for our clients for modest spreads andfees.
in less liquid markets (such as mid-cap corporate bonds, growth market currencies or certain non-agency mortgage-backed securities), we execute
transactions for our clients for spreads and fees that are generally somewhatlarger.
we also structure and execute transactions involving customized or tailor-made products that address our clients risk exposures, investment
objectives or other complex needs (such as a jet fuel hedge for anairline).  given the focus on the
mortgage market, our mortgage activities are further describedbelow.  our activities in mortgages include commercial
mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives, residential mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives (including u.s. government agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations, other prime, subprime and alt-a securities and loans),
and other asset-backed securities, loans andderivatives.  we buy, hold and sell long and short mortgage positions,
primarily for market making for our clients. our inventory therefore changes based on client demands and is generally held for short-termperiods.  see notes18 and 27 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for information about exposure to mortgage repurchase requests, mortgage rescissions and
mortgage-related litigation.  equities. includes client execution activities related to making markets in equity products, as well as commissions and fees from executing and clearing institutional client transactions on major stock, options
and futures exchanges worldwide. equities also includes our securities services business, which provides financing, securities lending and other prime brokerage services to institutional clients, including hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds
and foundations, and generates revenues primarily in the form of interest rate spreads or fees, and revenues related to our reinsuranceactivities.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the table below presents the operating results of our institutional client
servicessegment.
year ended december
inmillions
fixed income, currency and commodities clientexecution
$9,914
$9,018
$13,707
equities client execution1
3,171
3,031
3,231
commissions and fees
3,053
3,633
3,426
securities services
1,986
1,598
1,432
total equities
8,210
8,262
8,089
total net revenues
18,124
17,280
21,796
operating expenses
12,480
12,837
14,994
pre-tax earnings
$5,644
$4,443
$6,802
1.
includes net revenues related to reinsurance of $1.08billion, $880million and $827million for the years ended december2012,
december2011 and december2010,respectively.
2012 versus 2011. net
revenues in institutional client services were $18.12billion for 2012, 5% higher than2011.  net revenues in fixed
income, currency and commodities client execution were $9.91billion for 2012, 10% higher than 2011. these results reflected strong net revenues in mortgages, which were significantly higher compared with 2011. in addition, net revenues in
credit products and interest rate products were solid and higher compared with 2011. these increases were partially offset by significantly lower net revenues in commodities and slightly lower net revenues in currencies. although broad market
concerns persisted during 2012, fixed income, currency and commodities client execution operated in a generally improved environment characterized by tighter credit spreads and less challenging market-making conditions compared with2011.
net revenues in equities were $8.21billion for 2012, essentially unchanged compared with 2011. net revenues in
securities services were significantly higher compared with 2011, reflecting a gain of approximately $500million on the sale of our hedge fund administration business. in addition, equities client execution net revenues were higher than 2011,
primarily reflecting significantly higher results in cash products, principally due to increased levels of client activity. these increases were offset by lower commissions and fees, reflecting lower market volumes. during 2012, equities operated in
an environment generally characterized by an increase in global equity prices and lower volatilitylevels.
the net loss attributable to the impact of changes in our own credit spreads on borrowings
for which the fair value option was elected was $714million ($433million and $281million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution, respectively) for 2012, compared with a net
gain of $596million ($399million and $197million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution, respectively) for2011.
during 2012, institutional client services operated in an environment generally characterized by continued broad market concerns and
uncertainties, although positive developments helped to improve market conditions. these developments included certain central bank actions to ease monetary policy and address funding risks for european financial institutions. in addition, the u.s.
economy posted stable to improving economic data, including favorable developments in unemployment and housing. these improvements resulted in tighter credit spreads, higher global equity prices and lower levels of volatility. however, concerns
about the outlook for the global economy and continued political uncertainty, particularly the political debate in the united states surrounding the fiscal cliff, generally resulted in client risk aversion and lower activity levels. also,
uncertainty over financial regulatory reform persisted. if these concerns and uncertainties continue over the long term, net revenues in fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities would likely be negativelyimpacted.
operating expenses were $12.48billion for 2012, 3% lower than 2011, primarily due to lower brokerage, clearing, exchange
and distribution fees, and lower impairment charges, partially offset by higher net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings. pre-tax earnings were $5.64billion in 2012, 27% higher than2011.
2011 versus 2010. net
revenues in institutional client services were $17.28billion for 2011, 21% lower than2010.  net revenues in fixed
income, currency and commodities client execution were $9.02billion for 2011, 34% lower than 2010. although activity levels during 2011 were generally consistent with 2010 levels, and results were solid during the first quarter of 2011, the
environment during the remainder of 2011 was characterized by broad market concerns and uncertainty, resulting in volatile markets and significantly wider credit spreads, which contributed to difficult market-making conditions and led to reductions
in risk by us and our clients. as a result of these conditions, net revenues across the franchise were lower, including significant declines in mortgages and credit products, compared with2010.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
net revenues in equities were $8.26billion for 2011, 2% higher than 2010. during
2011, average volatility levels increased and equity prices in europe and asia declined significantly, particularly during the third quarter. the increase in net revenues reflected higher commissions and fees, primarily due to higher market volumes,
particularly during the third quarter of 2011. in addition, net revenues in securities services increased compared with 2010, reflecting the impact of higher average customer balances. equities client execution net revenues were lower than 2010,
primarily reflecting significantly lower net revenues inshares.  the net gain attributable to the impact of changes in
our own credit spreads on borrowings for which the fair value option was elected was $596million ($399million and $197million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution,
respectively) for 2011, compared with a net gain of $198million ($188million and $10million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution, respectively) for2010.
institutional client services operated in an environment generally characterized by increased concerns regarding the weakened state of
global economies, including heightened european sovereign debt risk, and its impact on the european banking system and global financial institutions. these conditions also impacted expectations for economic prospects in the united states and were
reflected in equity and debt markets more broadly. in addition, the downgrade in credit ratings of the u.s. government and federal agencies and many financial institutions during the second half of 2011 contributed to further uncertainty in the
markets. these concerns, as well as other broad market concerns, such as uncertainty over financial regulatory reform, continued to have a negative impact on our net revenues during2011.
operating expenses were $12.84billion for 2011, 14% lower than 2010, due to decreased compensation and benefits expenses, primarily
resulting from lower net revenues, lower net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings (2010 included $550million related to a settlement with the sec), the impact of the u.k. bank payroll tax during 2010, as well as an impairment
of our nyse dmm rights of $305million during 2010. these decreases were partially offset by higher brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees, principally reflecting higher transaction volumes in equities. pre-tax earnings were
$4.44billion in 2011, 35% lower than2010.
investing& lending  investing& lending includes our investing activities and the origination of loans to provide financing to clients. these investments and loans are typically longer-term in nature. we make
investments, directly and indirectly through funds that we manage, in debt securities and loans, public and private equity securities, real estate, consolidated investment entities and power generationfacilities.
the table below presents the operating results of our investing& lendingsegment.
year ended december
inmillions
icbc
$408
$(517
)
$747
equity securities (excludingicbc)
2,392
1,120
2,692
debt securities and loans
1,850
2,597
other
1,241
1,443
1,505
total net revenues
5,891
2,142
7,541
operating expenses
2,666
2,673
3,361
pre-tax earnings/(loss)
$3,225
$(531
)
$4,180
2012 versus 2011. net revenues in investing& lending were $5.89billion and $2.14billion for 2012 and 2011, respectively. during 2012, investing& lending net revenues were positively impacted
by tighter credit spreads and an increase in global equity prices. results for 2012 included a gain of $408million from our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc, net gains of $2.39billion from other investments in equities,
primarily in private equities, net gains and net interest income of $1.85billion from debt securities and loans, and other net revenues of $1.24billion, principally related to our consolidated investment entities. if equity markets
decline or credit spreads widen, net revenues in investing& lending would likely be negativelyimpacted.
operating expenses were $2.67billion for 2012, essentially unchanged compared with 2011. pre-tax earnings were $3.23billion in
2012, compared with a pre-tax loss of $531million in2011.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
2011 versus 2010. net revenues in investing& lending were $2.14billion and $7.54billion for 2011 and 2010, respectively. during 2011, investing& lending results reflected an operating
environment characterized by a significant decline in equity markets in europe and asia, and unfavorable credit markets that were negatively impacted by increased concerns regarding the weakened state of global economies, including heightened
european sovereign debt risk. results for 2011 included a loss of $517million from our investment in the ordinary shares of icbc and net gains of $1.12billion from other investments in equities, primarily in private equities, partially
offset by losses from public equities. in addition, investing& lending included net revenues of $96million from debt securities and loans. this amount includes approximately $1billion of unrealized losses related to
relationship lending activities, including the effect of hedges, offset by net interest income and net gains from other debt securities and loans. results for 2011 also included other net revenues of $1.44billion, principally related to our
consolidated investmententities.  results for 2010 included a gain of $747million from our investment in the
ordinary shares of icbc, a net gain of $2.69billion from other investments in equities, a net gain of $2.60billion from debt securities and loans and other net revenues of $1.51billion, principally related to our consolidated
investment entities. the net gain from other investments in equities was primarily driven by an increase in global equity markets, which resulted in appreciation of both our public and private equity positions and provided favorable conditions for
initial public offerings. the net gains and net interest from debt securities and loans primarily reflected the impact of tighter credit spreads and favorable credit markets during the year, which provided favorable conditions for borrowers
torefinance.  operating expenses were $2.67billion for 2011,20% lower than 2010, due to decreased
compensation and benefits expenses, primarily resulting from lower net revenues. this decrease was partially offset by the impact of impairment charges related to consolidated investments during 2011. pre-tax loss was $531million in 2011,
compared with pre-tax earnings of $4.18billion in2010.
investment management  investment management provides investment management services and offers investment products (primarily through separately managed accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and private
investment funds) across all major asset classes to a diverse set of institutional and individual clients. investment management also offers wealth advisory services, including portfolio management and financial counseling, and brokerage and other
transaction services to high-net-worth individuals andfamilies.  assets under supervision include assets under management
and other client assets. assets under management include client assets where we earn a fee for managing assets on a discretionary basis. this includes net assets in our mutual funds, hedge funds, credit funds and private equity funds (including real
estate funds), and separately managed accounts for institutional and individual investors. other client assets include client assets invested with third-party managers, private bank deposits and assets related to advisory relationships where we earn
a fee for advisory and other services, but do not have discretion over the assets. assets under supervision do not include the self-directed brokerage accounts of ourclients.
assets under management and other client assets typically generate fees as a percentage of net asset value, which vary by asset class and
are affected by investment performance as well as asset inflows and redemptions.  in certain circumstances, we are also
entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of a funds return or when the return exceeds a specified benchmark or other performance targets. incentive fees are recognized only when all material contingencies areresolved.
the table below presents the operating results of our investment managementsegment.
year ended december
inmillions
management and other fees
$4,105
$4,188
$3,956
incentive fees
transaction revenues
total net revenues
5,222
5,034
5,014
operating expenses
4,294
4,020
4,082
pre-tax earnings
$928
$1,014
$932
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the tables below present our assets under supervision, including assets under management by
asset class and other client assets, as well as a summary of the changes in our assets undersupervision.
as of december31,
inbillions
alternative investments1
$133
$142
$148
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management (aum)
other client assets
total assets under supervision (aus)
$965
$895
$917
1.
primarily includes hedge funds, credit funds, private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
yearendeddecember31,
inbillions
balance, beginning of year
$895
$917
$955
net inflows/(outflows)alternative investments
(11
)
(5
)
(1
)
equity
(13
)
(9
)
(21
)
fixed income
(15
)
total non-money market net inflows/(outflows)
(16
)
(29
)
(15
)
money markets
(2
)
(56
)
total aum net inflows/(outflows)
(18
)
(17
)2
(71
)
other client assets net inflows/(outflows)
(10
)
(7
)
total aus net inflows/(outflows)
(27
)
(78
)
net market appreciation/(depreciation)aum
other client assets
total aus net marketappreciation/(depreciation)
balance, end of year
$965
$895
$917
1.
includes $34billion of fixed income asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of dwight asset management, including $17billion in assets
under management and $17billion in other client assets, and $5billion of fixed income and equity asset outflows in connection with our liquidation of goldman sachs asset management korea, all related to assets undermanagement.
2.
includes $6billion of asset inflows across all asset classes in connection with our acquisitions of goldman sachs australia pty ltd and benchmark asset
management company privatelimited.
2012 versus 2011. net revenues in investment management were $5.22billion for 2012, 4% higher than 2011, due to significantly higher incentive fees, partially offset by lower transaction revenues and slightly lower
management and other fees. during the year, assets under supervision increased $70billion to $965billion. assets under management increased $26billion to $854billion, reflecting net market appreciation of $44billion,
primarily in fixed income and equity assets, partially offset by net outflows of $18billion. net outflows in assets under management included outflows in equity, alternative investment and money market assets, partially offset by inflows in
fixed income assets. other client assets increased $44billion to $111billion, primarily due to net inflows, principally in client assets invested with third-party managers and assets related to advisoryrelationships.
during 2012, investment management operated in an environment generally characterized by improved asset prices, resulting in appreciation
in the value of client assets. however, the mix of assets under supervision has shifted slightly from asset classes that typically generate higher fees to asset classes that typically generate lower fees compared with 2011. in the future, if asset
prices were to decline, or investors continue to favor asset classes that typically generate lower fees or investors continue to withdraw their assets, net revenues in investment management would likely be negatively impacted. in addition, continued
concerns about the global economic outlook could result in downward pressure on assets undersupervision.  operating
expenses were $4.29billion for 2012, 7% higher than 2011, due to increased compensation and benefits expenses. pre-tax earnings were $928million in 2012, 8% lower than2011.
2011 versus 2010. net
revenues in investment management were $5.03billion for 2011, essentially unchanged compared with 2010, primarily due to higher management and other fees, reflecting favorable changes in the mix of assets under management, offset by lower
incentive fees. during 2011, assets under supervision decreased $22billion to $895billion. assets under management decreased $12billion to $828billion, reflecting net outflows of $17billion, partially offset by net
market appreciation of $5billion. net outflows in assets under management primarily reflected outflows in fixed income and equity assets, partially offset by inflows in money market assets. other client assets decreased $10billion to
$67billion, primarily due to net outflows, principally in client assets invested with third-party managers in money marketfunds.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
during the first half of 2011, investment management operated in an environment generally
characterized by improved asset prices and a shift in investor assets away from money markets in favor of asset classes with potentially higher risk and returns. however, during the second half of 2011, asset prices declined, particularly in
equities, in part driven by increased uncertainty regarding the global economic outlook. declining asset prices and economic uncertainty contributed to investors shifting assets away from asset classes with potentially higher risk and returns to
asset classes with lower risk andreturns.  operating expenses were $4.02billion for 2011, 2% lower than 2010.
pre-tax earnings were $1.01billion in 2011, 9% higher than2010.  geographic data
see note25 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for a summary of our total
net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings by geographicregion.
regulatory developments
the u.s. dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act (dodd-frank act), enacted in july2010, significantly altered the
financial regulatory regime within which we operate. the implications of the dodd-frank act for our businesses will depend to a large extent on the rules that will be adopted by the federal reserve board, the federal deposit insurance corporation
(fdic), the sec, the u.s. commodity futures trading commission (cftc) and other agencies to implement the legislation, as well as the development of market practices and structures under the regime established by the legislation and the implementing
rules. other reforms have been adopted or are being considered by other regulators and policy makers worldwide and these reforms may affect our businesses. we expect that the principal areas of impact from regulatory reform for us willbe:
the dodd-frank prohibition on proprietary trading and the limitation on the sponsorship of, and investment in, hedge funds and private
equity funds by banking entities, including bank holding companies, referred to as the volckerrule;
increased regulation of and restrictions on over-the-counter (otc) derivatives markets and transactions;and
increased regulatory capitalrequirements.  in october2011, the proposed rules to implement the volcker rule were issued and included an extensive request for comments on the proposal. the proposed rules are highly complex, and many aspects
of the volcker rule remain unclear. the full impact of the rule on us will depend upon the detailed scope of the prohibitions, permitted activities, exceptions and exclusions, and will not be known with certainty until the rules are finalized and
market practices and structures develop under the final rules. currently, companies are expected to be required to be in compliance by july2014 (subject to possibleextensions).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
while many aspects of the volcker rule remain unclear, we evaluated the prohibition on
proprietary trading and determined that businesses that engage in bright line proprietary trading are most likely to be prohibited. in 2011 and 2010, we liquidated substantially all of our principal strategies and global
macro proprietary trading positions.  in addition, we have evaluated the limitations on sponsorship of, and investments in,
hedge funds and private equity funds. the firm earns management fees and incentive fees for investment management services from hedge funds and private equity funds, which are included in our investment management segment. the firm also makes
investments in funds, and the gains and losses from these investments are included in our investing& lending segment; these gains and losses will be impacted by the volcker rule. the volcker rule limitation on investments in hedge funds
and private equity funds requires the firm to reduce its investment in each hedge fund and private equity fund to 3% or less of the funds net asset value, and to reduce the firms aggregate investment in all such funds to 3% or less of
the firms tier1 capital. the firms aggregate net revenues from its investments in hedge funds and private equity funds were not material to the firms aggregate total net revenues over the period from 1999 through 2012. we
continue to manage our existing private equity funds, taking into account the transition periods under the volcker rule. with respect to our hedge funds, we currently plan to comply with the volcker rule by redeeming certain of our interests in the
funds. since march2012, we have been redeeming up to approximately 10% of certain hedge funds total redeemable units per quarter, and expect to continue to do so through june2014. we redeemed approximately $1.06billion of
these interests in hedge funds during the year ended december2012. in addition, we have limited the firms initial investment to 3% for certain new investments in hedge funds and private equityfunds.
as required by the dodd-frank act, the federal reserve board and fdic have jointly issued a rule requiring each bank holding company with
over $50billion in assets and each designated systemically important financial institution to provide to regulators an annual plan for its rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure (resolution plan).
our resolution plan must,
among other things, demonstrate that goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank usa) is adequately protected from risks arising from our other entities. the regulators joint rule sets specific
standards for the resolution plans, including requiring a detailed resolution strategy and analyses of the companys material entities, organizational structure, interconnections and interdependencies, and management information systems, among
other elements. we submitted our resolution plan to the regulators on june29,2012. gsbank usa also submitted its resolution plan on june29,2012, as required by thefdic.
in september2011, the sec proposed rules to implement the dodd-frank acts prohibition against securitization
participants engaging in any transaction that would involve or result in any material conflict of interest with an investor in a securitization transaction. the proposed rules would except bona fide market-making activities and risk-mitigating
hedging activities in connection with securitization activities from the general prohibition.we will also be affected by rules to be adopted by federal agencies pursuant to the dodd-frank act that require any person who organizes or initiates
an asset-backed security transaction to retain a portion (generally, at least five percent) of any credit risk that the person conveys to a thirdparty.  in december2011, the federal reserve board proposed regulations designed to strengthen the regulation and supervision of large bank holding companies and systemically important nonbank financial
institutions. these proposals address, among other things, risk-based capital and leverage requirements, liquidity requirements, overall risk management requirements, single counterparty limits and early remediation requirements that are designed to
address financial weakness at an early stage. although many of the proposals mirror initiatives to which bank holding companies are already subject, their full impact on the firm will not be known with certainty until the rules are finalized and
market practices and structures develop under the final rules. in addition, in october2012, the federal reserve board issued final rules for stress testing requirements for certain bank holding companies, including the firm. see equity
capital below for further information about our comprehensive capital analysis and review(ccar).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the dodd-frank act also contains provisions that include (i)requiring the
registration of all swap dealers and major swap participants with the cftc and of security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants with the sec, the clearing and execution of certain swaps and security-based swaps through
central counterparties, regulated exchanges or electronic facilities and real-time public and regulatory reporting of trade information, (ii)placing new business conduct standards and other requirements on swap dealers, major swap
participants, security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants, covering their relationships with counterparties, their internal oversight and compliance structures, conflict of interest rules, internal information barriers,
general and trade-specific record-keeping and risk management, (iii)establishing mandatory margin requirements for trades that are not cleared through a central counterparty, (iv)position limits that cap exposure to derivatives on
certain physical commodities and (v)entity-level capital requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers and major security-based swapparticipants.
the cftc is responsible for issuing rules relating to swaps, swap dealers and major swap participants, and the sec is responsible for
issuing rules relating to security-based swaps, security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. although the cftc has not yet finalized its capital regulations, certain of the requirements, including registration of swap
dealers and real-time public trade reporting, have taken effect already under cftc rules, and the sec and the cftc have finalized the definitions of a number of key terms. the cftc has finalized a number of other implementing rules and laid out a
series of implementation deadlines in 2013, covering rules for business conduct standards for swap dealers and clearingrequirements.  the sec has proposed rules to impose margin, capital and segregation requirements for security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. the sec has also proposed rules relating to
registration of security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants, trade reporting and real-time reporting, and business conduct requirements for security-based swap dealers and major security-based swapparticipants.
we have registered certain subsidiaries as swap dealers under the cftc rules,
including goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.), gs bank usa, goldman sachs international (gsi) and j. aron& company. we expect that these entities, and our businesses more broadly, will be subject to significant and developing
regulation and regulatory oversight in connection with swap-related activities. similar regulations have been proposed or adopted in jurisdictions outside the united states and, in july2012 and february 2013, the basel committee and the
international organization of securities commissions released consultative documents proposing margin requirements for non-centrally-cleared derivatives. the full impact of the various u.s. and non-u.s. regulatory developments in this area will not
be known with certainty until the rules are implemented and market practices and structures develop under the finalrules.
the dodd-frank act also establishes the consumer financial protection bureau, which has broad authority to regulate providers of credit,
payment and other consumer financial products and services, and has oversight over certain of our products andservices.
see note20 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for additional information about
regulatory developments as they relate to our regulatory capitalratios.  see business regulation
in part i, item1 of this form10-k for more information on the laws, rules and regulations and proposed laws, rules and regulations that apply to us and ouroperations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
balance sheet and funding sources
balance sheet management
one of our most important risk management disciplines is our ability to manage the size and
composition of our balance sheet. while our asset base changes due to client activity, market fluctuations and business opportunities, the size and composition of our balance sheet reflect (i)our overall risk tolerance, (ii)our ability
to access stable funding sources and (iii)the amount of equity capital wehold.  although our balance sheet
fluctuates on a day-to-day basis, our total assets and adjusted assets at quarterly and year-end dates are generally not materially different from those occurring within our reporting periods.
in order to ensure appropriate risk management, we seek to maintain a liquid balance sheet and have processes in place to dynamically
manage our assets and liabilities whichinclude:
quarterly planning;
business-specific limits;
monitoring of key metrics; and
scenario analyses.
quarterly planning. we prepare a quarterly balance sheet plan that combines our projected total assets and composition of assets with our expected funding sources and capital levels for the upcoming quarter. the objectives
of this quarterly planning process are:
to develop our near-term balance sheet projections, taking into account the general state of the financial markets and expected business activity
levels;
to ensure that our projected assets are supported by an adequate amount and tenor of funding and that our projected capital and liquidity metrics
are within management guidelines and regulatory requirements; and
to allow business risk managers and managers from our independent control and support functions to objectively evaluate balance sheet limit requests
from business managers in the context of the firms overall balance sheet constraints. these constraints include the firms liability profile and equity capital levels, maturities and plans for new debt and equity issuances, share
repurchases, deposit trends and secured funding transactions.  to prepare our quarterly balance sheet plan,
business risk managers and managers from our independent control and support functions meet with business managers to review current and prior period metrics and discuss expectations for the upcoming quarter. the specific metrics reviewed include
asset and liability size and composition, aged inventory, limit utilization, risk and performance measures, and capital usage.
our consolidated quarterly plan, including our balance sheet plans by business, funding and capital projections, and projected capital and
liquidity metrics, is reviewed by the firmwide finance committee. see overview and structure of risk management for an overview of our risk management structure.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
business-specific limits. the firmwide finance committee sets asset and liability limits for each business and aged inventory limits for certain financial instruments as a disincentive to hold inventory over longer periods of
time. these limits are set at levels which are close to actual operating levels in order to ensure prompt escalation and discussion among business managers and managers in our independent control and support functions on a routine basis. the
firmwide finance committee reviews and approves balance sheet limits on a quarterly basis and may also approve changes in limits on an ad hoc basis in response to changing business needs or marketconditions.
monitoring of key
metrics. we monitor key balance sheet metrics daily both by business and on a consolidated basis, including asset and liability size and composition, aged inventory, limit utilization,
risk measures and capital usage. we allocate assets to businesses and review and analyze movements resulting from new business activity as well as marketfluctuations.  scenario analyses. we conduct scenario analyses to determine how we would manage the size
and composition of our balance sheet and maintain appropriate funding, liquidity and capital positions in a variety ofsituations:
these scenarios cover short-term and long-term time horizons using various macro-economic and firm-specific assumptions. we use these analyses to
assist us in developing longer-term funding plans, including the level of unsecured debt issuances, the size of our secured funding program and the amount and composition of our equity capital. we also consider any potential future constraints, such
as limits on our ability to grow our asset base in the absence of appropriatefunding.
through our internal capital adequacy assessment process (icaap), ccar, the stress tests we are required to conduct under the dodd-frank act, and
our resolution and recovery planning, we further analyze how we would manage our balance sheet and risks through the duration of a severe crisis and we develop plans to access funding, generate liquidity, and/or redeploy or issue equity capital,
asappropriate.
balance sheet allocation  in addition to preparing our consolidated statements of financial condition in accordance with u.s. gaap, we prepare a balance sheet that generally allocates assets to our businesses, which is a non-gaap
presentation and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap presentations used by other companies. we believe that presenting our assets on this basis is meaningful because it is consistent with the way management views and manages risks associated
with the firms assets and better enables investors to assess the liquidity of the firms assets. the table below presents a summary of this balance sheetallocation.
as of december
inmillions
excess liquidity (global core excess)
$174,622
$171,581
other cash
6,839
7,888
excess liquidity and cash
181,461
179,469
secured client financing
229,442
283,707
inventory
318,323
273,640
secured financing agreements
76,277
71,103
receivables
36,273
35,769
institutional client services
430,873
380,512
icbc1
2,082
4,713
equity (excluding icbc)
21,267
23,041
debt
25,386
23,311
receivables and other
8,421
5,320
investing& lending
57,156
56,385
total inventory and related assets
488,029
436,897
other
assets2
39,623
23,152
total assets
$938,555
$923,225
1.
in january2013, we sold approximately 45% of our ordinary shares oficbc.
2.
includes assets related to our reinsurance business classified as held for sale as of december2012. see note12 to the consolidated financial
statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for furtherinformation.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the following is a description of the captions in the tableabove.
excess liquidity and
cash. we maintain substantial excess liquidity to meet a broad range of potential cash outflows and collateral needs in the event of a stressed environment. see liquidity risk
management below for details on the composition and sizing of our excess liquidity pool or global core excess (gce). in addition to our excess liquidity, we maintain other operating cash balances, primarily for use in specific
currencies, entities, or jurisdictions where we do not have immediate access to parent companyliquidity.  secured client financing. we provide collateralized financing for client positions, including margin loans secured by client collateral, securities
borrowed, and resale agreements primarily collateralized by government obligations. as a result of client activities, we are required to segregate cash and securities to satisfy regulatory requirements. our secured client financing arrangements,
which are generally short-term, are accounted for at fair value or at amounts that approximate fair value, and include daily margin requirements to mitigate counterparty creditrisk.
institutional client
services. in institutional client services, we maintain inventory positions to facilitate market-making in fixed income, equity, currency and commodity products. additionally, as part of
client market-making activities, we enter into resale or securities borrowing arrangements to obtain securities which we can use to cover transactions in which we or our clients have sold securities that have not yet been purchased. the receivables
in institutional client services primarily relate to securitiestransactions.  investing& lending. in investing& lending, we make investments and originate loans to provide financing to clients. these
investments and loans are typically longer-term in nature. we make investments, directly and indirectly through funds that we manage, in debt securities, loans, public and private equity securities, real estate and otherinvestments.
other assets.
other assets are generally less liquid, non-financial assets, including property, leasehold improvements and equipment, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, income tax-related
receivables, equity-method investments, assets classified as held for sale and miscellaneousreceivables.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the tables below present the reconciliation of this balance sheet allocation to our u.s.
gaap balance sheet. in the tables below, total assets for institutional client services and investing& lending represent the inventory and related assets. these amounts differ from total assets by
business segment disclosed in note25 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k because total assets disclosed in note25 include
allocations of our excess liquidity and cash, secured client financing and other assets.
as of december2012
inmillions
excessliquidityandcash
securedclientfinancing
institutionalclientservices
investing& lending
otherassets
total
assets
cashandcashequivalents
$72,669
$
$
$
$
$72,669
cashand securities segregated for regulatory and otherpurposes
49,671
49,671
securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal fundssold
28,018
84,064
28,960
141,334
securities borrowed
41,699
47,877
47,317
136,893
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
4,400
14,044
18,480
receivables from customers and counterparties
43,430
22,229
7,215
72,874
financial instruments owned, at fair value
39,075
318,323
49,613
407,011
other assets
39,623
39,623
total assets
$181,461
$229,442
$430,873
$57,156
$39,623
$938,555
as of december2011
inmillions
excessliquidityand cash
securedclientfinancing
institutionalclientservices
investing&
lending
otherassets
totalassets
cashandcashequivalents
$56,008
$
$
$
$
$56,008
cashand securities segregated for regulatory and otherpurposes
64,264
64,264
securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal fundssold
70,220
98,445
18,671
187,789
securities borrowed
14,919
85,990
52,432
153,341
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
3,252
10,612
14,204
receivables from customers and counterparties
31,756
25,157
3,348
60,261
financial instruments owned, at fair value
38,322
273,640
52,244
364,206
other assets
23,152
23,152
total assets
$179,469
$283,707
$380,512
$56,385
$23,152
$923,225
1.
includes unencumbered cash, u.s. government and federal agency obligations (including highly liquid u.s. federal agency mortgage-backed obligations), and
german, french, japanese and united kingdom government obligations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
balance sheet analysis and metrics
as of december2012, total assets on our consolidated statements of financial
condition were $938.56billion, an increase of $15.33billion from december2011. this increase was primarily due to (i)an increase in financial instruments owned, at fair value of $42.81billion, due to increases in
equities and convertible debentures and non-u.s. government and agency obligations and (ii)an increase in cash and cash equivalents of $16.66billion, primarily due to increases in interest-bearing deposits with banks. these increases
were partially offset by decreases in securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds sold of $46.46billion, primarily due to firm and clientactivities.
as of december2012, total liabilities on our consolidated statements of financial condition were $862.84billion, an increase
of $9.99billion from december2011. this increase was primarily due to an increase in deposits of $24.02billion, primarily due to increases in client activity. this increase was partially offset by a decrease in financial
instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value of $18.37billion, primarily due to decreases in derivatives and u.s. government and federal agencyobligations.
as of december2012, our total securities sold under agreements to repurchase, accounted for as collateralized financings, were
$171.81billion, which was essentially unchanged and 3% higher than the daily average amount of repurchase agreements during the quarter ended and year ended december2012, respectively. as of december2012, the increase in our
repurchase agreements relative to the daily average during the year was primarily due to an increase in firm financing activities. as of december2011, our total securities sold under agreements to repurchase, accounted for as collateralized
financings, were $164.50billion, which was 7% higher and 3% higher than the daily average amount of repurchase agreements during the quarter ended and year ended december2011, respectively. as of december2011, the increase in our
repurchase agreements relative to the daily average during the quarter and year was primarily due to increases in client activity at the end of the year. the level of our repurchase agreements fluctuates between and within periods, primarily due to
providing clients with access to highly liquid collateral, such as u.s. government and federal agency, and investment-grade sovereign obligations through collateralized financingactivities.
the table below presents information on our assets, unsecured long-term borrowings,
shareholders equity and leverageratios.
as of december
$ inmillions
total assets
$938,555
$923,225
adjusted assets
$686,874
$604,391
unsecured long-term borrowings
$167,305
$173,545
total shareholders equity
$75,716
$70,379
leverage ratio
12.4x
13.1x
adjusted leverage ratio
9.1x
8.6x
debt to equity ratio
2.2x
2.5x
adjusted assets. adjusted assets equals total assets less (i)low-risk collateralized assets generally associated with our secured client financing transactions, federal funds sold and excess liquidity (which
includes financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, less derivative liabilities) and (ii)cash and securities we segregate for regulatory and other purposes. adjusted assets is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable
to similar non-gaap measures used by othercompanies.  the table below presents the reconciliation of total assets to
adjustedassets.
as of december
inmillions
total assets
$938,555
$923,225
deduct:
securities borrowed
(136,893
)
(153,341
)
securities purchased under agreementstoreselland federalfunds sold
(141,334
)
(187,789
)
add:
financialinstrumentssold,but notyetpurchased,atfairvalue
126,644
145,013
less derivative liabilities
(50,427
)
(58,453
)
subtotal
(202,010
)
(254,570
)
deduct:
cashandsecuritiessegregated
forregulatoryandotherpurposes
(49,671
)
(64,264
)
adjusted assets
$686,874
$604,391
leverage ratio. the leverage ratio equals total assets divided by total shareholders equity and measures the proportion of equity and debt the firm is using to finance assets. this ratio is different from the
tier1 leverage ratio included in equity capital consolidated regulatory capital ratios below, and further described in note20 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this
form10-k.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
adjusted leverage ratio. the adjusted leverage ratio equals adjusted assets divided by total shareholders equity. we believe that the adjusted leverage ratio is a more meaningful measure of our capital adequacy than the
leverage ratio because it excludes certain low-risk collateralized assets that are generally supported with little or no capital. the adjusted leverage ratio is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by
othercompanies.  our adjusted leverage ratio increased to 9.1x as of december2012 from 8.6x as of
december2011 as our adjusted assetsincreased.  debt to equity
ratio. the debt to equity ratio equals unsecured long-term borrowings divided by total shareholdersequity.  funding sources  our primary sources of funding are secured financings, unsecured
long-term and short-term borrowings, and deposits. we seek to maintain broad and diversified funding sourcesglobally.  we
raise funding through a number of different products,including:
collateralized financings, such as repurchase agreements, securities loaned and other securedfinancings;
long-term unsecured debt (including structured notes) through syndicated u.s. registered offerings, u.s. registered and 144a medium-term note
programs, offshore medium-term note offerings and other debtofferings;
savings and demand deposits through deposit sweep programs and time deposits through internal and third-party broker-dealers;and
short-term unsecured debt through u.s. and non-u.s. commercial paper and promissory note issuances and othermethods.
we generally distribute our funding products through our own sales force and third-party distributors, to a
large, diverse creditor base in a variety of markets in the americas, europe and asia. we believe that our relationships with our creditors are critical to our liquidity. our creditors include banks, governments, securities lenders, pension funds,
insurance companies, mutual funds and individuals. we have imposed various internal guidelines to monitor creditor concentration across our fundingprograms.
secured funding. we fund a significant amount of inventory on a secured basis. secured funding is less sensitive to changes in our credit quality than unsecured funding, due to our posting of collateral to our lenders.
nonetheless, we continually analyze the refinancing risk of our secured funding activities, taking into account trade tenors, maturity profiles, counterparty concentrations, collateral eligibility and counterparty rollover probabilities. we seek to
mitigate our refinancing risk by executing term trades with staggered maturities, diversifying counterparties, raising excess secured funding, and pre-funding residual risk through ourgce.
we seek to raise secured funding with a term appropriate for the liquidity of the assets that are being financed, and we seek longer
maturities for secured funding collateralized by asset classes that may be harder to fund on a secured basis especially during times of market stress. substantially all of our secured funding is executed for tenors of one month or greater. assets
that may be harder to fund on a secured basis during times of market stress include certain financial instruments in the following categories: mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities, non-investment grade corporate debt securities,
equities and convertible debentures and emerging market securities. assets that are classified as level3 in the fair value hierarchy are generally funded on an unsecured basis. see note6 to the consolidated financial statements in part
ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about the classification of financial instruments in the fair valuehierarchy and see unsecured long-term borrowings below for further information about the use of
unsecured long-term borrowings as a source of funding.  the weighted average maturity of our secured funding, excluding funding
collateralized by highly liquid securities eligible for inclusion in our gce, exceeded 100days as of december2012.
a majority of our secured funding for securities not eligible for inclusion in the gce is executed through term repurchase agreements and
securities lending contracts. we also raise financing through other types of collateralized financings, such as secured loans andnotes.  gs bank usa has access to funding through the federal reserve bank discount window. while we do not rely on this funding in our liquidity planning and stress testing, we maintain policies and procedures
necessary to access this funding and test discount window borrowingprocedures.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
unsecured long-term borrowings.
we issue unsecured long-term borrowings as a source of funding for inventory and other assets and to finance a portion of our gce. we issue in different tenors, currencies, and products
to
maximize the diversification of our investor base. the table below presents our quarterly unsecured long-term borrowings maturity profile through 2018 as of december2012.
the weighted average maturity of our unsecured long-term borrowings as of
december2012 was approximately eight years. to mitigate refinancing risk, we seek to limit the principal amount of debt maturing on any one day or during any week or year. we enter into interest rate swaps to convert a substantial portion of
our long-term borrowings into floating-rate obligations in order to manage our exposure to interest rates. see note16 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about our
unsecured long-termborrowings.
temporary liquidity guarantee program
(tlgp). the remaining portion of our senior unsecured short-term debt guaranteed by the fdic under the tlgp matured during the second quarter of 2012. as of december2012, no
borrowings guaranteed by the fdic under the tlgp were outstanding and the program had expired for newissuances.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
deposits. as part of our efforts to diversify our funding base, deposits have become a more meaningful share of our funding activities. gs bank usa has been actively growing its deposit base with an emphasis on
issuance of long-term certificates of deposit and on expanding our deposit sweep program, which involves long-term contractual agreements with several u.s. broker-dealers who sweep client cash to fdic-insured deposits. we utilize deposits to finance
activities in our bank subsidiaries. the table below presents the sourcing of ourdeposits.
as of december2012
type of deposit
inmillions
savingsanddemand
time
private bank deposits3
$30,460
$
certificates of deposit
21,507
deposit sweep programs
15,998
institutional
2,108
total4
$46,509
$23,615
1.
represents deposits with no stated maturity.
2.
weighted average maturity in excess of three years.
3.
substantially all were from overnight deposit sweep programs related to private wealth management clients.
4.
deposits insured by the fdic as of december2012 were approximately $42.77billion.
unsecured short-term borrowings. a significant portion of our short-term borrowings was originally long-term debt that is scheduled to mature within one year of the reporting date. we use short-term borrowings to finance liquid assets
and for other cash management purposes. we primarily issue commercial paper, promissory notes, and other hybridinstruments.  as of december2012, our unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings, were $44.30billion. see note15 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about our unsecured short-term borrowings.
equity capital
capital adequacy is of critical importance to us. our objective is to be conservatively capitalized in terms of the amount and composition
of our equity base. accordingly, we have in place a comprehensive capital management policy that serves as a guide to determine the amount and composition of equity capital we maintain.
the level and composition of our equity capital are determined by multiple factors including our current and future consolidated
regulatory capital requirements, our icaap, ccar and results of stress tests, and may also be influenced by other factors such as rating agency guidelines, subsidiary capital requirements, the business environment, conditions in the financial
markets and assessments of potential future losses due to adverse changes in our business and market environments. in addition, we maintain a capital plan which projects sources and uses of capital given a range of business environments, and a
contingency capital plan which provides a framework for analyzing and responding to an actual or perceived capitalshortfall.  as part of the federal reserve boards annual ccar, u.s. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50billion or greater are required to submit annual capital plans for review by
the federal reserve board. the purpose of the federal reserve boards review is to ensure that these institutions have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks and that permit continued operations
during times of economic and financial stress. the federal reserve board will evaluate a bank holding company based on whether it has the capital necessary to continue operating under the baseline and stressed scenarios provided by the federal
reserve. as part of the capital plan review, the federal reserve board evaluates an institutions plan to make capital distributions, such as increasing dividend payments or repurchasing or redeeming stock, across a range of macro-economic and
firm-specific assumptions. in addition, the rules adopted by the federal reserve board under the dodd-frank act, require us to conduct stress tests on a semi-annual basis and publish a summary of certain results, beginning in march2013. the
federal reserve board will conduct its own annual stress tests and is expected to publish a summary of certain results in march2013.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
as part of our 2012 ccar submission, the federal reserve informed us that it did not object
to our proposed capital actions through the first quarter of 2013, including the repurchase of outstanding common stock and increases in the quarterly common stock dividend. we submitted our 2013 ccar to the federal reserve on
january7,2013 and expect to publish a summary of our results in march2013.  our consolidated regulatory
capital requirements are determined by the federal reserve board, as described below. our icaap incorporates an internal risk-based capital assessment designed to identify and measure material risks associated with our business activities, including
market risk, credit risk and operational risk, in a manner that is closely aligned with our risk management practices. our internal risk-based capital assessment is supplemented with the results of stress tests.
as of december2012, our total shareholders equity was $75.72billion (consisting of common shareholders equity of
$69.52billion and preferred stock of $6.20billion). as of december2011, our total shareholders equity was $70.38billion (consisting of common shareholders equity of $67.28billion and preferred stock of
$3.10billion). in addition, as of december 2012 and december 2011, $2.73billion and $5.00billion, respectively, of our junior subordinated debt issued to trusts qualified as equity capital for regulatory and certain rating agency
purposes. seeconsolidated regulatory capital ratios below for information regarding the impact of regulatorydevelopments.
consolidated regulatory capital  the federal reserve board is the primary regulator of group inc., a bank holding company under the bank holding company act of 1956 (bhc act) and a financial holding company under amendments to the bhc
act effected by the u.s. gramm-leach-bliley act of 1999. as a bank holding company, we are subject to consolidated regulatory capital requirements that are computed in accordance with the federal reserve boardsrisk-based capital
requirements (which are based on the basel1 capital accord of the basel committee). these capital requirements are expressed as capital ratios that compare measures of capital to risk-weighted assets (rwas). see note20 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for additional information regarding the firms rwas. the firms capital levels are also subject to qualitative judgments by its regulators about
components, risk weightings and otherfactors.  federal reserve board regulations require bank holding companies to
maintain a minimum tier1 capital ratio of 4% and a minimum total capital ratio of 8%. the required minimum tier1 capital ratio and total capital ratio in order to be considered a well-capitalized bank holding company under
the federal reserve board guidelines are 6% and 10%, respectively. bank holding companies may be expected to maintain ratios well above the minimum levels, depending on their particular condition, risk profile and growth plans. the minimum
tier1 leverage ratio is 3% for bank holding companies that have received the highest supervisory rating under federal reserve board guidelines or that have implemented the federal reserve boards risk-based capital measure for market
risk. other bank holding companies must have a minimum tier1 leverage ratio of4%.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
consolidated regulatory capital ratios
the table below presents information about our regulatory capital ratios, which are based on basel1, as implemented by the federal
reserve board.
as of december
$ inmillions
common shareholders equity
$69,516
$67,279
less: goodwill
(3,702
)
(3,802
)
less: intangible assets
(1,397
)
(1,666
)
less: equity investments in
certainentities1
(4,805
)
(4,556
)
less: disallowed deferred tax assets
(1,261
)
(1,073
)
less: debt valuation adjustment2
(180
)
(664
)
less: other
adjustments3
(124
)
(356
)
tier1 common capital
58,047
55,162
non-cumulative preferred stock
6,200
3,100
junior subordinated debt issued totrusts4
2,730
5,000
tier1 capital
66,977
63,262
qualifying subordinated debt5
13,342
13,828
other adjustments
tier2 capital
13,429
13,881
total capital
$80,406
$77,143
risk-weighted assets
$399,928
$457,027
tier1 capital ratio
16.7
%
13.8
%
total capital ratio
20.1
%
16.9
%
tier1 leverage ratio6
7.3
%
7.0
%
tier1 common
ratio7
14.5
%
12.1
%
1.
primarily represents a portion of our equity investments in non-financialcompanies.
2.
represents the cumulative change in the fair value of our unsecured borrowings attributable to the impact of changes in our own credit spreads, (net of tax at
the applicable taxrate).
3.
includes net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale securities (net of tax at the applicable tax rate), the cumulative change in our pension and
postretirement liabilities (net of tax at the applicable tax rate) and investments in certain nonconsolidatedentities.
4.
see note16 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for additional information about the junior
subordinated debt issued totrusts.
5.
substantially all of our subordinated debt qualifies as tier2 capital for basel1purposes.
6.
see note20 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for additional information about the firms
tier1 leverageratio.
7.
the tier1 common ratio equals tier1 common capital divided by rwas. we believe that the tier1 common ratio is meaningful because it is one
of the measures that we and investors use to assess capital adequacy and, while not currently a formal regulatory capital ratio, this measure is of increasing importance to regulators. the tier1 common ratio is a non-gaap measure and may not
be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by othercompanies.  our tier1 capital ratio
increased to 16.7% as of december2012 from 13.8% as of december2011 primarily reflecting an increase in common shareholders equity and a reduction in market rwas. the reduction in
market rwas was primarily driven by lower volatilities, a decrease in derivative exposure and capital efficiency initiatives that, while driven by future basel3 rules, also reduced market
rwas as measured under the current rules.  changes to the market risk capital rules of the u.s. federal bank regulatory
agencies became effective on january1,2013. these changes require the addition of several new model-based capital requirements, as well as an increase in capital requirements for securitization positions and are designed to implement the
new market risk framework of the basel committee, as well as the prohibition on the use of external credit ratings, as required by the dodd-frank act. this revised market risk framework is a significant part of the regulatory capital changes that
will ultimately be included in our basel3 capital ratios. the firms estimated tier1 common ratio under basel1 reflecting these revised market risk regulatory capital requirements would have been approximately 350basis
points lower than the firms reported basel1 tier1 common ratio as of december2012.  see
business regulation in part i, item1 of this form10-k and note20 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for additional information about our regulatory
capital ratios and the related regulatory requirements, including pending and proposed regulatory changes.  risk-weighted assets
rwas under the federal reserve boardsrisk-based capital requirements are calculated based on the amount of credit risk and
market risk.  rwas for credit risk reflect amounts for on-balance sheet and offbalance sheet exposures. credit risk
requirements for on-balance sheet assets, such as receivables and cash, are generally based on the balance sheet value. credit risk requirements for securities financing transactions are determined based upon the positive net exposure for each
trade, and include the effect of counterparty netting and collateral, as applicable. for off-balance sheet exposures, including commitments and guarantees, a credit equivalent amount is calculated based on the notional amount of each trade.
requirements for otc derivatives are based on a combination of positive net exposure and a percentage of the notional amount of each trade, and include the effect of counterparty netting and collateral, as applicable. all such assets and exposures
are then assigned a risk weight depending on, among other things, whether the counterparty is a sovereign, bank or a qualifying securities firm or other entity (or if collateral is held, depending on the nature of thecollateral).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
rwas for market risk are comprised of modeled and non-modeled risk requirements. modeled
risk requirements are determined by reference to the firms value-at-risk (var) model. var is the potential loss in value of inventory positions due to adverse market movements over a defined time horizon with a specified confidence level. we
use a single var model which captures risks including interest rates, equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. for certain portfolios of debt and equity positions, the modeled rwas also reflect requirements for specific risk, which is the
risk of loss on a position that could result from changes in risk factors unique to that position. regulatory var used for capital requirements will differ from risk management var, due to different time horizons (10-day vs. 1-day), confidence
levels (99% vs. 95%), as well as other factors. non-modeled risk requirements reflect specific risk for other debt and equity positions. the standardized measurement method is used to determine non-modeled risk by applying supervisory defined
risk-weighting factors to positions after applicable netting isperformed.  the table below presents information on the
components of rwas within our consolidated regulatory capitalratios.
as of december
inmillions
credit rwas
otc derivatives
$107,269
$119,848
commitments and guarantees1
46,007
37,648
securities financing transactions2
47,069
53,236
other3
87,181
84,039
total credit rwas
$287,526
$294,771
market rwas
modeled requirements
$23,302
$57,784
non-modeled requirements
89,100
104,472
total market rwas
112,402
162,256
total
rwas4
$399,928
$457,027
1.
principally includes certain commitments to extend credit and letters ofcredit.
2.
represents resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loanedtransactions.
3.
principally includes receivables from customers, other assets, cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities.
4.
under the current regulatory capital framework, there is no explicit requirement for operational risk.
as outlined above, changes to the market risk capital rules that became effective on january1,2013, require the addition of
several new model-based capital requirements, as well as an increase in capital requirements for securitizationpositions.
internal capital adequacy assessment process
we perform an icaap with the objective of ensuring that the firm is appropriately capitalized relative to the risks in ourbusiness.
as part of our icaap, we perform an internal risk-based capital assessment. this assessment incorporates market risk, credit
risk and operational risk. market risk is calculated by using var calculations supplemented by risk-based add-ons which include risks related to rare events (tail risks). credit risk utilizes assumptions about our counterparties probability of
default, the size of our losses in the event of a default and the maturity of our counterparties contractual obligations to us. operational risk is calculated based on scenarios incorporating multiple types of operational failures. backtesting
is used to gauge the effectiveness of models at capturing and measuring relevantrisks.  we evaluate capital adequacy
based on the result of our internal risk-based capital assessment, supplemented with the results of stress tests which measure the firms estimated performance under various market conditions. our goal is to hold sufficient capital, under our
internal risk-based capital framework, to ensure we remain adequately capitalized after experiencing a severe stress event. our assessment of capital adequacy is viewed in tandem with our assessment of liquidity adequacy and is integrated into the
overall risk management structure, governance and policy framework of thefirm.  we attribute capital usage to each of our
businesses based upon our internal risk-based capital and regulatory frameworks and manage the levels of usage based upon the balance sheet and risk limitsestablished.  rating agency guidelines  the credit rating agencies assign credit ratings to the
obligations of group inc., which directly issues or guarantees substantially all of the firms senior unsecured obligations. gs&co. and gsi have been assigned long- and short-term issuer ratings by certain credit rating agencies. gs bank
usa has also been assigned long-term issuer ratings as well as ratings on its long-term and short-term bank deposits. in addition, credit rating agencies have assigned ratings to debt obligations of certain other subsidiaries of groupinc.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the level and composition of our equity capital are among the many factors considered in
determining our credit ratings. each agency has its own definition of eligible capital and methodology for evaluating capital adequacy, and assessments are generally based on a combination of factors rather than a single calculation. see
liquidity risk management credit ratings for further information about credit ratings of group inc., gs&co., gsi and gsbankusa.  subsidiary capital requirements  many of our subsidiaries, including gs bank usa and
our broker-dealer subsidiaries, are subject to separate regulation and capital requirements of the jurisdictions in which theyoperate.  gs bank usa is subject to minimum capital requirements that are calculated in a manner similar to those applicable to bank holding companies and computes its capital ratios in accordance with the
regulatory capital requirements currently applicable to state member banks, which are based on basel1, as implemented by the federal reserve board. as of december2012, gs bank usas tier1 capital ratio under basel1 as
implemented by the federal reserve board was 18.9%. see note20 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about gs bank usas regulatory capital ratios under
basel1, as implemented by the federal reserve board. effective january1,2013, gs bank usa also implemented the revised market risk framework outlined above. this revised market risk framework is a significant part of the regulatory
capital changes that will ultimately be included in gs bank usas basel3 capitalratios.  for purposes of
assessing the adequacy of its capital, gs bank usa has established an icaap which is similar to that used by group inc. in addition, the rules adopted by the federal reserve board under the dodd-frank act require gs bank usa to conduct stress tests
on an annual basis and publish a summary of certain results, beginning in march2013. gs bank usa submitted its annual stress results to the federal reserve on january7,2013 and expects to publish a summary of its results in
march2013. gs bank usas capital levels and prompt corrective action classification are subject to qualitative judgments by its regulators about components, risk weightings and otherfactors.
we expect that the capital requirements of several of our subsidiaries are likely to
increase in the future due to the various developments arising from the basel committee, the dodd-frank act, and other governmental entities and regulators. see note20 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this
form10-k for information about the capital requirements of our other regulated subsidiaries and the potential impact of regulatoryreform.  subsidiaries not subject to separate regulatory capital requirements may hold capital to satisfy local tax and legal guidelines, rating agency requirements (for entities with assigned credit ratings) or
internal policies, including policies concerning the minimum amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based on its underlying level of risk. in certain instances, group inc. may be limited in its ability to access capital held at certain
subsidiaries as a result of regulatory, tax or other constraints. as of december2012 and december2011, group inc.s equity investment in subsidiaries was $73.32billion and $67.70billion, respectively, compared with its
total shareholders equity of $75.72billion and $70.38billion, respectively.  group inc. has guaranteed the
payment obligations of gs&co., gs bank usa, and goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec) subject to certain exceptions. in november2008, group inc. contributed subsidiaries into gs bank usa, and group inc. agreed to
guarantee certain losses, including credit-related losses, relating to assets held by the contributed entities. in connection with this guarantee, group inc. also agreed to pledge to gs bank usa certain collateral, including interests in
subsidiaries and other illiquid assets.  our capital invested in non-u.s. subsidiaries is generally exposed to foreign exchange
risk, substantially all of which is managed through a combination of derivatives and non-u.s.denominateddebt.  contingency capital plan
our contingency capital plan provides a framework for analyzing and responding to a perceived or actual capital
deficiency, including, but not limited to, identification of drivers of a capital deficiency, as well as mitigants and potential actions. it outlines the appropriate communication procedures to follow during a crisis period, including internal
dissemination of information as well as ensuring timely communication with external stakeholders.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
equity capital management  our objective is to maintain a sufficient level and optimal composition of equity capital. we principally manage our capital through issuances and repurchases of our common stock. we may also, from time
to time, issue or repurchase our preferred stock, junior subordinated debt issued to trusts and other subordinated debt or other forms of capital as business conditions warrant and subject to approval of the federal reserve board. we manage our
capital requirements principally by setting limits on balance sheet assets and/or limits on risk, in each case both at the consolidated and business levels. we attribute capital usage to each of our businesses based upon our internal risk-based
capital and regulatory frameworks and manage the levels of usage based upon the balance sheet and risk limitsestablished.
see notes16 and 19 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information
about our preferred stock, junior subordinated debt issued to trusts and other subordinated debt.  berkshire hathaway warrant. in october2008, we issued berkshire hathaway a warrant, which grants berkshire hathaway the option to purchase up
to 43.5million shares of common stock at an exercise price of $115.00 per share on or before october1,2013. see note19 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for information
about the seriesg preferredstock.  share repurchase
program. we seek to use our share repurchase program to help maintain the appropriate level of common equity. the repurchase program is effected primarily through regular open-market
purchases, the amounts and timing of which are determined primarily by our current and projected capital positions (i.e., comparisons of our desired level and composition of capital to our actual level and composition of capital), but which may also
be influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of our commonstock.  as of
december2012, under the share repurchase program approved by the board of directors of group inc. (board), we can repurchase up to 21.5million additional shares of common stock; however, any such repurchases are subject to the approval
of the federal reserve board. see market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities in partii, item5 and note19 to the consolidated financial statements in
part ii, item8 of this form10-k for additional information on our repurchase program and see above for information about the annual ccar.
other capital metrics  the table below presents information on our shareholders equity and book value per commonshare.
as of december
inmillions, except per share amounts
total shareholders equity
$75,716
$70,379
common shareholders equity
69,516
67,279
tangible common shareholders equity
64,417
61,811
book value per common share
144.67
130.31
tangible book value per common share
134.06
119.72
tangible common shareholders equity. tangible common shareholders equity equals total shareholders equity less preferred stock, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. we believe that tangible common shareholders
equity is meaningful because it is a measure that we and investors use to assess capital adequacy. tangible common shareholders equity is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by othercompanies.
the table below presents the reconciliation of total shareholders equity to tangible common
shareholdersequity.
as of december
inmillions
total shareholders equity
$75,716
$70,379
deduct: preferred stock
(6,200
)
(3,100
)
common shareholders equity
69,516
67,279
deduct: goodwill and identifiableintangibleassets
(5,099
)
(5,468
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$64,417
$61,811
book value and tangible book value per common share.
book value and tangible book value per common share are based on common shares outstanding, including restricted stock units granted to employees with no future service requirements, of
480.5million and 516.3million as of december2012 and december2011, respectively. we believe that tangible book value per common share (tangible common shareholders equity divided by common shares outstanding) is
meaningful because it is a measure that we and investors use to assess capital adequacy. tangible book value per common share is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by othercompanies.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
off-balance-sheet arrangements and contractual obligations
off-balance-sheet arrangements
we have various types of off-balance-sheet arrangements that we enter into in the ordinary
course of business. our involvement in these arrangements can take many different forms,including:
purchasing or retaining residual and other interests in special purpose entities such as mortgage-backed and other asset-backed
securitizationvehicles;
holding senior and subordinated debt, interests in limited and general partnerships, and preferred and common stock in other
nonconsolidatedvehicles;
entering into interest rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit derivatives, including total returnswaps;
entering into operating leases;and
providing guarantees, indemnifications, loan commitments, letters of credit and representations andwarranties.
we enter into these arrangements for a variety of business purposes, including securitizations. the securitization vehicles that purchase
mortgages, corporate bonds, and other types of financial assets are critical to the functioning of several significant investor markets, including the mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities markets, since they offer investors access to
specific cash flows and risks created through the securitizationprocess.
we also enter into these arrangements to underwrite client securitization transactions;
provide secondary market liquidity; make investments in performing and nonperforming debt, equity, real estate and other assets; provide investors with credit-linked and asset-repackaged notes; and receive or provide letters of credit to satisfy
margin requirements and to facilitate the clearance and settlementprocess.  our financial interests in, and derivative
transactions with, such nonconsolidated entities are generally accounted for at fair value, in the same manner as our other financial instruments, except in cases where we apply the equity method ofaccounting.
the table below presents where a discussion of our various off-balance-sheet arrangements may be found in part ii, items 7 and 8 of this
form10-k. in addition, see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for a discussion of our consolidationpolicies.
type of off-balance-sheet arrangement
disclosure in form10-k
variable interests and other obligations, including contingent obligations, arising from variable interests in nonconsolidatedvies
see note11 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k.
leases, letters of credit, and lending and other commitments
see contractual obligations below and note18 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this
form10-k.
guarantees
see contractual obligations below and note18 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this
form10-k.
derivatives
see notes4, 5, 7 and 18 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this
form10-k.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
contractual obligations
we have certain contractual obligations which require us to make future cash payments.
these contractual obligations include our unsecured long-term borrowings, secured long-term financings, time deposits, contractual interest payments and insurance agreements, all of which are included in our consolidated statements of financial
condition. our obligations to make future cash payments
also include certain off-balance-sheet contractual obligations such as purchase obligations, minimum rental payments under noncancelable leases and commitments andguarantees.
the table below presents our contractual obligations, commitments and guarantees as of december2012.
inmillions
2014-2015
2016-2017
2018-
thereafter
total
amounts related to on-balance-sheet obligations
time deposits1
$
$7,151
$4,064
$5,069
$16,284
secured long-term financings2
6,403
1,140
1,422
8,965
unsecured long-term borrowings3
43,920
42,601
80,784
167,305
contractual interest payments4
7,489
13,518
10,182
33,332
64,521
insurance liabilities5
13,740
16,110
subordinated liabilities issued by consolidated vies
1,155
1,360
amounts related to off-balance-sheet arrangements
commitments to extend credit
10,435
16,322
43,453
5,412
75,622
contingent and forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements
47,599
47,599
forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements
6,144
6,144
letters of credit
investment commitments
1,378
2,174
3,529
7,339
other commitments
4,471
4,624
minimum rental payments
1,375
3,189
derivative guarantees
339,460
213,012
49,413
61,264
663,149
securities lending indemnifications
27,123
27,123
other financial guarantees
1,195
3,479
1.
excludes $7.33billion of time deposits maturing within one year.
2.
the aggregate contractual principal amount of secured long-term financings for which the fair value option was elected, primarily consisting of transfers of
financial assets accounted for as financings rather than sales and certain other nonrecourse financings, exceeded their related fair value by $115million.
3.
includes $10.51billion related to interest rate hedges on certain unsecured long-term borrowings. in addition, the fair value of unsecured long-term
borrowings (principal and non-principal-protected) for which the fair value option was elected exceeded the related aggregate contractual principal amount by $379million. excludes $77million of unsecured long-term borrowings related to
our reinsurance business classified as held for sale as of december2012. see note17 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for furtherinformation.
4.
represents estimated future interest payments related to unsecured long-term borrowings, secured long-term financings and time deposits based on applicable
interest rates as of december2012. includes stated coupons, if any, on structurednotes.
5.
represents estimated undiscounted payments related to future benefits and unpaid claims arising from policies associated with our insurance activities,
excluding separate accounts and estimated recoveries under reinsurance contracts. excludes $13.08billion of insurance liabilities related to our reinsurance business classified as held for sale as of december2012. see note17 to the
consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for furtherinformation.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
in the table above:
obligations maturing within one year of our financial statement date or redeemable within one year of our financial statement date at the option of
the holder are excluded and are treated as short-termobligations.
obligations that are repayable prior to maturity at our option are reflected at their contractual maturity dates and obligations that are redeemable
prior to maturity at the option of the holders are reflected at the dates such options becomeexercisable.
amounts included in the table do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow requirements for these arrangements because commitments and
guarantees represent notional amounts and may expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the counterpartysrequest.
due to the uncertainty of the timing and amounts that will ultimately be paid, our liability for unrecognized tax benefits has been excluded. see
note24 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about our unrecognized taxbenefits.
see notes15 and 18 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information
about our short-term borrowings, and commitments andguarantees.  as of december2012, our unsecured long-term
borrowings were $167.31billion, with maturities extending to 2061, and consisted principally of senior borrowings. see note16 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for further
information about our unsecured long-termborrowings.  as of december2012, our future minimum rental payments net of
minimum sublease rentals under noncancelable leases were $3.19billion. these lease commitments, principally for office space, expire on various dates through 2069. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for increases
in real estate taxes and other charges. see note18 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about ourleases.
our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office space held in excess of our
current requirements. this excess space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied space that we may exit in the future. we regularly evaluate our current and future
space capacity in relation to current and projected staffing levels. for the year ended december2012, total occupancy expenses for space held in excess of our current requirements were not material. in addition, for the year ended
december2012, we incurred exit costs of $17million related to our office space. we may incur exit costs (included in depreciation and amortization and occupancy) in the future to the extent we (i)reduce our
space capacity or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties in the locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of existing space that had been held for potential growth. these exit costs may be material to our results of operations
in a givenperiod.  overview and structure of risk management
overview  we believe that effective
risk management is of primary importance to the success of the firm. accordingly, we have comprehensive risk management processes through which we monitor, evaluate and manage the risks we assume in conducting our activities. these include market,
credit, liquidity, operational, legal, regulatory and reputational risk exposures. our risk management framework is built around three core components: governance, processes andpeople.
governance. risk
management governance starts with our board, which plays an important role in reviewing and approving risk management policies and practices, both directly and through its risk committee, which consists of all of our independent directors. the board
also receives regular briefings on firmwide risks, including market risk, liquidity risk, credit risk and operational risk from our independent control and support functions, including the chief risk officer. the chief risk officer, as part of the
review of the firmwide risk package, regularly advises the risk committee of the board of relevant risk metrics and material exposures. next, at the most senior levels of the firm, our leaders are experienced risk managers, with a sophisticated and
detailed understanding of the risks we take. our senior managers lead and participate in risk-oriented committees, as do the leaders of our independent control and support functions including those in internal audit, compliance,
controllers, credit risk management, human capital management, legal, market risk management, operations, operational risk management, tax, technology andtreasury.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the firms governance structure provides the protocol and responsibility for
decision-making on risk management issues and ensures implementation of those decisions. we make extensive use of risk-related committees that meet regularly and serve as an important means to facilitate and foster ongoing discussions to identify,
manage and mitigaterisks.  we maintain strong communication about risk and we have a culture of collaboration in
decision-making among the revenue-producing units, independent control and support functions, committees and senior management. while we believe that the first line of defense in managing risk rests with the managers in our revenue-producing units,
we dedicate extensive resources to independent control and support functions in order to ensure a strong oversight structure and an appropriate segregation ofduties. we regularly reinforce the firms strong culture of escalation and
accountability across all divisions and functions.  processes. we maintain various processes and procedures that are critical components of our risk management. first and foremost is our daily discipline of marking substantially all of the firms inventory to
current market levels. goldman sachs carries its inventory at fair value, with changes in valuation reflected immediately in our risk management systems and in net revenues. we do so because we believe this discipline is one of the most effective
tools for assessing and managing risk and that it provides transparent and realistic insight into our financialexposures.
we also apply a rigorous framework of limits to control risk across multiple transactions, products, businesses and markets. this includes
setting credit and market risk limits at a variety of levels and monitoring these limits on a daily basis. limits are typically set at levels that will be periodically exceeded, rather than at levels which reflect our maximum risk appetite. this
fosters an ongoing dialogue on risk among revenue-producing units, independent control and support functions, committees and senior management, as well as rapid escalation of risk-related matters. see market risk management and
credit risk management for further information on our risklimits.  active management of our positions is
another important process. proactive mitigation of our market and credit exposures minimizes the risk that we will be required to take outsized actions during periods ofstress.
we also focus on the rigor and effectiveness of the firms risk systems. the goal of our risk management technology is
to get the right information to the right people at the right
time, which requires systems that are comprehensive, reliable and timely. we devote significant time and resources to our risk management technology to ensure that it consistently provides us
with complete, accurate and timelyinformation.
people. even the best
technology serves only as a tool for helping to make informed decisions in real time about the risks we are taking. ultimately, effective risk management requires our people to interpret our risk data on an ongoing and timely basis and adjust risk
positions accordingly. in both our revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions, the experience of our professionals, and their understanding of the nuances and limitations of each risk measure, guide the firm in
assessing exposures and maintaining them within prudentlevels.  structure
ultimate oversight of risk is the responsibility of the firms board. the board oversees risk both directly and through its risk
committee. within the firm, a series of committees with specific risk management mandates have oversight or decision-making responsibilities for risk management activities. committee membership generally consists of senior managers from both our
revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions. we have established procedures for these committees to ensure that appropriate information barriers are in place. our primary risk committees, most of which also have
additional sub-committees or working groups, are described below. in addition to these committees, we have other risk-oriented committees which provide oversight for different businesses, activities, products, regions and legalentities.
membership of the firms risk committees is reviewed regularly and updated to reflect changes in the responsibilities of
the committee members. accordingly, the length of time that members serve on the respective committees varies as determined by the committee chairs and based on the responsibilities of the members within thefirm.
in addition, independent control and support functions, which report to the chief financial officer, the general counsel and the chief
administrative officer, or in the case of internal audit, to the audit committee of the board, are responsible for day-to-day oversight or monitoring of risk, as discussed in greater detail in the followingsections. internal audit, which
includes professionals with a broad range of audit and industry experience, including risk management expertise, is responsible for independently assessing and validating key controls within the risk management framework.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the chart below presents an overview of our risk management governance structure,
highlighting the
oversight of our board, our key risk-related committees and the independence of our control and support functions.
management committee. the management committee oversees the global activities of the firm, including all of the firms independent control and support functions. it provides this oversight directly and through authority
delegated to committees it has established. this committee is comprised of the most senior leaders of the firm, and is chaired by the firms chief executive officer. the management committee has established various committees with delegated
authority and the chairperson of the management committee appoints the chairpersons of these committees. most members of the management committee are also members of other firmwide, divisional and regional committees. the following are the
committees that are principally involved in firmwide riskmanagement.
firmwide client and business standards
committee. the firmwide client and business standards committee assesses and makes determinations regarding business standards and practices, reputational risk management, client
relationships and client service, is chaired by the firms president and chief operating officer, and reports to the management committee. this committee also has responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the recommendations of the
business standards committee. this committee has established the following two risk-related committees that report toit:
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
firmwide new activity committee.
the firmwide new activity committee is responsible for reviewing new activities and for establishing a process to identify and review previously approved activities that are significant
and that have changed in complexity and/or structure or present different reputational and suitability concerns over time to consider whether these activities remain appropriate. this committee is co-chaired by the firms head of
operations/chief operating officer for europe, middle east and africa and the chief administrative officer of our investment management division who are appointed by the firmwide client and business standards committeechairperson.
firmwide suitability committee. the
firmwide suitability committee is responsible for setting standards and policies for product, transaction and client suitability and providing a forum for consistency across divisions, regions and products on suitability assessments. this committee
also reviews suitability matters escalated from other firm committees. this committee is co-chaired by the firms international general counsel and the co-head of our investment management division who are appointed by the firmwide client and
business standards committeechairperson.  firmwide
risk committee. the firmwide risk committee is globally responsible for the ongoing monitoring and control of the firms financial risks. through both direct and delegated authority,
the firmwide risk committee approves firmwide, product, divisional and business-level limits for both market and credit risks, approves sovereign credit risk limits and reviews results of stress tests and scenario analyses. this committee is
co-chaired by the firms chief financial officer and a senior managing director from the firms executive office, and reports to the management committee. the following four committees report to the firmwide risk committee. the chairperson
of the securities division risk committee is appointed by the chairpersons of the firmwide risk committee; the chairpersons of the credit policy and firmwide operational risk committees are appointed by the firms chief risk officer;
andthe chairpersons of the firmwide finance committee are appointed by the firmwide riskcommittee.
securities division risk committee.
the securities division risk committee sets market risk limits, subject to overall firmwide risk limits, for the securities division based on a number of risk measures, including but not
limited to var, stress tests, scenario analyses and balance sheet levels. this committee is chaired by the chief risk officer of our securitiesdivision.
credit policy committee. the credit
policy committee establishes and reviews broad firmwide credit policies and parameters that are implemented by our credit risk management department (credit risk management). this committee is chaired by the firms chief creditofficer.
firmwide operational risk committee.
the firmwide operational risk committee provides oversight of the ongoing development and implementation of our operational risk policies, framework and methodologies, and monitors the
effectiveness of operational risk management. this committee is chaired by a managing director in credit riskmanagement.
firmwide finance committee. the
firmwide finance committee has oversight of firmwide liquidity, the size and composition of our balance sheet and capital base, and our credit ratings. this committee regularly reviews and discusses our liquidity, balance sheet, funding position
andcapitalization in the context of current events, risksandexposures, and regulatory requirements. this committeeisalso responsible for reviewing and approving balance sheetlimits and the size of our gce. this
committee is co-chaired by the firms chief financial officer and the firms globaltreasurer.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the following committees report jointly to the firmwide risk committee and the firmwide
client and business standardscommittee:
firmwide commitments committee. the
firmwide commitments committee reviews the firms underwriting and distribution activities with respect to equity and equity-related product offerings, and sets and maintains policies and procedures designed to ensure that legal, reputational,
regulatory and business standards are maintained on a global basis. in addition to reviewing specific transactions, this committee periodically conducts general strategic reviews of sectors and products and establishes policies in connection with
transaction practices. this committee is co-chaired by the firms senior strategy officer and the co-head of global mergers& acquisitions who are appointed by the firmwide client and business standards committeechairperson.
firmwide capital committee. the
firmwide capital committee provides approval and oversight of debt-related transactions, including principal commitments of the firms capital. this committee aims to ensure that business and reputational standards for underwritings and capital
commitments are maintained on a global basis. this committee is co-chaired by the firms global treasurer and the head of credit finance for europe, middle east and africa who are appointed by the firmwide risk committeechairpersons.
investment management division risk committee. the investment management division risk committee is responsible for the ongoing monitoring and control of global market, counterparty credit
and liquidity risks associated with the activities of our investment management businesses. the head of investment management division risk management is the chair of this committee. the investment management division risk committee reports to the
firms chief riskofficer.
conflicts management  conflicts of interest and the firms approach to dealing with them are fundamental to our client relationships, our reputation and our long-term success. the term conflict of interest
does not have a universally accepted meaning, and conflicts can arise in many forms within a business or between businesses. the responsibility for identifying potential conflicts, as well as complying with the firms policies and procedures,
is shared by the entirefirm.  we have a multilayered approach to resolving conflicts and addressing reputational risk.
the firms senior management oversees policies related to conflicts resolution. the firms senior management, the business selection and conflicts resolution group, the legal department and compliance division, the firmwide client and
business standards committee and other internal committees all play roles in the formulation of policies, standards and principles and assist in making judgments regarding the appropriate resolution of particular conflicts. resolving potential
conflicts necessarily depends on the facts and circumstances of a particular situation and the application of experienced and informedjudgment.  at the transaction level, various people and groups have roles. as a general matter, the business selection and conflicts resolution group reviews all financing and advisory assignments in investment
banking and investing, lending and other activities of the firm. various transaction oversight committees, such as the firmwide capital, commitments and suitability committees and other committees across the firm, also review new underwritings,
loans, investments and structured products. these committees work with internal and external lawyers and the compliance division to evaluate and address any actual or potentialconflicts.
we regularly assess our policies and procedures that address conflicts of interest in an effort to conduct our business in accordance with
the highest ethical standards and in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, andregulations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
liquidity risk management
liquidity is of critical importance to financial institutions. most of the recent failures
of financial institutions have occurred in large part due to insufficient liquidity. accordingly, the firm has in place a comprehensive and conservative set of liquidity and funding policies to address both firm-specific and broader industry or
market liquidity events. our principal objective is to be able to fund the firm and to enable our core businesses to continue to serve clients and generate revenues, even under adversecircumstances.
we manage liquidity risk according to the followingprinciples:
excess liquidity. we
maintain substantial excess liquidity to meet a broad range of potential cash outflows and collateral needs in a stressedenvironment.  asset-liability management. we assess anticipated holding periods for our assets and their
expected liquidity in a stressed environment. we manage the maturities and diversity of our funding across markets, products and counterparties, and seek to maintain liabilities of appropriate tenor relative to our assetbase.
contingency funding plan.
we maintain a contingency funding plan to provide a framework for analyzing and responding to a liquidity crisis situation or periods of market stress. this framework sets forth the plan
of action to fund normal business activity in emergency and stress situations. these principles are discussed in more detailbelow.  excess
liquidity  our most important liquidity policy is to pre-fund our estimated potential cash and collateral needs during a
liquidity crisis and hold this excess liquidity in the form of unencumbered, highly liquid securities and cash. we believe that the securities held in our global core excess would be readily convertible to cash in a matter of days, through
liquidation, by entering into repurchase agreements or from maturities of reverse repurchase agreements, and that this cash would allow us to meet immediate obligations without needing to sell other assets or depend on additional funding from
credit-sensitivemarkets.
as of december2012 and december2011, the fair value of the securities and
certain overnight cash deposits included in our gce totaled $174.62billion and $171.58billion, respectively. based on the results of our internal liquidity risk model, discussed below, as well as our consideration of other factors
including, but not limited to, a qualitative assessment of the condition of the financial markets and the firm, we believe our liquidity position as of december2012 wasappropriate.
the table below presents the fair value of the securities and certain overnight cash deposits that are included in ourgce.
average for the
year ended december
inmillions
u.s. dollar-denominated
$125,111
$125,668
non-u.s. dollar-denominated
46,984
40,291
total
$172,095
$165,959
the u.s. dollar-denominated excess is composed of (i)unencumbered u.s. government and federal agency
obligations (including highly liquid u.s. federal agency mortgage-backed obligations), all of which are eligible as collateral in federal reserve open market operations and (ii)certain overnight u.s. dollar cash deposits. the non-u.s.
dollar-denominated excess is composed of only unencumbered german, french, japanese and united kingdom government obligations and certain overnight cash deposits in highly liquid currencies. we strictly limit our excess liquidity to this narrowly
defined list of securities and cash because they are highly liquid, even in a difficult funding environment. we do not include other potential sources of excess liquidity, such as less liquid unencumbered securities or committed credit facilities,
in ourgce.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the table below presents the fair value of our gce by assetclass.
average for the
yearendeddecember
inmillions
overnight cash deposits
$52,233
$34,622
u.s. government obligations
72,379
88,528
u.s. federal agency obligations, including highlyliquid
u.s.federalagencymortgage-backedobligations
2,313
5,018
german, french, japanese and united kingdom government obligations
45,170
37,791
total
$172,095
$165,959
the gce is held at group inc. and our major broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries, as presented in the
tablebelow.
average for the
year ended december
inmillions
group inc.
$37,405
$49,548
major broker-dealer subsidiaries
78,229
75,086
major bank subsidiaries
56,461
41,325
total
$172,095
$165,959
our gce reflects the followingprinciples:
the first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most critical to a companyssurvival.
focus must be maintained on all potential cash and collateral outflows, not just disruptions to financing flows. our businesses are diverse, and our
liquidity needs are determined by many factors, including market movements, collateral requirements and client commitments, all of which can change dramatically in a difficult fundingenvironment.
during a liquidity crisis, credit-sensitive funding, including unsecured debt and some types of secured financing agreements, may be unavailable,
and the terms (e.g., interest rates, collateral provisions and tenor) or availability of other types of secured financing maychange.
as a result of our policy to pre-fund liquidity that we estimate may be needed in a crisis, we hold more unencumbered securities and have larger
debt balances than our businesses would otherwise require. we believe that our liquidity is stronger with greater balances of highly liquid unencumbered securities, even though it increases our total assets and our fundingcosts.
we believe that our gce provides us with a resilient source of funds that would be
available in advance of potential cash and collateral outflows and gives us significant flexibility in managing through a difficult fundingenvironment.  in order to determine the appropriate size of our gce, we use an internal liquidity model, referred to as the modeled liquidity outflow, which captures and quantifies the firms liquidity risks. we
also consider other factors including, but not limited to, an assessment of our potential intraday liquidity needs and a qualitative assessment of the condition of the financial markets and thefirm.
we distribute our gce across entities, asset types, and clearing agents to provide us with sufficient operating liquidity to ensure timely
settlement in all major markets, even in a difficult fundingenvironment.  we maintain our gce to enable us to meet
current and potential liquidity requirements of our parent company, group inc., and our major broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries. the modeled liquidity outflow incorporates a consolidated requirement as well as a standalone requirement for each of
our major broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries. liquidity held directly in each of these subsidiaries is intended for use only by that subsidiary to meet its liquidity requirements and is assumed not to be available to group inc. unless
(i)legally provided for and (ii)there are no additional regulatory, tax or other restrictions. we hold a portion of our gce directly at group inc. to support consolidated requirements not accounted for in the major subsidiaries. in
addition to the gce, we maintain operating cash balances in several of our other operating entities, primarily for use in specific currencies, entities, or jurisdictions where we do not have immediate access to parent companyliquidity.
in addition to our gce, we have a significant amount of other unencumbered cash and financial instruments, including other
government obligations, high-grade money market securities, corporate obligations, marginable equities, loans and cash deposits not included in our gce. the fair value of these assets averaged $87.09billion and $83.32billion for the
years ended december2012 and december2011, respectively. we do not consider these assets liquid enough to be eligible for our gce liquidity pool and therefore conservatively do not assume we will generate liquidity from these assets in
our modeled liquidityoutflow.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
modeled liquidity outflow. our modeled liquidity outflow is based on a scenario that includes both a market-wide stress and a firm-specific stress, characterized by the following qualitativeelements:
severely challenged market environments, including low consumer and corporate confidence, financial and political instability, adverse changes in
market values, including potential declines in equity markets and widening of creditspreads.
a firm-specific crisis potentially triggered by material losses, reputational damage, litigation, executive departure, and/or a
ratingsdowngrade.  the following are the critical modeling parameters of the modeled
liquidityoutflow:
liquidity needs over a 30-dayscenario.
a two-notch downgrade of the firms long-term senior unsecured creditratings.
a combination of contractual outflows, such as upcoming maturities of unsecured debt, and contingent outflows (e.g., actions though not
contractually required, we may deem necessary in a crisis). we assume that most contingent outflows will occur within the initial days and weeks of acrisis.
no issuance of equity or unsecureddebt.
no support from government funding facilities. although we have access to various central bank funding programs, we do not assume reliance on them
as a source of funding in a liquiditycrisis.
maintenance of our normal business levels. we do not assume asset liquidation, other than thegce.
the modeled liquidity outflow is calculated and reported to senior management on a daily basis. we regularly refine our model to reflect
changes in market or economic conditions and the firms businessmix.
the potential contractual and contingent cash and collateral outflows covered in our
modeled liquidity outflowinclude:  unsecured funding
contractual: all upcoming maturities of unsecured long-term debt, commercial paper, promissory notes and other unsecured funding products. we assume
that we will be unable to issue new unsecured debt or rollover any maturingdebt.
contingent: repurchases of our outstanding long-term debt, commercial paper and hybrid financial instruments in the ordinary course of business as a
marketmaker.  deposits
contractual: all upcoming maturities of term deposits. we assume that we will be unable to raise new term deposits or rollover any maturing
termdeposits.
contingent: withdrawals of bank deposits that have no contractual maturity. the withdrawal assumptions reflect, among other factors, the type of
deposit, whether the deposit is insured or uninsured, and the firms relationship with thedepositor.  secured funding
contractual: a portion of upcoming contractual maturities of secured funding due to either the inability to refinance or the ability to refinance
only at wider haircuts (i.e., on terms which require us to post additional collateral). our assumptions reflect, among other factors, the quality of the underlying collateral, counterparty roll probabilities (our assessment of the
counterpartys likelihood of continuing to provide funding on a secured basis at the maturity of the trade) and counterpartyconcentration.
contingent: a decline in value of financial assets pledged as collateral for financing transactions, which would necessitate additional collateral
postings under thosetransactions.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
otc derivatives
contingent: collateral postings to counterparties due to adverse changes in the value of our otcderivatives.
contingent: other outflows of cash or collateral related to otc derivatives, including the impact of trade terminations, collateral substitutions,
collateral disputes, collateral calls or termination payments required by a two-notch downgrade in our credit ratings, and collateral that has not been called by counterparties, but is available tothem.
exchange-traded derivatives
contingent: variation margin postings required due to adverse changes in the value of our outstanding exchange-tradedderivatives.
contingent: an increase in initial margin and guaranty fund requirements by derivative clearinghouses.
customer cash and securities
contingent: liquidity outflows associated with our prime brokerage business, including withdrawals of customer credit balances, and a reduction in
customer short positions, which serve as a funding source for longpositions.  unfunded commitments
contingent: draws on our unfunded commitments. draw assumptions reflect, among other things, the type of commitment andcounterparty.
other
other upcoming large cash outflows, such as taxpayments.  asset-liability management  our liquidity risk management policies are designed to
ensure we have a sufficient amount of financing, even when funding markets experience persistent stress. we seek to maintain a long-dated and diversified funding profile, taking into consideration the characteristics and liquidity profile of
ourassets.  our approach to asset-liability managementincludes:
conservatively managing the overall characteristics of our funding book, with a focus on maintaining long-term, diversified sources of funding in
excess of our current requirements. see balance sheet and funding sources funding sources for additional details.
actively managing and monitoring our asset base, with particular focus on the liquidity, holding period and our ability to fund assets on a secured
basis. this enables us to determine the most appropriate funding products and tenors. see balance sheet and funding sources balance sheet management for more detail on our balance sheet management process and
funding sources secured funding for more detail on asset classes that may be harder to fund on a securedbasis.
raising secured and unsecured financing that has a long tenor relative to the liquidity profile of our assets. this reduces the risk that our
liabilities will come due in advance of our ability to generate liquidity from the sale of our assets. because we maintain a highly liquid balance sheet, the holding period of certain of our assets may be materially shorter than their contractual
maturitydates.  our goal is to ensure that the firm maintains sufficient liquidity to fund its assets
and meet its contractual and contingent obligations in normal times as well as during periods of market stress. through our dynamic balance sheet management process (see balance sheet and funding sources balance sheet
management), we use actual and projected asset balances to determine secured and unsecured funding requirements. funding plans are reviewed and approved by the firmwide finance committee on a quarterly basis. in addition, senior managers in
our independent control and support functions regularly analyze, and the firmwide finance committee reviews, our consolidated total capital position (unsecured long-term borrowings plus total shareholders equity) so that we maintain a level of
long-term funding that is sufficient to meet our long-term financing requirements. in a liquidity crisis, we would first use our gce in order to avoid reliance on asset sales (other than our gce). however, we recognize that orderly asset sales may
be prudent or necessary in a severe or persistent liquidity crisis.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
subsidiary funding policies. the majority of our unsecured funding is raised by group inc. which lends the necessary funds to its subsidiaries, some of which are regulated, to meet their asset financing, liquidity and capital
requirements. in addition, group inc. provides its regulated subsidiaries with the necessary capital to meet their regulatory requirements. the benefits of this approach to subsidiary funding are enhanced control and greater flexibility to meet the
funding requirements of our subsidiaries. funding is also raised at the subsidiary level through a variety of products, including secured funding, unsecured borrowings anddeposits.
our intercompany funding policies assume that, unless legally provided for, a subsidiarys funds or securities are not freely
available to its parent company or other subsidiaries. in particular, many of our subsidiaries are subject to laws that authorize regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to group inc. regulatory action of that
kind could impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on its obligations. accordingly, we assume that the capital provided to our regulated subsidiaries is not available to group inc. or other subsidiaries and any other financing
provided to our regulated subsidiaries is not available until the maturity of suchfinancing.  group inc. has provided
substantial amounts of equity and subordinated indebtedness, directly or indirectly, to its regulated subsidiaries. for example, as of december2012, group inc. had $29.52billion of equity and subordinated indebtedness invested in
gs&co., its principal u.s. registered broker-dealer; $29.45billion invested in gsi, a regulated u.k. broker-dealer; $2.62billion invested in gsec, a u.s. registered broker-dealer; $3.78billion invested in goldman sachs japan
co., ltd., a regulated japanese broker-dealer; and $20.67billion invested in gs bank usa, a regulated new york state-chartered bank. group inc. also provided, directly or indirectly, $68.44billion of unsubordinated loans and
$11.37billion of collateral to these entities, substantially all of which was to gs&co., gsi and gs bank usa, as of december2012. in addition, as of december2012, group inc. had significant amounts of capital invested in and
loans to its other regulatedsubsidiaries.
contingency funding plan  the goldman sachs contingency funding plan sets out the plan of action we would use to fund business activity in crisis situations and periods of market stress. the contingency funding plan outlines a
list of potential risk factors, key reports and metrics that are reviewed on an ongoing basis to assist in assessing the severity of, and managing through, a liquidity crisis and/or market dislocation. the contingency funding plan also describes in
detail the firms potential responses if our assessments indicate that the firm has entered a liquidity crisis, which include pre-funding for what we estimate will be our potential cash and collateral needs as well as utilizing secondary
sources of liquidity. mitigants and action items to address specific risks which may arise are also described and assigned to individuals responsible forexecution.  the contingency funding plan identifies key groups of individuals to foster effective coordination, control and distribution of information, all of which are critical in the management of a crisis or
period of market stress. the contingency funding plan also details the responsibilities of these groups and individuals, which include making and disseminating key decisions, coordinating all contingency activities throughout the duration of the
crisis or period of market stress, implementing liquidity maintenance activities and managing internal and externalcommunication.  proposed
liquidity framework  the basel committee on banking supervisions international framework for liquidity risk
measurement, standards and monitoring calls for imposition of a liquidity coverage ratio, designed to ensure that the banking entity maintains an adequate level of unencumbered high-quality liquid assets based on expected cash outflows under an
acute liquidity stress scenario, and a net stable funding ratio, designed to promote more medium- and long-term funding of the assets and activities of banking entities over a one-year time horizon. while the principles behind the new framework are
broadly consistent with our current liquidity management framework, it is possible that the implementation of these standards could impact our liquidity and funding requirements and practices. under the basel committee framework, the liquidity
coverage ratio would be introduced on january1,2015; however there would be a phase-in period whereby firms would have a 60% minimum in 2015 which would be raised 10%per year until it reaches 100% in 2019. the net stable funding
ratio is not expected to be introduced as a requirement until january1,2018.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
credit ratings  the table below presents the unsecured credit ratings and outlook of group inc.
as of december2012
short-term
debt
long-term
debt
subordinated
debt
trustpreferred
preferred
stock
ratings
outlook
dbrs, inc.
r-1(middle
)
a(high
)
a
a
bbb
stable
fitch, inc.
f1
a
a-
bbb-
bb+
stable
moodys investors service (moodys)
p-2
a3
baa1
baa3
ba2
negative
standard& poors ratings services (s&p)
a-2
a-
bbb+
bb+
bb+
negative
rating and investment information, inc.
a-1
a+
a
n/a
n/a
negative
1.
trust preferred securities issued by goldman sachs capital i.
2.
includes the senior guaranteed trust securities issued by murray street investment trust i and vesey street investment trust i.
3.
includes group inc.s non-cumulative preferred stock and the apex issued by goldman sachs capital ii and goldman sachs capital iii.
4.
the ratings outlook for trust preferred and preferred stock is stable.
the table below presents the unsecured credit ratings of gs bank usa, gs&co. and gsi.
as of december2012
short-term
debt
long-termdebt
short-term
bankdeposits
long-term
bankdeposits
fitch, inc.
gs bank usa
f1
a
f1
a+
gs&co.
f1
a
n/a
n/a
moodys
gs bank usa
p-1
a2
p-1
a2
s&p
gs bank usa
a-1
a
n/a
n/a
gs&co.
a-1
a
n/a
n/a
gsi
a-1
a
n/a
n/a
on january24,2013, fitch, inc. assigned gsi a rating of f1 for short-term debt
and a for long-term debt.  we rely on the short-term and long-term debt capital markets to fund a significant portion of our
day-to-day operations and the cost and availability of debt financing is influenced by our credit ratings. credit ratings are also
important when we are competing in certain markets, such as otc derivatives, and when we seek to engage in longer-term transactions. see certain risk factors that mayaffect our
businesses below and risk factors in part i, item1a of this form10-k for a discussion of the risks associated with a reduction in our credit ratings.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
we believe our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit rating agencies
assessmentof:
our liquidity, market, credit and operational risk managementpractices;
the level and variability of ourearnings;
our capitalbase;
our franchise, reputation andmanagement;
our corporate governance;and
the external operating environment, including the assumed level of governmentsupport.
certain of the firms derivatives have been transacted under bilateral agreements with counterparties who may require us to post
collateral or terminate the transactions based on changes in our credit ratings. we assess the impact of these bilateral agreements by determining the collateral or termination payments that would occur assuming a downgrade by all rating
agencies.a downgrade by any one rating agency, depending on the agencys relative ratings of the firm at the time of the downgrade, may have an impact which is comparable to the impact of a downgrade by all rating agencies.we
allocate a portion of our gce to ensure we would be able to make the additional collateral or termination payments that may be required in the event of a two-notch reduction in our long-term credit ratings, as well as collateral that has not been
called by counterparties, but is available to them. the table below presents the additional collateral or termination payments that could have been called at the reporting date by counterparties in the event of a one-notch and two-notch downgrade in
our creditratings.
as of december
inmillions
additional collateral or termination payments for aone-notchdowngrade
$1,534
$1,303
additional collateral or termination payments for atwo-notchdowngrade
2,500
2,183
cash flows  as a global financial institution, our cash flows are complex and bear little relation to our net earnings and net assets. consequently, we believe that traditional cash flow analysis is less meaningful
in evaluating our liquidity position than the excess liquidity and asset-liability management policies described above. cash flow analysis may, however, be helpful in highlighting certain macro trends and strategic initiatives in
ourbusinesses.  year ended december2012. our cash and cash equivalents increased by $16.66billion to $72.67billion at the end of 2012. we generated $9.14billion in net cash from operating and investing activities. we generated
$7.52billion in net cash from financing activities from an increase in bank deposits, partially offset by net repayments of unsecured and secured long-termborrowings.
year ended december2011. our cash and cash equivalents increased by $16.22billion to $56.01billion at the end of 2011. we generated $23.13billion in net cash from operating and investing activities. we used net
cash of $6.91billion for financing activities, primarily for repurchases of our seriesg preferred stock and common stock, partially offset by an increase in bankdeposits.
year ended december2010. our cash and cash equivalents increased by $1.50billion to $39.79billion at the end of 2010. we generated $7.84billion in net cash from financing activities primarily from net proceeds
from issuances of short-term secured financings. we used net cash of $6.34billion for operating and investing activities, primarily to fund an increase in securities purchased under agreements to resell and an increase in cash and securities
segregated for regulatory and other purposes, partially offset by cash generated from a decrease in securitiesborrowed.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
market risk management
overview  market risk is the risk of loss in the value of our inventory due to changes in market prices. we hold inventory primarily for market making for our clients and for our investing and lending activities.
our inventory therefore changes based on client demands and our investment opportunities. our inventory is accounted for at fair value and therefore fluctuates on a daily basis, with the related gains and losses included in market
making, and other principal transactions. categories of market risk include the following:
interest rate risk: results from exposures to changes in the level, slope and curvature of yield curves, the volatilities of interest rates,
mortgage prepayment speeds and creditspreads.
equity price risk: results from exposures to changes in prices and volatilities of individual equities, baskets of equities and equity indices.
currency rate risk: results from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward prices and volatilities of currencyrates.
commodity price risk: results from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward prices and volatilities of commodities, such as electricity, natural
gas, crude oil, petroleum products, and precious and base metals.  market risk management process
we manage our market risk by diversifying exposures, controlling position sizes and establishing economic hedges in related securities or
derivatives. this includes:
accurate and timely exposure information incorporating multiple risk metrics;
a dynamic limit setting framework; and
constant communication among revenue-producing units, risk managers and senior management.
market risk management, which is independent of the revenue-producing units and reports to the firms chief risk officer, has primary
responsibility for assessing, monitoring and managing market risk at the firm. we monitor and control risks through strong firmwide oversight and independent control and support functions across the firms globalbusinesses.
managers in revenue-producing units are accountable for managing risk within prescribed
limits. these managers have in-depth knowledge of their positions, markets and the instruments available to hedge their exposures.  managers in revenue-producing units and market risk management discuss market information, positions and estimated risk and loss scenarios on an ongoing basis.
risk measures  market risk
management produces risk measures and monitors them against market risk limits set by our firms risk committees. these measures reflect an extensive range of scenarios and the results are aggregated at trading desk, business and firmwide
levels.  we use a variety of risk measures to estimate the size of potential losses for both moderate and more extreme market
moves over both short-term and long-term time horizons. risk measures used for shorter-term periods include var and sensitivity metrics. for longer-term horizons, our primary risk measures are stress tests. our risk reports detail key risks, drivers
and changes for each desk and business, and are distributed daily to senior management of both our revenue-producing units and our independent control and supportfunctions.  systems  we have made a significant investment in technology to monitor market risk
including:
an independent calculation of var and stress measures;
risk measures calculated at individual position levels;
attribution of risk measures to individual risk factors of eachposition;
the ability to report many different views of the risk measures (e.g., by desk, business, product type or legal entity);and
the ability to produce ad hoc analyses in a timely manner.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
value-at-risk  var is the potential loss in value of inventory positions due to adverse market movements over a defined time horizon with a specified confidence level. we typically employ a one-day time horizon with a
95% confidence level. we use a single var model which captures risks including interest rates, equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. as such, var facilitates comparison across portfolios of different risk characteristics. var also
captures the diversification of aggregated risk at the firmwidelevel.  we are aware of the inherent limitations to var
and therefore use a variety of risk measures in our market risk management process. inherent limitations to var include:
var does not estimate potential losses over longer time horizons where moves may be extreme.
var does not take account of the relative liquidity of different riskpositions.
previous moves in market risk factors may not produce accurate predictions of all future market moves.
when calculating var, we use historical simulations with full valuation of approximately 70,000 market factors. var is calculated at a
position level based on simultaneously shocking the relevant market risk factors for that position. we sample from 5 years of historical data to generate the scenarios for our var calculation. the historical data is weighted so that the relative
importance of the data reduces over time. this gives greater importance to more recent observations and reflects current asset volatilities, which improves the accuracy of our estimates of potential loss. as a result, even if our inventory positions
were unchanged, our var would increase with increasing market volatility and vice versa.  given its reliance on historical
data, var is most effective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which there are no sudden fundamental changes or shifts in market conditions.  our var measure does not include:
positions that are best measured and monitored using sensitivity measures; and
the impact of changes in counterparty and our own credit spreads on derivatives, as well as changes in our own credit spreads on unsecured
borrowings for which the fair value option was elected.
model review and validation  our var model is subject to review and validation by our independent model validation group at least annually. this review includes:
a critical evaluation of the model, its theoretical soundness and adequacy for intended use;
verification of the testing strategy utilized by the model developers to ensure that the model functions as intended;and
verification of the suitability of the calculation techniques incorporated in the model.
our var model is regularly reviewed and enhanced in order to incorporate changes in the composition of inventory positions, as well
as variations in market conditions. prior to implementing significant changes to our assumptions and/or model, we perform model validation and test runs. significant changes to our var model are reviewed with the firms chief risk officer and
chief financial officer, and approved by the firmwide riskcommittee.  we evaluate the accuracy of our var model through
daily backtesting (i.e., comparing daily trading net revenues to the var measure calculated as of the prior business day) at the firmwide level and for each of our businesses and major regulated subsidiaries.
stress testing  we use stress
testing to examine risks of specific portfolios as well as the potential impact of significant risk exposures across the firm. we use a variety of stress testing techniques to calculate the potential loss from a wide range of market moves on the
firms portfolios, including sensitivity analysis, scenario analysis and firmwide stress tests. the results of our various stress tests are analyzed together for risk management purposes.
sensitivity analysis is used to quantify the impact of a market move in a single risk factor across all positions (e.g., equity prices or
credit spreads) using a variety of defined market shocks, ranging from those that could be expected over a one-day time horizon up to those that could take many months to occur. we also use sensitivity analysis to quantify the impact of the default
of a single corporate entity, which captures the risk of large or concentratedexposures.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
scenario analysis is used to quantify the impact of a specified event, including how the
event impacts multiple risk factors simultaneously. for example, for sovereign stress testing we calculate potential direct exposure associated with our sovereign inventory as well as the corresponding debt, equity and currency exposures associated
with our non-sovereign inventory that may be impacted by the sovereign distress. when conducting scenario analysis, we typically consider a number of possible outcomes for each scenario, ranging from moderate to severely adverse market impacts. in
addition, these stress tests are constructed using both historical events and forward-looking hypothetical scenarios.  firmwide
stress testing combines market, credit, operational and liquidity risks into a single combined scenario. firmwide stress tests are primarily used to assess capital adequacy as part of the icaap process; however, we also ensure that firmwide stress
testing is integrated into our risk governance framework. this includes selecting appropriate scenarios to use for the icaap process. see equity capital internal capital adequacy assessment process above for further
information about our icaapprocess.  unlike var measures, which have an implied probability because they are calculated
at a specified confidence level, there is generally no implied probability that our stress test scenarios will occur. instead, stress tests are used to model both moderate and more extreme moves in underlying market factors. when estimating
potential loss, we generally assume that our positions cannot be reduced or hedged (although experience demonstrates that we are generally able to do so).  stress test scenarios are conducted on a regular basis as part of the firms routine risk management process and on an ad hoc basis in response to market events or concerns. stress testing is an
important part of the firms risk management process because it allows us to quantify our exposure to tail risks, highlight potential loss concentrations, undertake risk/reward analysis, and assess and mitigate our riskpositions.
limits  we use risk limits at various levels in the firm (including firmwide, product and business) to govern risk appetite by controlling the size of our exposures to market risk. limits are set based on var and
on a range of stress tests relevant to the firms exposures. limits are reviewed frequently and amended on a permanent or temporary basis to reflect changing market conditions, business conditions or tolerance for risk.
the firmwide risk committee sets market risk limits at firmwide and product levels and our securities division risk committee sets
sub-limits for market-making and investing activities at a business level. the purpose of the firmwide limits is to assist senior management in controlling the firms overall risk profile. sub-limits set the desired maximum amount of exposure
that may be managed by any particular business on a day-to-day basis without additional levels of senior management approval, effectively leaving day-to-day trading decisions to individual desk managers and traders. accordingly, sub-limits are a
management tool designed to ensure appropriate escalation rather than to establish maximum risk tolerance. sub-limits also distribute risk among various businesses in a manner that is consistent with their level of activity and client demand, taking
into account the relative performance of each area.  our market risk limits are monitored daily by market risk management,
which is responsible for identifying and escalating, on a timely basis, instances where limits have been exceeded. the business-level limits that are set by the securities division risk committee are subject to the same scrutiny and limit escalation
policy as the firmwidelimits.  when a risk limit has been exceeded (e.g., due to changes in market conditions, such as
increased volatilities or changes in correlations), it is reported to the appropriate risk committee and a discussion takes place with the relevant desk managers, after which either the risk position is reduced or the risk limit is temporarily or
permanentlyincreased.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
metrics  we analyze var at the firmwide level and a variety of more detailed levels, including by risk category, business, and region. the tables below present, by risk category, average daily var and period-end
var, as well as the high and low var for the period. diversification effect in the tables below represents the difference between total var and the sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this effect arises because the four market risk
categories are not perfectlycorrelated.  average daily var
inmillions
risk categories
yearendeddecember
interest rates
$78
$94
$93
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect
(54
)
(66
)
(92
)
total
$86
$113
$134
our average daily var decreased to $86million in 2012 from $113million in 2011, reflecting a
decrease in the interest rates category due to lower levels of volatility, decreases in the commodity prices and currency rates categories due to reduced exposures and lower levels of volatility, and a decrease in the equity prices category due to
reduced exposures. these decreases were partially offset by a decrease in the diversification benefit across riskcategories.  our average daily var decreased to $113million in 2011 from $134million in 2010, primarily reflecting decreases in the equity prices and currency rates categories, principally due to reduced
exposures. these decreases were partially offset by a decrease in the diversification benefit across riskcategories.
year-end var and high and low var
inmillions
risk categories
asofdecember
year ended
december2012
high
low
interest rates
$64
$100
$103
$61
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect
(42
)
(69
)
total
$71
$99
$122
$67
our daily var decreased to $71million as of december2012 from $99million as of
december2011, primarily reflecting decreases in the interest rates and equity prices categories due to lower levels of volatility.these decreases were partially offset by a decrease in the diversification benefit across
riskcategories.  during the year ended december2012, the firmwide var risk limit was not exceeded and was reduced
on one occasion due to lower levels of volatility.  during the year ended december2011, the firmwide var risk limit was
exceeded on one occasion. it was resolved by a temporary increase in the firmwide var risk limit, which was subsequently made permanent due to higher levels of volatility. the firmwide var risk limit had previously been reduced on one occasion in
2011, reflecting lower risk utilization and the market environment.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
the chart below reflects the var over the last four quarters.
the chart below presents the frequency distribution of our daily trading net revenues for
substantially all inventory
positions included in var for the year ended december2012.
daily trading net revenues are compared with var calculated as of the end of the prior
business day. trading losses incurred on a single day did not exceed our 95% one-day var during 2012. trading losses incurred on a single day exceeded our 95% one-day var (i.e., a var exception) on three occasions during2011.
during periods in which the firm has significantly more positive net revenue days than net revenue loss days, we
expect to have fewer var exceptions because, under normal conditions, our business model generally produces positive net revenues. in periods in which our franchise revenues are adversely
affected, we generally have more loss days, resulting in more var exceptions. in addition, var backtesting is performed against total daily market-making revenues, including bid/offer net revenues, which are more likely than not to be positive by
their nature.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
sensitivity measures
certain portfolios and individual positions are not included in var because var is not the
most appropriate risk measure. the market risk of these positions is determined by estimating the potential reduction in net revenues of a 10% decline in the underlying asset value.
the table below presents market risk for positions that are not included in var. these measures do not reflect diversification benefits
across asset categories and therefore have not beenaggregated.
asset categories
10% sensitivity
amountasofdecember
inmillions
icbc
$208
$212
equity (excluding icbc)1
2,263
2,458
debt2
1,676
1,521
1.
relates to private and restricted public equity securities, including interests in firm-sponsored funds that invest in corporate equities and real estate and
interests in firm-sponsored hedge funds.
2.
primarily relates to interests in our firm-sponsored funds that invest in corporate mezzanine and senior debt instruments. also includes loans backed by
commercial and residential real estate, corporate bank loans and other corporate debt, including acquired portfolios of distressed loans.  var excludes the impact of changes in counterparty and our own credit spreads on derivatives as well as changes in our own credit spreads on unsecured borrowings for which the fair value option was
elected. the estimated sensitivity to a one basis point increase in credit spreads (counterparty and our own) on derivatives was a $3million gain (including hedges) as of december2012. in addition, the estimated sensitivity to a one
basis point increase in our own credit spreads on unsecured borrowings for which the fair value option was elected was a $7million gain (including hedges) as of december2012. however, the actual net impact of a change in our own credit
spreads is also affected by the liquidity, duration and convexity (as the sensitivity is not linear to changes in yields) of those unsecured borrowings for which the fair value option was elected, as well as the relative performance of any
hedgesundertaken.  the firm engages in insurance activities where we reinsure and purchase portfolios of insurance risk
and pension liabilities. the risks associated with these activities include, but are not limited to: equity price, interest rate, reinvestment and mortality risk. the firm mitigates risks associated with insurance activities through the use of
reinsurance and hedging. certain of the assets associated with the firms insurance activities are included in var. in addition to the positions included in var, we held $9.07billion of securities accounted for as available-for-sale as of
december2012, which support the firms
reinsurance business. as of december2012, our available-for-sale securities primarily consisted of $3.63billion of corporate debt securities with an average yield of 4%, the majority
of which will mature after five years, $3.38billion of mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities with an average yield of 6%, the majority of which will mature after ten years, and $856million of u.s. government and federal
agency obligations with an average yield of 3%, the majority of which will mature after five years. as of december2012, such assets were classified as held for sale and were included in other assets. see note12 to the
consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about assets held for sale. as of december2011, we held $4.86billion of securities accounted for as available-for-sale, primarily
consisting of $1.81billion of corporate debt securities with an average yield of 5%, the majority of which will mature after five years, $1.42billion of mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities with an average yield of 10%,
the majority of which will mature after ten years, and $662million of u.s. government and federal agency obligations with an average yield of 3%, the majority of which will mature after ten years.
in addition, as of december2012 and december2011, we had commitments and held loans for which we have obtained credit loss
protection from sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. see note18 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about such lending commitments. as of december2012, the firm
also had $6.50billion of loans held for investment which were accounted for at amortized cost and included in receivables from customers and counterparties, substantially all of which had floating interest rates. the estimated
sensitivity to a 100 basis point increase in interest rates on such loans was $62million of additional interest income over a 12-month period, which does not take into account the potential impact of an increase in costs to fund such loans.
see note8 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for further information about loans held forinvestment.  additionally, we make investments accounted for under the equity method and we also make direct investments in real estate, both of which are included in other assets in the consolidated
statements of financial condition. direct investments in real estate are accounted for at cost less accumulated depreciation. see note12 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for information on
other assets.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
credit risk management
overview  credit risk represents the potential for loss due to the default or deterioration in credit quality of a counterparty (e.g., an otc derivatives counterparty or a borrower) or an issuer of securities or
other instruments we hold. our exposure to credit risk comes mostly from client transactions in otc derivatives and loans and lending commitments. credit risk also comes from cash placed with banks, securities financing transactions (i.e., resale
and repurchase agreements and securities borrowing and lending activities) and receivables from brokers, dealers, clearing organizations, customers andcounterparties.  credit risk management, which is independent of the revenue-producing units and reports to the firms chief risk officer, has primary responsibility for assessing, monitoring and managing credit risk
at the firm. the credit policy committee and the firmwide risk committee establish and review credit policies and parameters. in addition, we hold other positions that give rise to credit risk (e.g., bonds held in our inventory and secondary bank
loans). these credit risks are captured as a component of market risk measures, which are monitored and managed by market risk management, consistent with other inventory positions.
policies authorized by the firmwide risk committee and the credit policy committee prescribe the level of formal approval required for the
firm to assume credit exposure to a counterparty across all product areas, taking into account any applicable netting provisions, collateral or other credit riskmitigants.
credit risk management process  effective management of credit risk requires accurate and timely information, a high level of communication and knowledge of customers, countries, industries and products. our process for managing credit
risk includes:
approving transactions and setting and communicating credit exposurelimits;
monitoring compliance with established credit exposurelimits;
assessing the likelihood that a counterparty will default on its payment obligations;
measuring the firms current and potential credit exposure and losses resulting from counterparty default;
reporting of credit exposures to senior management, the board and regulators;
use of credit risk mitigants, including collateral and hedging;and
communication and collaboration with other independent control and support functions such as operations, legal andcompliance.
as part of the risk assessment process, credit risk management performs credit reviews which include initial
and ongoing analyses of our counterparties. a credit review is an independent judgment about the capacity and willingness of a counterparty to meet its financial obligations. for substantially all of our credit exposures, the core of our process is
an annual counterparty review. a counterparty review is a written analysis of a counterpartys business profile and financial strength resulting in an internal credit rating which represents the probability of default on financial obligations
to the firm. the determination of internal credit ratings incorporates assumptions with respect to the counterpartys future business performance, the nature and outlook for the counterpartys industry, and the economic environment. senior
personnel within credit risk management, with expertise in specific industries, inspect and approve credit reviews and internal creditratings.  our global credit risk management systems capture credit exposure to individual counterparties and on an aggregate basis to counterparties and their subsidiaries (economic groups). these systems also
provide management with comprehensive information on our aggregate credit risk by product, internal credit rating, industry, country andregion.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
risk measures and limits  we measure our credit risk based on the potential loss in an event of non-payment by a counterparty. for derivatives and securities financing transactions, the primary measure is potential exposure, which
is our estimate of the future exposure that could arise over the life of a transaction based on market movements within a specified confidence level. potential exposure takes into account netting and collateral arrangements. for loans and lending
commitments, the primary measure is a function of the notional amount of the position. we also monitor credit risk in terms of current exposure, which is the amount presently owed to the firm after taking into account applicable netting and
collateral.  we use credit limits at various levels (counterparty, economic group, industry, country) to control the size of
our credit exposures. limits for counterparties and economic groups are reviewed regularly and revised to reflect changing appetites for a given counterparty or group of counterparties. limits for industries and countries are based on the
firms risk tolerance and are designed to allow for regular monitoring, review, escalation and management of credit risk concentrations.  stress
tests/scenario analysis  we use regular stress tests to calculate the credit exposures, including potential concentrations
that would result from applying shocks to counterparty credit ratings or credit risk factors (e.g., currency rates, interest rates, equity prices). these shocks include a wide range of moderate and more extreme market movements. some of our stress
tests include shocks to multiple risk factors, consistent with the occurrence of a severe market or economic event. in the case of sovereign default, we estimate the direct impact of the default on our sovereign credit exposures, changes to our
credit exposures arising from potential market moves in response to the default, and the impact of credit market deterioration on corporate borrowers and counterparties that may result from the sovereign default. unlike potential exposure, which is
calculated within a specified confidence level, with a stress test there is generally no assumed probability of these eventsoccurring.  we run stress tests on a regular basis as part of our routine risk management processes and conduct tailored stress tests on an ad hoc basis in response to market developments. stress tests are regularly
conducted jointly with the firms market and liquidity risk functions.
risk mitigants  to reduce our credit exposures on derivatives and securities financing transactions, we may enter into netting agreements with counterparties that permit us to offset receivables and payables with such
counterparties. we may also reduce credit risk with counterparties by entering into agreements that enable us to obtain collateral from them on an upfront or contingent basis and/or to terminate transactions if the counterpartys credit rating
falls below a specified level.  for loans and lending commitments, depending on the credit quality of the borrower and other
characteristics of the transaction, we employ a variety of potential risk mitigants. risk mitigants include: collateral provisions, guarantees, covenants, structural seniority of the bank loan claims and, for certain lending commitments, provisions
in the legal documentation that allow the firm to adjust loan amounts, pricing, structure and other terms as market conditions change. the type and structure of risk mitigants employed can significantly influence the degree of credit risk involved
in aloan.  when we do not have sufficient visibility into a counterpartys financial strength or when we believe a
counterparty requires support from its parent company, we may obtain third-party guarantees of the counterpartys obligations. we may also mitigate our credit risk using credit derivatives or participationagreements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
credit exposures
the firms credit exposures are described further below.
cash and cash
equivalents. cash and cash equivalents include both interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits. to mitigate the risk of credit loss, we place substantially all of our deposits
with highly rated banks and central banks.  otc derivatives. derivatives are reported on a net-by-counterparty basis (i.e., the net payable or receivable for derivative assets and liabilities for a given counterparty) when a legal right of setoff exists under an
enforceable nettingagreement.  derivatives are accounted for at fair value, net of cash collateral received or posted
under credit support agreements. as credit risk is an essential component of fair value, the firm includes a credit valuation adjustment (cva) in the fair value of derivatives to reflect counterparty credit risk, as described in note7 to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of this form10-k. cva is a function of the present value of expected exposure, the probability of counterparty default and the assumed recovery upon default.
the tables below present the distribution of our exposure to otc derivatives by tenor,
based on expected duration for mortgage-related credit derivatives and generally on remaining contractual maturity for other derivatives, both before and after the effect of collateral and netting agreements. receivable and payable balances for the
same counterparty across tenor categories are netted under enforceable netting agreements, and cash collateral received is netted under credit support agreements. receivable and payable balances with the same counterparty in the same tenor category
are netted within such tenor category. the categories shown reflect our internally determined public rating agencyequivalents.
as of december2012
inmillions
credit rating equivalent
0 - 12
months
1 - 5
years
5years
orgreater
total
netting
exposure
exposurenet ofcollateral
aaa/aaa
$494
$1,934
$2,778
$5,206
$(1,476
)
$3,730
$3,443
aa/aa2
4,631
7,483
20,357
32,471
(16,026
)
16,445
10,467
a/a2
13,422
26,550
42,797
82,769
(57,868
)
24,901
16,326
bbb/baa2
7,032
12,173
27,676
46,881
(32,962
)
13,919
4,577
bb/ba2 or lower
2,489
5,762
7,676
15,927
(9,116
)
6,811
4,544
unrated
1,611
(13
)
1,598
1,259
total
$28,394
$54,829
$101,642
$184,865
$(117,461
)
$67,404
$40,616
as of december2011
inmillions
credit rating equivalent
0 - 12
months
1 - 5
years
5years or
greater
total
netting
exposure
exposurenet ofcollateral
aaa/aaa
$727
$786
$2,297
$3,810
$(729
)
$3,081
$2,770
aa/aa2
4,661
10,198
28,094
42,953
(22,972
)
19,981
12,954
a/a2
17,704
36,553
50,787
105,044
(73,873
)
31,171
17,109
bbb/baa2
7,376
14,222
25,612
47,210
(36,214
)
10,996
6,895
bb/ba2 or lower
2,896
4,497
6,597
13,990
(6,729
)
7,261
4,527
unrated
1,807
(149
)
1,658
1,064
total
$34,116
$66,920
$113,778
$214,814
$(140,666
)
$74,148
$45,319
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
lending activities. we manage the firms traditional credit origination activities, including funded loans and lending commitments (both fair value and held for investment loans and lending commitments), using the
credit risk process, measures and limits described above. other lending positions, including secondary trading positions, are risk-managed as a component of marketrisk.  other credit exposures. the firm is exposed to credit risk from its receivables from
brokers, dealers and clearing organizations and customers and counterparties. receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations are primarily comprised of initial margin placed with clearing organizations and receivables related to sales
of securities which have traded, but not yet settled. these receivables have minimal credit risk due to the low probability of clearing organization default and the short-term nature of receivables related to securities settlements. receivables from
customers and counterparties are generally comprised of collateralized receivables related to customer securities transactions and have minimal credit risk due to both the value of the collateral received and the short-term nature of
thesereceivables.
credit exposures  as of december2012, our credit exposures increased as compared with december2011, reflecting an increase in cash and loans and lending commitments, partially offset by a decrease in otc
derivative exposures. the percentage of our credit exposure arising from non-investment-grade counterparties (based on our internally determined public rating agency equivalents) increased from december2011 reflecting an increase in loans and
lending commitments. counterparty defaults rose slightly during the year ended december2012; however, the estimated losses associated with these counterparty defaults were lower as compared with the prioryear.
the tables below present the firms credit exposures related to cash, otc derivatives, and loans and lending commitments associated
with traditional credit origination activities broken down by industry, region and internal creditrating.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
credit exposure by industry
cash
otc derivatives
loans and
lendingcommitments1
as of december
as of december
as of december
inmillions
asset managers& funds
$
$64
$10,552
$10,582
$1,673
$1,290
banks, brokers& other financial institutions
10,507
12,535
21,310
25,041
6,192
3,591
consumer products, non-durables& retail
1,516
1,031
13,304
12,685
government& central banks
62,162
43,389
14,729
16,642
1,782
1,828
healthcare& education
3,764
2,962
7,717
7,158
insurance
4,214
2,828
3,199
2,891
natural resources& utilities
4,383
4,803
16,360
14,795
real estate
3,796
2,695
technology, media, telecommunications& services
2,016
2,124
17,674
12,646
transportation
1,207
1,104
6,557
5,753
other
3,332
6,704
4,650
5,759
total2
$72,669
$56,008
$67,404
$74,148
$82,904
$71,091
credit exposure by region
cash
otc derivatives
loans and
lendingcommitments1
as of december
as of december
as of december
inmillions
americas
$65,193
$48,543
$32,968
$36,591
$59,792
$52,755
emea3
1,683
1,800
26,739
29,549
21,104
16,989
asia
5,793
5,665
7,697
8,008
2,008
1,347
total2
$72,669
$56,008
$67,404
$74,148
$82,904
$71,091
credit exposure by credit quality
cash
otc derivatives
loans and
lendingcommitments1
inmillions credit rating equivalent
as of december
as of december
as of december
aaa/aaa
$59,825
$40,559
$3,730
$3,081
$2,179
$2,192
aa/aa2
6,356
7,463
16,445
19,981
7,220
7,026
a/a2
5,068
6,464
24,901
31,171
21,901
21,055
bbb/baa2
13,919
10,996
26,313
22,937
bb/ba2 or lower
1,094
1,209
6,811
7,261
25,291
17,820
unrated
1,598
1,658
total2
$72,669
$56,008
$67,404
$74,148
$82,904
$71,091
1.
includes approximately $12billion and $10billion of loans as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, and approximately
$71billion and $61billion of lending commitments as of december2012 and december2011, respectively. excludes certain bank loans and bridge loans and certain lending commitments that are risk managed as part of
marketrisk using var and sensitivity measures.
2.
the firm bears credit risk related to resale agreements and securities borrowed only to the extent that cash advanced or the value of securities pledged or
delivered to the counterparty exceeds the value of the collateral received. the firm also has credit exposure on repurchase agreements and securities loaned to the extent that the value of securities pledged or delivered to the counterparty for
these transactions exceeds the amount of cash or collateral received. we had approximately $37billion and $41billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, in credit exposure related to securities financing
transactions reflecting applicable nettingagreements and collateral.
3.
emea (europe, middle east and africa).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
selected country exposures
during 2011 and throughout 2012, there have been concerns about european sovereign debt
risk and its impact on the european banking system and a number of european member states have been experiencing significant credit deterioration. the most pronounced market concerns relate to greece, ireland, italy, portugal and spain. the tables
below present our credit exposure (both gross and net of hedges) to all sovereigns, financial institutions and corporate counterparties or borrowers in these countries. credit exposure represents the potential for loss due to the default or
deterioration in credit quality of a counterparty or borrower. in addition, the tables include the market
exposure of our long and short inventory for which the issuer or underlier is located in these countries. market exposure represents the potential for loss in value of our inventory due to
changes in market prices. there is no overlap between the credit and market exposures in the tables below.  the country of risk
is determined by the location of the counterparty, issuer or underliers assets, where they generate revenue, the country in which they are headquartered, and/or the government whose policies affect their ability to repay their obligations.
as of december2012
credit exposure
market exposure
inmillions
loans
otcderivatives
other
grossfunded
hedges
total net funded credit
exposure
unfunded
credit exposure
total credit exposure
debt
equitiesandother
creditderivatives
total
marketexposure
greece
sovereign
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$30
$
$
$30
non-sovereign
(5
)
total greece
(5
)
ireland
sovereign
(150
)
(142
)
non-sovereign
1,030
total ireland
italy
sovereign
1,756
1,757
(1,714
)
(415
)
(603
)
(1,018
)
non-sovereign
(33
)
1,286
(996
)
(497
)
total italy
2,316
2,489
(1,747
)
1,329
(1,599
)
(1,515
)
portugal
sovereign
(226
)
(71
)
non-sovereign
(6
)
(133
)
total portugal
(6
)
(359
)
(42
)
spain
sovereign
(268
)
non-sovereign
1,048
1,330
(95
)
1,235
1,968
1,268
(186
)
1,165
total spain
1,048
1,405
(95
)
1,310
2,043
2,254
(454
)
1,883
subtotal
$1,091
$2,967
$356
$4,414
$(1,842
)3
$2,572
$1,320
$3,892
$3,500
$231
$(2,412
)3
$1,319
1.
principally consists of collateralized loans.
2.
includes the benefit of $6.6billion of cash and u.s. treasury securities collateral and excludes non-u.s. government and agency obligations and
corporate securities collateral of $357million.
3.
includes written and purchased credit derivative notionals reduced by the fair values of such credit derivatives.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
as of december2011
credit exposure
market exposure
inmillions
loans
otcderivatives
other
grossfunded
hedges
total net
funded credit
exposure
unfunded
creditexposure
totalcreditexposure
debt
equities
andother
creditderivatives
total
marketexposure
greece
sovereign
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$329
$
$(22
)
$307
non-sovereign
total greece
(4
)
ireland
sovereign
(352
)
non-sovereign
(8
)
total ireland
(8
)
(237
)
italy
sovereign
1,666
1,669
(1,410
)
non-sovereign
(25
)
(896
)
(409
)
total italy
2,123
2,252
(1,435
)
1,225
(696
)
portugal
sovereign
(98
)
(75
)
non-sovereign
(179
)
total portugal
(156
)
(11
)
spain
sovereign
(550
)
(399
)
non-sovereign
(141
)
(629
)
(45
)
total spain
(141
)
(1,179
)
(444
)
subtotal
$299
$3,265
$338
$3,902
$(1,584
)
$2,318
$611
$2,929
$2,212
$645
$(2,272
)2
$585
1.
includes the benefit of $6.5billion of cash and u.s. treasury securities collateral and excludes non-u.s. government and agency obligations and
corporate securities collateral of $341million.
2.
includes written and purchased credit derivative notionals reduced by the fair values of such credit derivatives.
we economically hedge our exposure to written credit derivatives by entering into
offsetting purchased credit derivatives with identical underlyings. where possible, we endeavor to match the tenor and credit default terms of such hedges to that of our written credit derivatives. substantially all purchased credit derivatives
included above are bought from investment-grade counterparties domiciled outside of these countries and are collateralized with cash or u.s. treasury securities. the gross purchased and written credit derivative notionals across the above countries
for single-name and index credit default swaps (included in hedges and credit derivatives in the tables above) were $179.4billion and $168.6billion, respectively, as of december2012, and $177.8billion
and $167.3billion, respectively, as of december2011. including netting under legally enforceable netting agreements, within each and across all of the countries above, the purchased and written credit derivative notionals for single-name
and index credit default swaps
were $26.0billion and $15.3billion, respectively, as of december2012, and $28.2billion and $17.7billion, respectively, as of december2011. these notionals are
not representative of our exposure because they exclude available netting under legally enforceable netting agreements on other derivatives outside of these countries and collateral received or posted under credit supportagreements.
in credit exposure above, other principally consists of deposits, secured lending transactions and other secured
receivables, net of applicable collateral. as of december2012 and december2011, $4.8billion and $7.0billion, respectively, of secured lending transactions and other secured receivables were fullycollateralized.
for information about the nature of or payout under trigger events related to written and purchased credit protection
contracts see note7 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
we conduct stress tests intended to estimate the direct and indirect impact that might
result from a variety of possible events involving the above countries, including sovereign defaults and the exit of one or more countries from the euro area. in the stress tests, described in market risk management stress
testing and credit risk management stress tests/scenario analysis, we estimate the direct impact of the event on our credit and market exposures resulting from shocks to risk factors including, but not limited to,
currency rates, interest rates, and equity prices. the parameters of these shocks vary based on the scenario reflected in each stress test. we also estimate the indirect impact on our exposures arising from potential market moves in response to the
event, such as the impact of credit market deterioration on corporate borrowers and counterparties along with the shocks to the risk factors described above. we review estimated losses produced by the stress tests in order to understand their
magnitude, highlight potential loss concentrations, and assess and mitigate our exposures wherenecessary.  euro area exit
scenarios include analysis of the impacts on exposure that might result from the redenomination of assets in the exiting country or countries. constructing stress tests for these scenarios requires many assumptions about how exposures might be
directly impacted and how resulting secondary market moves would indirectly impact such exposures. given the multiple parameters involved in such scenarios, losses from such events are inherently difficult to quantify and may materially differ from
our estimates. in order to prepare for any market disruption that might result from a euro area exit, we test our operational and risk management readiness and capability to respond to a redenominationevent.
see liquidity risk management modeled liquidity outflow, market risk management stress
testing and credit risk management stress tests/scenario analysis for furtherdiscussion.
operational risk management
overview  operational risk is the
risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events. our exposure to operational risk arises from routine processing errors as well as extraordinary incidents, such as major systems
failures. potential types of loss events related to internal and external operational riskinclude:
clients, products and business practices;
execution, delivery and process management;
business disruption and system failures;
employment practices and workplace safety;
damage to physical assets;
internal fraud; and
external fraud.  the firm maintains a comprehensive control framework designed to provide a well-controlled environment to minimize operational risks. the firmwide operational risk committee, along with the support of
regional or entity-specific working groups or committees, provides oversight of the ongoing development and implementation of our operational risk policies and framework. our operational risk management department (operational risk management) is a
risk management function independent of our revenue-producing units, reports to the firms chief risk officer, and is responsible for developing and implementing policies, methodologies and a formalized framework for operational risk management
with the goal of minimizing our exposure to operationalrisk.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
operational risk management process  managing operational risk requires timely and accurate information as well as a strong control culture. we seek to manage our operational risk through:
the training, supervision and development of our people;
the active participation of senior management in identifying and mitigating key operational risks across thefirm;
independent control and support functions that monitor operational risk on a daily basis and have instituted extensive policies and procedures and
implemented controls designed to prevent the occurrence of operational risk events;
proactive communication between our revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions;and
a network of systems throughout the firm to facilitate the collection of data used to analyze and assess our operational risk exposure.
we combine top-down and bottom-up approaches to manage and measure operational risk. from a top-down
perspective, the firms senior management assesses firmwide and business level operational risk profiles. from a bottom-up perspective, revenue-producing units and independent control and support functions are responsible for risk management on
a day-to-day basis, including identifying, mitigating, and escalating operational risks to senior management.  our operational
risk framework is in part designed to comply with the operational risk measurement rules under basel2 and has evolved based on the changing needs of our businesses and regulatory guidance. our framework comprises the following practices:
risk identification and reporting;
risk measurement; and
risk monitoring.  internal audit performs a review of our operational risk framework, including our key controls, processes and applications, on an annual basis to assess the effectiveness of our framework.
risk identification and reporting  the core of our operational risk management framework is risk identification and reporting. we have a comprehensive data collection process, including firmwide policies and procedures, for operational
risk events.  we have established policies that require managers in our revenue-producing units and our independent control and
support functions to escalate operational risk events. when operational risk events are identified, our policies require that the events be documented and analyzed to determine whether changes are required in the firms systems and/or processes
to further mitigate the risk of future events.  in addition, our firmwide systems capture internal operational risk event data,
key metrics such as transaction volumes, and statistical information such as performance trends. we use an internally-developed operational risk management application to aggregate and organize this information. managers from both revenue-producing
units and independent control and support functions analyze the information to evaluate operational risk exposures and identify businesses, activities or products with heightened levels of operational risk. we also provide periodic operational risk
reports to senior management, risk committees and the board.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
risk measurement  we measure the firms operational risk exposure over a twelve-month time horizon using both statistical modeling and scenario analyses, which involve qualitative assessments of the potential
frequency and extent of potential operational risk losses, for each of the firms businesses. operational risk measurement incorporates qualitative and quantitative assessments of factorsincluding:
internal and external operational risk event data;
assessments of the firms internal controls;
evaluations of the complexity of the firms businessactivities;
the degree of and potential for automation in the firmsprocesses;
new product information;
the legal and regulatory environment;
changes in the markets for the firms products and services, including the diversity and sophistication of the firms customers and
counterparties; and
the liquidity of the capital markets and the reliability of the infrastructure that supports the capital markets.
the results from these scenario analyses are used to monitor changes in operational risk and to determine business lines that may have
heightened exposure to operational risk. these analyses ultimately are used in the determination of the appropriate level of operational risk capital to hold.
risk monitoring  we evaluate changes in the operational risk profile of the firm and its businesses, including changes in business mix or jurisdictions in which the firm operates, by monitoring the factors noted above at
a firmwide level. the firm has both detective and preventive internal controls, which are designed to reduce the frequency and severity of operational risk losses and the probability of operational risk events. we monitor the results of assessments
and independent internal audits of these internal controls.  recent accounting developments
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements in part ii, item8 of this form10-k for information about recent
accounting developments.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  managements discussion and analysis
certain risk factors that mayaffect ourbusinesses
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in our businesses, including
market, liquidity, credit, operational, legal, regulatory and reputational risks. for a discussion of how management seeks to manage some of these risks, see overview and structure of risk management. a summary of the more important
factors that could affect our businesses follows. for a further discussion of these and other important factors that could affect our businesses, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity, see risk factors in
part i, item1a of this form10-k.
our businesses have been and may continue to be adversely affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic
conditionsgenerally.
our businesses have been and may be adversely affected by declining asset values. this is particularly true for those businesses in which we have
net long positions, receive fees based on the value of assets managed, or receive or postcollateral.
our businesses have been and may be adversely affected by disruptions in the credit markets, including reduced access to credit and higher costs of
obtaining credit.
our market-making activities have been and may be affected by changes in the levels of market volatility.
our investment banking, client execution and investment management businesses have been adversely affected and may continue to be adversely affected
by market uncertainty or lack of confidence among investors and ceos due to general declines in economic activity and other unfavorable economic, geopolitical or marketconditions.
our investment management business may be affected by the poor investment performance of our investmentproducts.
we may incur losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and strategies.
our liquidity, profitability and businesses may be adversely affected by an inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets or by a
reduction in our credit ratings or by an increase in our credit spreads.
conflicts of interest are increasing and a failure to appropriately identify and address conflicts of interest could adversely affect our
businesses.
group inc. is a holding company and is dependent for liquidity on payments from its subsidiaries, many of which are subject to restrictions.
our businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely affected by deterioration in the credit quality of, or defaults by, third parties who
owe us money, securities or other assets or whose securities or obligations we hold.
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our market-making, underwriting, investing and lending activities.
the financial services industry is highly competitive.
we face enhanced risks as new business initiatives lead us to transact with a broader array of clients and counterparties and expose us to new asset
classes and newmarkets.
derivative transactions and delayed settlements may expose us to unexpected risk and potential losses.
our businesses may be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain qualified employees.
our businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive regulation around the world.
we may be adversely affected by increased governmental and regulatory scrutiny or negative publicity.
a failure in our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third parties, could impair our liquidity, disrupt our businesses, result in the
disclosure of confidential information, damage our reputation and cause losses.
substantial legal liability or significant regulatory action against us could have material adverse financial effects or cause us significant
reputational harm, which in turn could seriously harm our business prospects.
the growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new trading technology may adversely affect our business and may increase competition.
our commodities activities, particularly our power generation interests and our physical commodities activities, subject us to extensive regulation,
potential catastrophic events and environmental, reputational and other risks that may expose us to significant liabilities andcosts.
in conducting our businesses around the world, we are subject to political, economic, legal, operational and other risks that are inherent in
operating in manycountries.
we may incur losses as a result of unforeseen or catastrophic events, including the emergence of a pandemic, terrorist attacks, extreme weather
events or other naturaldisasters.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk are set forth under managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations overview and structure of risk management in partii, item7 of this form10-k.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
item8.financial statements and supplementary data
index
pageno.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1.description of business
note2.basis of presentation
note3.significant accounting
policies
note4.
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased,atfairvalue
note5.fair value measurements
note6.cash instruments
note7.derivatives and hedging
activities
note8.fair value option
note9.collateralized agreements and
financings
note10.securitization activities
note11.variable interest entities
note12.other assets
note13.goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets
note14.deposits
note15.short-term borrowings
note16.long-term borrowings
note17.other liabilities and accrued expenses
note18.commitments, contingencies and
guarantees
note19.shareholders equity
note20.regulation and capital adequacy
note21.earnings per common share
note22.transactions with affiliated funds
note23.interest income and interest expense
note24.income taxes
note25.business segments
note26.credit concentrations
note27.legal proceedings
note28.employee benefit plans
note29.employee incentive plans
note30.parent company
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
common stock performance
selected financial data
statistical disclosures
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
management of the goldman sachs group, inc., together with its consolidated subsidiaries
(the firm), is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. the firms internal control over financial reporting is a process designed under the supervision of the firms principal
executive and principal financial officers to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the firms financial statements for external reporting purposes in accordance with u.s. generally
accepted accountingprinciples.  as of december31,2012, management conducted an assessment of the firms
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework established in internal control integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this assessment,
management has determined that the firms internal control over financial reporting as of december31,2012 waseffective.
our internal control over financial reporting includes policies and procedures that pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect transactions and dispositions of assets; provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements
in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and the directors of the firm; and provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the firms assets that could have a material effect on our financialstatements.  the firms internal control over financial reporting as of december31,2012 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in
their report appearing on page 116, which expresses an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial reporting as of december31,2012.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and the shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the accompanying index
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the goldman sachs group, inc. and its subsidiaries (the company) at december31,2012 and 2011, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three
years in the period ended december31,2012, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. also in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control
over financial reporting as of december31,2012, based on criteria established in internal controlintegrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the
companys management is responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in
managements report on internal control over financial reporting appearing on page 115. our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements and on the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our
audits. we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. our audit of internal control over financial
reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the
assessed risk. our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for ouropinions.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could
have a material effect on the financialstatements.  because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures maydeteriorate.  /s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york  february28,2013
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2012
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of earnings
year ended december
inmillions, except per share amounts
revenues
investment banking
$4,941
$4,361
$4,810
investment management
4,968
4,691
4,669
commissions and fees
3,161
3,773
3,569
market making
11,348
9,287
13,678
other principal transactions
5,865
1,507
6,932
total non-interest revenues
30,283
23,619
33,658
interest income
11,381
13,174
12,309
interest expense
7,501
7,982
6,806
net interest income
3,880
5,192
5,503
net revenues, including net interest income
34,163
28,811
39,161
operating
expenses
compensation and benefits
12,944
12,223
15,376
u.k. bank payroll
tax
brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees
2,208
2,463
2,281
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
1,738
1,865
1,889
occupancy
1,030
1,086
professional fees
insurance reserves
other expenses
2,435
2,072
2,559
total non-compensation expenses
10,012
10,419
10,428
total operating expenses
22,956
22,642
26,269
pre-tax earnings
11,207
6,169
12,892
provision for taxes
3,732
1,727
4,538
net earnings
7,475
4,442
8,354
preferred stock dividends
1,932
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$7,292
$2,510
$7,713
earnings per common
share
basic
$14.63
$4.71
$14.15
diluted
14.13
4.51
13.18
average common shares
outstanding
basic
496.2
524.6
542.0
diluted
516.1
556.9
585.3
the accompanying notes are an integral part
of these consolidated financial statements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
year ended december
inmillions
net earnings
$7,475
$4,442
$8,354
other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax:
currency translation adjustment, net of tax
(89
)
(55
)
(38
)
pension and postretirement liability adjustments, net of tax
(145
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
(30
)
other comprehensive income/(loss)
(230
)
comprehensive income
$7,798
$4,212
$8,430
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial
statements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of financial condition
as of december
inmillions, except share and per share amounts
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$72,669
$56,008
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes (includes $30,484 and $42,014 at fair value as of december2012 and
december2011, respectively)
49,671
64,264
collateralized agreements:
securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds sold (includes $141,331 and $187,789 at fair value as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively)
141,334
187,789
securities borrowed (includes $38,395 and $47,621 at fair value as of december2012 and
december2011,respectively)
136,893
153,341
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
18,480
14,204
receivables from customers and counterparties (includes $7,866 and $9,682 at fair value as of december2012and
december2011, respectively)
72,874
60,261
financialinstrumentsowned,atfairvalue(includes$67,177and$53,989
pledgedascollateralasofdecember2012and december2011,
respectively)
407,011
364,206
other assets (includes $13,426 and $0 at fair value as of december2012 and
december2011, respectively)
39,623
23,152
total assets
$938,555
$923,225
liabilities and
shareholders equity
deposits (includes $5,100 and $4,526 at fair value as of december2012 and december2011, respectively)
$70,124
$46,109
collateralized financings:
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, at fair value
171,807
164,502
securities loaned (includes $1,558 and $107 at fair value as of december2012 and december2011,respectively)
13,765
7,182
other secured financings (includes $30,337 and $30,019 at fair value as of december2012 and
december2011,respectively)
32,010
37,364
payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
5,283
3,667
payables to customers and counterparties
189,202
194,625
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
126,644
145,013
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings (includes $17,595and $17,854 at fair
value as of december2012 and december2011, respectively)
44,304
49,038
unsecured long-term borrowings (includes $12,593 and $17,162 at fair value as of december2012 and
december2011,respectively)
167,305
173,545
other liabilities and accrued expenses (includes $12,043 and $9,486 at fair value as of
december2012 and december2011,respectively)
42,395
31,801
total liabilities
862,839
852,846
commitments, contingencies and
guarantees
shareholders
equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share; aggregate liquidation preference of $6,200 and $3,100 as of december2012
anddecember2011, respectively
6,200
3,100
common stock, par value $0.01 per share; 4,000,000,000 shares authorized, 816,807,400 and 795,555,310 shares issued as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively, and 465,148,387 and 485,467,565 shares outstanding as of december2012 and december2011, respectively
restricted stock units and employee stock options
3,298
5,681
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01 per share; 200,000,000 shares authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
48,030
45,553
retained earnings
65,223
58,834
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(193
)
(516
)
stock held in treasury, at cost, par value $0.01 per share; 351,659,015 and 310,087,747 shares as
of december2012and december2011,respectively
(46,850
)
(42,281
)
total shareholders equity
75,716
70,379
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$938,555
$923,225
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
year ended december
inmillions
preferred stock
balance, beginning of year
$3,100
$6,957
$6,957
issued
3,100
repurchased
(3,857
)
balance, end of year
6,200
3,100
6,957
common stock
balance, beginning of year
issued
balance, end of year
restricted stock units and employee stock options
balance, beginning of year
5,681
7,706
6,245
issuance and amortization of restricted stock units and employee stock options
1,368
2,863
4,137
delivery of common stock underlying restricted stock units
(3,659
)
(4,791
)
(2,521
)
forfeiture of restricted stock units and employee stock options
(90
)
(93
)
(149
)
exercise of employee stock options
(2
)
(4
)
(6
)
balance, end of year
3,298
5,681
7,706
additional paid-in capital
balance, beginning of year
45,553
42,103
39,770
issuance of common stock
delivery of common stock underlying share-based awards
3,939
5,160
3,067
cancellation of restricted stock units in satisfaction of withholding tax requirements
(1,437
)
(1,911
)
(972
)
preferred stock issuance costs
(13
)
excess net tax benefit/(provision) related to share-based awards
(11
)
cash settlement of share-based compensation
(1
)
(40
)
(1
)
balance, end of year
48,030
45,553
42,103
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year
58,834
57,163
50,252
net earnings
7,475
4,442
8,354
dividends and dividend equivalents declared on common stock and restricted stock units
(903
)
(769
)
(802
)
dividends on preferred stock
(183
)
(2,002
)
(641
)
balance, end of year
65,223
58,834
57,163
accumulated other comprehensive loss
balance, beginning of year
(516
)
(286
)
(362
)
other comprehensive income/(loss)
(230
)
balance, end of year
(193
)
(516
)
(286
)
stock held in treasury, at cost
balance, beginning of year
(42,281
)
(36,295
)
(32,156
)
repurchased
(4,646
)
(6,051
)
(4,185
)
reissued
balance, end of year
(46,850
)
(42,281
)
(36,295
)
total shareholders equity
$75,716
$70,379
$77,356
the accompanying notes are an integral part
of these consolidated financial statements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of cash flows
year ended december
inmillions
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$7,475
$4,442
$8,354
adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by/(used for) operating activities
depreciation and amortization
1,738
1,869
1,904
deferred income taxes
(356
)
1,339
share-based compensation
1,319
2,849
4,035
gain on sale of hedge fund administration business
(494
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
10,817
(10,532
)
(17,094
)
net receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
(2,838
)
(3,780
)
net payables to customers and counterparties
(17,661
)
13,883
(4,637
)
securities borrowed, net of securities loaned
23,031
8,940
19,638
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, net of securities purchased under agreements toresell andfederal funds
sold
53,527
(10,092
)
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(48,783
)
5,085
(9,231
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
(18,867
)
4,243
11,602
other, net
3,971
(5,346
)
(11,376
)
net cash provided by/(used for) operating activities
12,879
22,501
(5,357
)
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(961
)
(1,184
)
(1,227
)
proceeds from sales of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
business acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(593
)
(431
)
(804
)
proceeds from sales of investments
1,195
2,645
1,371
purchase of available-for-sale securities
(5,220
)
(2,752
)
(1,885
)
proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities
4,537
3,129
2,288
loans held for investment, net
(2,741
)
(856
)
(800
)
net cash provided by/(used for) investing activities
(3,734
)
(985
)
cash flows from financing activities
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
(1,952
)
(3,780
)
1,196
other secured financings (short-term), net
1,540
(1,195
)
12,689
proceeds from issuance of other secured financings (long-term)
4,687
9,809
5,500
repayment of other secured financings (long-term), including the current portion
(11,576
)
(8,878
)
(4,849
)
proceeds from issuance of unsecured long-term borrowings
27,734
29,169
20,231
repayment of unsecured long-term borrowings, including the current portion
(36,435
)
(29,187
)
(22,607
)
derivative contracts with a financing element, net
1,696
1,602
1,222
deposits, net
24,015
7,540
(849
)
preferred stock repurchased
(3,857
)
common stock repurchased
(4,640
)
(6,048
)
(4,183
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock, preferred stock and restricted stock units
(1,086
)
(2,771
)
(1,443
)
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
3,087
proceeds from issuance of common stock, including stock option exercises
excess tax benefit related to share-based compensation
cash settlement of share-based compensation
(1
)
(40
)
(1
)
net cash provided by/(used for) financing activities
7,516
(6,910
)
7,839
net increase in cash and cash equivalents
16,661
16,220
1,497
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
56,008
39,788
38,291
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$72,669
$56,008
$39,788
supplemental disclosures:  cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $9.25billion, $8.05billion and $6.74billion for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010,
respectively.  cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $1.88billion, $1.78billion and $4.48billion for the
years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively.  non-cash
activities:  during the year ended december2012, the firm assumed $77million of debt in connection with business
acquisitions. during the year ended december2011, the firm assumed $2.09billion of debt and issued $103million of common stock in connection with the acquisition of goldman sachs australia pty ltd (gs australia), formerly goldman
sachs& partners australia group holdings pty ltd. during the year ended december2010, the firm assumed $90million of debt in connection with business acquisitions. in addition, in the first quarter of 2010, the firm recorded an
increase of approximately $3billion in both assets (primarily financial instruments owned, at fair value) and liabilities (primarily unsecured short-term borrowings and other liabilities) upon adoption of accounting standards update (asu)
no.2009-17, consolidations (topic810) improvements to financial reporting by enterprises involved with variable interest entities.  the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note 1. description of business
note1.
description of business  the
goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc.), a delaware corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the firm), is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of
financial services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and high-net-worth individuals. founded in 1869, the firm is headquartered in new york and maintains offices in all major
financial centers around theworld.  the firm reports its activities in the following four businesssegments:
investment banking  the
firm provides a broad range of investment banking services to a diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, investment funds and governments. services include strategic advisory assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions,
divestitures, corporate defense activities, risk management, restructurings and spin-offs, and debt and equity underwriting of public offerings and private placements, including domestic and cross-border transactions, as well as derivative
transactions directly related to theseactivities.  institutional client services
the firm facilitates client transactions and makes markets in fixed income, equity, currency and commodity products, primarily with
institutional clients such as corporations, financial institutions, investment funds and governments. the firm also makes markets in and clears client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide and provides financing,
securities lending and other prime brokerage services to institutionalclients.
investing& lending  the firm invests in and originates loans to provide financing to clients. these investments and loans are typically longer-term in nature. the firm makes investments, directly and indirectly through funds
that the firm manages, in debt securities and loans, public and private equity securities, real estate, consolidated investment entities and power generationfacilities.  investment management  the firm provides investment management services and offers
investment products (primarily through separately managed accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a diverse set of institutional and individual clients. the firm also
offers wealth advisory services, including portfolio management and financial counseling, and brokerage and other transaction services to high-net-worth individuals andfamilies.
note 2. basis of presentation
note2.
basis of presentation
these consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the united states (u.s. gaap) and include the accounts of group inc. and all other entities in which the firm has a controlling financial interest. intercompany transactions and balances have beeneliminated.
all references to 2012,2011 and 2010 refer to the firms years ended, or the dates, as the context requires,
december31,2012, december31,2011 and december31,2010, respectively. any reference to a future year refers to a year ending on december31 of that year. certain reclassifications have been made to previously
reported amounts to conform to the currentpresentation.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 3. significant accounting policies
note3.
significant accounting policies
the firms significant accounting policies include when and how to measure the fair
value of assets and liabilities, accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, and when to consolidate an entity. see notes5 through 8 for policies on fair value measurements, note13 for policies on goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, and below and note11 for policies on consolidation accounting. all other significant accounting policies are either discussed below or included in the followingfootnotes:
financial instruments owned, at fair value and
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at
fair value
note4
fair value measurements
note5
cash instruments
note6
derivatives and hedging activities
note7
fair value option
note8
collateralized agreements and financings
note9
securitization activities
note10
variable interest entities
note11
other assets
note12
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
note13
deposits
note14
short-term borrowings
note15
long-term borrowings
note16
other liabilities and accrued expenses
note17
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
note18
shareholders equity
note19
regulation and capital adequacy
note20
earnings per common share
note21
transactions with affiliated funds
note22
interest income and interest expense
note23
income taxes
note24
business segments
note25
credit concentrations
note26
legal proceedings
note27
employee benefit plans
note 28
employee incentive plans
note 29
parent company
note 30
consolidation  the firm consolidates entities in which the firm has a controlling financial interest. the firm determines whether it has a controlling financial interest in an entity by first evaluating whether the
entity is a voting interest entity or a variable interest entity(vie).
voting interest entities.
voting interest entities are entities in which (i)the total equity investment at risk is sufficient to enable the entity to finance its activities independently and (ii)the
equity holders have the power to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly impact its economic performance, the obligation to absorb the losses of the entity and the right to receive the residual returns of the entity. the usual
condition for a controlling financial interest in a voting interest entity is ownership of a majority voting interest. if the firm has a majority voting interest in a voting interest entity, the entity isconsolidated.
variable interest
entities. a vie is an entity that lacks one or more of the characteristics of a voting interest entity. the firm has a controlling financial interest in a vie when the firm has a variable
interest or interests that provide it with (i)the power to direct the activities of the vie that most significantly impact the vies economic performance and (ii)the obligation to absorb losses of the vie or the right to receive
benefits from the vie that could potentially be significant to the vie. see note11 for further information aboutvies.
equity-method investments.
when the firm does not have a controlling financial interest in an entity but can exert significant influence over the entitys operating and financial policies, the investment is
accounted for either (i)under the equity method of accounting or (ii)at fair value by electing the fair value option available under u.s. gaap. significant influence generally exists when the firm owns 20% to 50% of the entitys
common stock or in-substance commonstock.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
in general, the firm accounts for investments acquired after the fair value option became
available, at fair value. in certain cases, the firm applies the equity method of accounting to new investments that are strategic in nature or closely related to the firms principal business activities, when the firm has a significant degree
of involvement in the cash flows or operations of the investee or when cost-benefit considerations are less significant. see note12 for further information about equity-methodinvestments.
investment funds. the
firm has formed numerous investment funds with third-party investors. these funds are typically organized as limited partnerships or limited liability companies for which the firm acts as general partner or manager. generally, the firm does not hold
a majority of the economic interests in these funds. these funds are usually voting interest entities and generally are not consolidated because third-party investors typically have rights to terminate the funds or to remove the firm as general
partner or manager. investments in these funds are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value. see notes6, 18 and 22 for further information about investments infunds.
use of estimates  preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions, the most important of which relate to fair value measurements, accounting for goodwill
and identifiable intangible assets, and the provision for losses that may arise from litigation, regulatory proceedings and tax audits. these estimates and assumptions are based on the best available information but actual results could be
materiallydifferent.
revenue recognition  financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value. financial instruments owned, at
fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value are recorded at fair value either under the fair value option or in accordance with other u.s. gaap. in addition, the firm has elected to account for certain of its
other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value by electing the fair value option. the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market
participants at the measurement date. financial assets are marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked to offer prices. fair value measurements do not include transaction costs.
fair value gains or losses are generally included in market making for positions in institutional client services and other principal transactions for positions in investing& lending. see notes5 through 8 for
further information about fair valuemeasurements.  investment banking. fees from financial advisory assignments and underwriting revenues are recognized in earnings when the services related to the underlying
transaction are completed under the terms of the assignment. expenses associated with such transactions are deferred until the related revenue is recognized or the assignment is otherwise concluded. expenses associated with financial advisory
assignments are recorded as non-compensation expenses, net of client reimbursements. underwriting revenues are presented net of relatedexpenses.   investment management. the firm earns management fees and incentive fees for investment
management services. management fees are calculated as a percentage of net asset value, invested capital or commitments, and are recognized over the period that the related service is provided. incentive fees are calculated as a percentage of a
funds or separately managed accounts return, or excess return above a specified benchmark or other performance target. incentive fees are generally based on investment performance over a 12-month period or over the life of a fund. fees
that are based on performance over a 12-month period are subject to adjustment prior to the end of the measurement period. for fees that are based on investment performance over the life of the fund, future investment underperformance may require
fees previously distributed to the firm to be returned to the fund. incentive fees are recognized only when all material contingencies have been resolved. management and incentive fee revenues are included in investment
managementrevenues.  commissions and fees. the firm earns commissions and fees from executing and clearing client transactions on stock, options and futures markets. commissions and fees are recognized on the day the trade
isexecuted.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
transfers of assets
transfers of assets are accounted for as sales when the firm has relinquished control over the assets transferred. for transfers of assets
accounted for as sales, any related gains or losses are recognized in net revenues. assets or liabilities that arise from the firms continuing involvement with transferred assets are measured at fair value. for transfers of assets that are not
accounted for as sales, the assets remain in financial instruments owned, at fair value and the transfer is accounted for as a collateralized financing, with the related interest expense recognized over the life of the transaction. see
note9 for further information about transfers of assets accounted for as collateralized financings and note10 for further information about transfers of assets accounted for assales.
receivables from customers and counterparties
receivables from customers and counterparties generally relate to collateralized transactions. such receivables are primarily comprised of
customer margin loans, certain transfers of assets accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases at fair value, collateral posted in connection with certain derivative transactions, and loans held for investment. certain of the firms
receivables from customers and counterparties are accounted for at fair value under the fair value option, with changes in fair value generally included in market making revenues. receivables from customers and counterparties not
accounted for at fair value are accounted for at amortized cost net of estimated uncollectible amounts. interest on receivables from customers and counterparties is recognized over the life of the transaction and included in interest
income. see note8 for further information about receivables from customers andcounterparties.
payables to customers and counterparties  payables to customers and counterparties primarily consist of customer credit balances related to the firms prime brokerage activities. payables to customers and counterparties are accounted for at
cost plus accrued interest, which generally approximates fair value. while these payables are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with
other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these payables been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2
as of december2012.
receivables from and payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
receivables from and payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations are accounted for at cost plus accrued interest, which
generally approximates fair value. while these receivables and payables are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and
therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these receivables and payables been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of
december2012.
insurance activities  certain of the firms insurance and reinsurance contracts are accounted for at fair value under the fair value option, with changes in fair value included in market making revenues. see
note8 for further information about the fair values of these insurance and reinsurance contracts. see note12 for further information about the firms reinsurance business classified as held for sale as of december2012.
revenues from variable annuity and life insurance and reinsurance contracts not accounted for at fair value generally consist
of fees assessed on contract holder account balances for mortality charges, policy administration fees and surrender charges. these revenues are recognized in earnings over the period that services are provided and are included in market
making revenues. changes in reserves, including interest credited to policyholder account balances, are recognized in insurancereserves.  premiums earned for underwriting property catastrophe reinsurance are recognized in earnings over the coverage period, net of premiums ceded for the cost of reinsurance, and are included in market
making revenues. expenses for liabilities related to property catastrophe reinsurance claims, including estimates of losses that have been incurred but not reported, are included in insurancereserves.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in non-u.s. currencies are translated at rates of exchange prevailing on the date of the consolidated
statements of financial condition and revenues and expenses are translated at average rates of exchange for the period. foreign currency remeasurement gains or losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are recognized in earnings. gains or
losses on translation of the financial statements of a non-u.s. operation, when the functional currency is other than the u.s. dollar, are included, net of hedges and taxes, in the consolidated statements of comprehensiveincome.
cash and cash equivalents  the firm defines cash equivalents as highly liquid overnight deposits held in the ordinary course of business. as of december2012 and december2011, cash and cash equivalents
included $6.75billion and $7.95billion, respectively, of cash and due from banks, and $65.92billion and $48.05billion, respectively, of interest-bearing deposits withbanks.
recent accounting developments
reconsideration of effective control for repurchase agreements (asc 860). in april2011, the fasb issued asu no.2011-03, transfers and servicing (topic860) reconsideration of effective control for repurchase agreements. asu
no.2011-03 changes the assessment of effective control by removing (i)the criterion that requires the transferor to have the ability to repurchase or redeem financial assets on substantially the agreed terms, even in the event of default
by the transferee, and (ii)the collateral maintenance implementation guidance related to that criterion. asu no.2011-03 was effective for periods beginning after december15,2011. the firm adopted the standard on
january1,2012. adoption of asu no.2011-03 did not affect the firms financial condition, results of operations or cashflows.  amendments to achieve common fair value measurement and disclosure requirements in u.s. gaap and ifrss (asc 820). in may2011, the fasb issued asu no.2011-04, fair value measurements and disclosures (topic820) amendments to achieve common fair value measurement and disclosure
requirements in u.s. gaap and ifrss. asu no.2011-04
clarifies the application of existing fair value measurement and disclosure requirements, changes certain principles related to measuring fair value, and requires additional disclosures about
fair value measurements. asu no.2011-04 was effective for periods beginning after december15,2011. the firm adopted the standard on january1,2012. adoption of asu no.2011-04 did not materially affect the
firms financial condition, results of operations or cashflows.
derecognition of in substance real estate (asc 360). in december2011, the fasb issued asu no.2011-10, property, plant, and equipment (topic360) derecognition of in substance real estate a scope
clarification. asu no.2011-10 clarifies that in order to deconsolidate a subsidiary (that is in substance real estate) as a result of a parent no longer controlling the subsidiary due to a default on the subsidiarys nonrecourse
debt, the parent also must satisfy the sale criteria in asc 360-20, property, plant, and equipment real estate sales. the asu was effective for fiscal years beginning on or after june15,2012. the firm will apply
the provisions of the asu to such events occurring on or after january1,2013. since the asu applies only to events occurring on or after january1,2013, adoption did not affect the firms financial condition, results of
operations or cashflows.  disclosures about offsetting assets and
liabilities (asc 210). in december2011, the fasb issued asu no.2011-11, balance sheet (topic210) disclosures about offsetting assets and
liabilities. asu no.2011-11, as amended by asu 2013-01, balance sheet (topic210): clarifying the scope of disclosures about offsetting assets and liabilities, requires disclosure of the effect or potential effect of
offsetting arrangements on the firms financial position as well as enhanced disclosure of the rights of setoff associated with the firms recognized derivative instruments, including bifurcated embedded derivatives, repurchase agreements
and reverse repurchase agreements, and securities borrowing and lending transactions. asu no.2011-11 is effective for periods beginning on or after january1,2013. since these amended principles require only additional disclosures
concerning offsetting and related arrangements, adoption will not affect the firms financial condition, results of operations or cashflows.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 4. financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
note4.
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value are accounted for at fair value either under the fair value option or in accordance with other u.s. gaap. see note8 for further information about the fair value option. the table below presents the firms
financial instruments owned, at fair value, including those pledged as collateral, and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value. the firm held $9.07billion and $4.86billion as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively, of securities accounted for as available-for-sale related to the firms reinsurance business. as of december2012, such assets
were classified as held for sale and were included in other assets. see note12 for further information about assets held for sale. as of december2011, all available-for-sale securities were included in financial
instruments owned, at fairvalue.
as of december2012
as of december2011
inmillions
financialinstrumentsowned
financialinstrumentssold, butnot yetpurchased
financialinstrumentsowned
financialinstrumentssold, butnot yetpurchased
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and othermoneymarket instruments
$6,057
$
$13,440
$
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
93,241
15,905
87,040
21,006
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
62,250
32,361
49,205
34,886
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities:
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
9,805
6,699
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
8,216
7,592
bank loans and bridge loans
22,407
1,779
19,745
2,756
corporate debt securities
20,981
5,761
22,131
6,553
state and municipal obligations
2,477
3,089
other debt obligations
2,251
4,362
equities and convertible debentures
96,454
20,406
65,113
21,326
commodities1
11,696
5,762
derivatives2
71,176
50,427
80,028
58,453
total
$407,011
$126,644
$364,206
$145,013
1.
includes commodities that have been transferred to third parties, which were accounted for as collateralized financings rather than sales, of
$4.29billion and $2.49billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
2.
net of cash collateral received or posted under credit support agreements and reported on a net-by-counterparty basis when a legal right of setoff exists
under an enforceable netting agreement.
3.
primarily relates to the fair value of unfunded lending commitments for which the fair value option was elected.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
gains and losses from market making and other principal transactions
the table below presents, by major product type, the firms market making and other principal transactions
revenues. these gains/(losses) are primarily related to the firms financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, including both derivative and non-derivative financial
instruments. these gains/(losses) exclude related interest income and interest expense. see note23 for further information about interest income and interestexpense.
the gains/(losses) in the table are not representative of the manner in which the firm manages its business activities because many of the
firms market-making, client facilitation, and investing and lending strategies utilize financial instruments across various product types. accordingly, gains or losses in one product type frequently offset gains or losses in other product
types. for example, most of the firms longer-term derivatives are sensitive to changes in interest rates and may be economically hedged with interest rate swaps. similarly, a significant portion of the firms cash instruments and
derivatives has exposure to foreign currencies and may be economically hedged with foreign currency contracts.
year ended december
inmillions
interest rates
$4,366
$1,557
$(2,042
)
credit
5,506
2,715
8,679
currencies
(1,004
)
3,219
equities
5,802
2,788
6,862
commodities
1,588
1,567
other
1,968
1,245
2,325
total
$17,213
$10,794
$20,610
1.
includes a gain of approximately $500million on the sale of the firms hedge fund administration business, which is included in market
making revenues.
note 5. fair value measurements
note5.
fair value measurements
the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. financial assets are marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked to offer prices. fair value
measurements do not include transaction costs. the firm measures certain financial assets and financial liabilities as a portfolio (i.e., based on its net exposure to market and/or credit risks).
the best evidence of fair value is a quoted price in an active market. if quoted prices in active markets are not available, fair value is
determined by reference to prices for similar instruments, quoted prices or recent transactions in less active markets, or internally developed models that primarily use market-based or independently sourced parameters as inputs including, but not
limited to, interest rates, volatilities, equity or debt prices, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, credit spreads and funding spreads (i.e., the spread, or difference, between the interest rate at which a borrower could finance a given
financial instrument relative to a benchmark interest rate).  u.s. gaap has a three-level fair value hierarchy for disclosure
of fair value measurements. the fair value hierarchy prioritizes inputs to the valuation techniques used to measure fair value, giving the highest priority to level1 inputs and the lowest priority to level3 inputs. a financial
instruments level in the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to its fair value measurement.  the fair value hierarchy is as follows:  level1. inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets to which the firm had access at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted
assets or liabilities.  level2. inputs to valuation techniques are observable, either directly or indirectly.  level3. one or more inputs to valuation techniques are significant and unobservable.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the fair values for substantially all of the firms financial assets and financial
liabilities are based on observable prices and inputs and are classified in levels1 and 2 of the fair value hierarchy. certain level2 and level3 financial assets and financial liabilities may require appropriate valuation
adjustments that a market participant would require to arrive at fair value for factors such as counterparty and the firms credit quality, funding risk, transfer restrictions, liquidity and bid/offer spreads. valuation adjustments are
generally based on marketevidence.
see notes6 and 7 for further information about fair value measurements of cash
instruments and derivatives, respectively, included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, and note8 for further information about fair value
measurements of other financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value under the fair valueoption.
financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or in accordance with other u.s. gaap
are summarizedbelow.
as of december
$ inmillions
total level1 financial assets
$190,737
$136,780
total level2 financial assets
502,293
587,416
total level3 financial assets
47,095
47,937
cash collateral and counterparty netting1
(101,612
)
(120,821
)
total financial assets at fair value
$638,513
$651,312
total assets
$938,555
$923,225
total level3 financial assets as a percentage of total assets
5.0
%
5.2
%
total level3 financial assets as a percentage of total financial assets at fair value
7.4
%
7.4
%
total level1 financial liabilities
$65,994
$75,557
total level2 financial liabilities
318,764
319,160
total level3 financial liabilities
25,679
25,498
cash collateral and counterparty netting1
(32,760
)
(31,546
)
total financial liabilities at fair value
$377,677
$388,669
total level3 financial liabilities as a percentage of total financial liabilities at fair
value
6.8
%
6.6
%
1.
represents the impact on derivatives of cash collateral netting, and counterparty netting across levels of the fair value hierarchy. netting among positions
classified in the same level is included in that level.
level3 financial assets as of december2012 decreased compared with
december2011, primarily reflecting a decrease in derivative assets, partially offset by an increase in private equity investments. the decrease in derivative assets primarily reflected a decline in credit derivative assets, principally due to
settlements, unrealized losses and sales, partially offset by net transfers from level2. level3 currency derivative assets also declined compared with december2011, principally due to unrealized losses and net transfers to
level2. the increase in private equity investments primarily reflected purchases and unrealized gains, partially offset by settlements and net transfers to level2.
see notes6, 7 and 8 for further information about level3 cash instruments,
derivatives and other financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value under the fair value option, respectively, including information about significant unrealized gains and losses, and transfers in and out of level3.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 6. cash instruments
note6.
cash instruments
cash instruments include u.s. government and federal agency
obligations, non-u.s. government and agency obligations, bank loans and bridge loans, corporate debt securities, equities and convertible debentures, and other non-derivative financial instruments owned and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased. see below for the types of cash instruments included in each level of the fair value hierarchy and the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine their fair values. see note5 for an overview of the firms
fair value measurementpolicies.  level1 cash instruments  level1 cash instruments include u.s. government obligations and most non-u.s. government obligations, actively traded listed equities, certain government agency obligations and money market
instruments. these instruments are valued using quoted prices for identical unrestricted instruments in activemarkets.
the firm defines active markets for equity instruments based on the average daily trading volume both in absolute terms and relative to
the market capitalization for the instrument. the firm defines active markets for debt instruments based on both the average daily trading volume and the number of days with tradingactivity.
level2 cash instruments  level2 cash instruments include commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits, most government agency obligations, certain non-u.s. government obligations, most corporate debt securities,
commodities, certain mortgage-backed loans and securities, certain bank loans and bridge loans, restricted or less liquid listed equities, most state and municipal obligations and certain lendingcommitments.
valuations of level2 cash instruments can be verified to quoted prices, recent trading activity for identical or similar
instruments, broker or dealer quotations or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. consideration is given to the nature of the quotations (e.g., indicative or firm) and the relationship of recent market activity to
the prices provided from alternative pricingsources.  valuation adjustments are typically made to level2 cash
instruments (i)if the cash instrument is subject to transfer restrictions and/or (ii)for other premiums and liquidity discounts that a market participant would require to arrive at fair value. valuation adjustments are generally based on
marketevidence.  level3 cash instruments  level3 cash instruments have one or more significant valuation inputs that are not observable. absent evidence to the contrary, level3 cash instruments are initially valued at transaction
price, which is considered to be the best initial estimate of fair value. subsequently, the firm uses other methodologies to determine fair value, which vary based on the type of instrument. valuation inputs and assumptions are changed when
corroborated by substantive observable evidence, including values realized on sales of financialassets.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents the valuation techniques and the nature of significant inputs
generally used to determine the
fair values of each type of level3 cash instrument.
level3 cash instruments
valuation techniques and significant inputs
loans and securities backed by commercial realestate
collateralized by a single commercial real estate property or a portfolio ofproperties
may include tranches of varying levels ofsubordination
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value analyses and include:
transaction prices in both the underlying
collateral and instruments with the same or similar underlying collateral and the basis, or price difference, to such prices
market yields implied by transactions of similar
or related assets and/or current levels and changes in market indices such as the cmbx (an index that tracks the performance of commercial mortgagebonds)
recovery rates implied by the value of the
underlying collateral, which is mainly driven by current performance of the underlying collateral, capitalization rates andmultiples
timing of expected future cash flows (duration)
loans and securities backed by residential realestate
collateralized by portfolios of residential realestate
may include tranches of varying levels ofsubordination
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value analyses, which incorporate comparisons to instruments with similar collateral and risk profiles, including relevant indices such as the
abx (an index that tracks the performance of subprime residential mortgage bonds). significant inputsinclude:
transaction prices in both the underlying
collateral and instruments with the same or similar underlying collateral
market yields implied by transactions of similar
or related assets
cumulative loss expectations, driven by default
rates, home price projections, residential property liquidation timelines and related costs
duration, driven by underlying loan prepayment speeds and residential property liquidationtimelines
bank loans and bridge loans
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value analyses, which incorporate comparisons both to prices of credit default swaps that reference the same or similar underlying instrument
or entity and to other debt instruments for the same issuer for which observable prices or broker quotations are available. significant inputsinclude:
market yields implied by transactions of similar
or related assets and/or current levels and trends of market indices such as cdx and lcdx (indices that track the performance of corporate credit and loans, respectively)
current performance and recovery assumptions
and, where the firm uses credit default swaps to value the related cash instrument, the cost of borrowing the underlying reference obligation
duration
non-u.s. government and agencyobligations
corporate debt securities
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value analyses, which incorporate comparisons both to prices of credit default swaps that reference the same or similar underlying instrument
or entity and to other debt instruments for the same issuer for which observable prices or broker quotations are available. significant inputsinclude:
market yields implied by transactions of similar
or related assets and/or current levels and trends of market indices such as cdx, lcdx and mcdx (an index that tracks the performance of municipal obligations)
current performance and recovery assumptions
and, where the firm uses credit default swaps to value the related cash instrument, the cost of borrowing the underlying reference obligation
duration
equities and convertible debentures (including private equity investments and investments in real estateentities)
recent third-party completed or pending transactions (e.g., merger proposals, tender offers, debt restructurings) are considered to be the best evidence for any change in fair value. when these are not
available, the following valuation methodologies are used, as appropriate:
industry multiples (primarily ebitda multiples)
and public comparables
transactions in similar
instruments
discounted cash flow
techniques
third-party appraisals
the firm also considers changes in the outlook for the relevant industry and financial performance of the issuer as compared to projected performance. significant inputsinclude:
market and transaction
multiples
discount rates, long-term growth rates, earnings
compound annual growth rates and capitalizationrates
for equity instruments with debt-like features: market yields implied by transactions of similar or related assets, current performance and recovery assumptions,
andduration
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
significant unobservable inputs
the table below presents the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value the
firms level3 cash instruments. these ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the valuation of each type of cash instrument. the ranges and weighted averages of these inputs are not representative of the
appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one cash instrument. for example, the highest multiple presented in
the table for private equity investments is appropriate for valuing a specific private equity investment but may not be appropriate for valuing any other private equity investment. accordingly,
the ranges of inputs presented below do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair value measurements of the firms level3 cashinstruments.
level3 cash instruments
level3assetsasof
december2012 (inmillions)
significantunobservableinputs
by valuation technique
rangeofsignificantunobservable
inputs (weighted average1) as of december2012
loans and securities backed by commercial realestate
collateralized by a single commercial real estate property or a portfolio of properties
mayinclude tranches of varying levelsofsubordination
$3,389
discounted cash
flows:
yield
4.0% to 43.3% (9.8%)
recovery rate3
37.0% to 96.2% (81.7%)
duration (years)4
0.1 to 7.0 (2.6)
basis
(13) points to 18 points (2points)
loans and securities backed by residential realestate
collateralized by portfolios of residential realestate
mayinclude tranches of varying levelsofsubordination
$1,619
discounted cash
flows:
yield
3.1% to 17.0% (9.7%)
cumulative loss rate
0.0% to 61.6% (31.6%)
duration (years)4
1.3 to 5.9 (3.7)
bank loans and bridge loans
$11,235
discounted cash
flows:
yield
0.3% to 34.5% (8.3%)
recovery rate3
16.5% to 85.0% (56.0%)
duration (years)4
0.2 to 4.4 (1.9)
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
corporate debt securities  state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
$4,651
discounted cash
flows:
yield
0.6% to 33.7% (8.6%)
recovery rate3
0.0% to 70.0% (53.4%)
duration (years)4
0.5 to 15.5 (4.0)
equities and convertible debentures (including private equity investments and investments in real estate entities)
$14,8552
comparable multiples:
multiples
0.7x to 21.0x (7.2x)
discounted cash flows:
discount rate
10.0% to 25.0% (14.3%)
long-term growth rate/compoundannualgrowthrate
0.7% to 25.0% (9.3%)
capitalization rate
3.9% to 11.4% (7.3%)
1.
weighted averages are calculated by weighting each input by the relative fair value of the respective financial instruments.
2.
the fair value of any one instrument may be determined using multiple valuation techniques.for example, market comparables and discounted cash flows may
be used together to determine fair value.therefore, the level3 balance encompasses both of these techniques.
3.
recovery rate is a measure of expected future cash flows in a default scenario, expressed as a percentage of notional or face value of the instrument, and
reflects the benefit of credit enhancement on certain instruments.
4.
duration is an estimate of the timing of future cash flows and, in certain cases, may incorporate the impact of other unobservable inputs (e.g.,
prepaymentspeeds).
increases in yield, discount rate, capitalization rate, duration or cumulative loss rate
used in the valuation of the firms level3 cash instruments would result in a lower fair value measurement, while increases in recovery rate, basis, multiples, long-term growth rate or compound annual
growth rate would result in a higher fair value measurement. due to the distinctive nature of each of the firms level3 cash instruments, the interrelationship of inputs is not
necessarily uniform within each producttype.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
fair value of cash instruments by level
the tables below present, by level within the fair value hierarchy, cash instrument assets
and liabilities, at fair value. cash instrument assets and liabilities are included in
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value,respectively.
cashinstrumentassetsatfairvalueasofdecember2012
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and othermoneymarketinstruments
$2,155
$3,902
$
$6,057
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
42,856
50,385
93,241
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
46,715
15,509
62,250
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities
1:
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
6,416
3,389
9,805
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
6,597
1,619
8,216
bank loans and bridge loans
11,172
11,235
22,407
corporate debt securities 2
18,049
2,821
20,981
state and municipal obligations
1,858
2,477
other debt obligations 2
1,066
1,185
2,251
equities and convertible debentures
72,875
8,724
14,855
96,454
commodities
11,696
11,696
total
$164,712
$135,374
$35,749
$335,835
cashinstrumentliabilitiesatfairvalueasofdecember
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
$15,475
$430
$
$15,905
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
31,011
1,350
32,361
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities:
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
bank loans and bridge loans
1,143
1,779
corporate debt securities
5,731
5,761
state and municipal obligations
equities and convertible debentures
19,416
20,406
total
$65,930
$9,645
$642
$76,217
1.
includes $489million and $446million of collateralized debt obligations (cdos) backed by real estate in level2 and level3,
respectively.
2.
includes $284million and $1.76billion of cdos and collateralized loan obligations (clos) backed by corporate obligations in level2 and
level3, respectively.
3.
includes $12.67billion of private equity investments, $1.58billion of investments in real estate entities and $600million of convertible
debentures.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
cash instrument assets at fair value as of december2011
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and othermoneymarketinstruments
$3,255
$10,185
$
$13,440
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
29,263
57,777
87,040
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
42,854
6,203
49,205
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and
securities1:
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
3,353
3,346
6,699
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
5,883
1,709
7,592
bank loans and bridge loans
8,460
11,285
19,745
corporate debt securities2
19,518
2,480
22,131
state and municipal obligations
2,490
3,089
other debt obligations2
2,911
1,451
4,362
equities and convertible debentures
39,955
11,491
13,667
65,113
commodities
5,762
5,762
total
$115,460
$134,033
$34,685
$284,178
cashinstrumentliabilitiesatfairvalueasofdecember2011
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
$20,940
$66
$
$21,006
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
34,339
34,886
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities:
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
bank loans and bridge loans
1,891
2,756
corporate debt securities4
6,522
6,553
state and municipal obligations
equities and convertible debentures
20,069
1,248
21,326
total
$75,348
$10,307
$905
$86,560
1.
includes $213million and $595million of cdos backed by real estate in level2 and level3, respectively.
2.
includes $403million and $1.19billion of cdos and clos backed by corporate obligations in level2 and level3, respectively.
3.
includes $12.07billion of private equity investments, $1.10billion of investments in real estate entities and $497million of convertible
debentures.
4.
includes $27million of cdos and clos backed by corporate obligations in level3.
transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy
transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the beginning of the
reporting period in which they occur.
during the year ended december2012, transfers into level2 from level1 of cash instruments were $1.85billion, including transfers of non-u.s. government obligations of $1.05billion, reflecting the
level of market activity in these instruments, and transfers of equity
securities of $806million, primarily reflecting the impact of transfer restrictions. transfers into level1 from level2 of cash instruments were $302million, including
transfers of non-u.s. government obligations of $180million, reflecting the level of market activity in these instruments, and transfers of equity securities of $102million, where the firm was able to obtain quoted prices for certain
actively tradedinstruments.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 rollforward
if a cash instrument asset or liability was transferred to level3
during a reporting period, its entire gain or loss for the period is included in level3.  level3 cash instruments
are frequently economically hedged with level1 and level2 cash instruments and/or level1, level2 or level3 derivatives. accordingly, gains or losses that are reported in level3 can be partially offset by gains or
losses attributable to level1 or level2 cash
instruments and/or level1, level2 or level3 derivatives. as a result, gains or losses included in the level3 rollforward below do not necessarily represent the overall
impact on the firms results of operations, liquidity or capitalresources.  the tables below present changes in fair
value for all cash instrument assets and liabilities categorized as level3 as of the end of theyear.
level3 cash instrument assets at fair value for the year ended december2012
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealizedgains/(losses)
netunrealizedgains/(losses)relating toinstrumentsstill held at
year-end
purchases
sales
settlements
transfersintolevel3
transfersout oflevel3
balance,end of
year
non-u.s. government and agencyobligations
$148
$2
$(52
)
$16
$(40
)
$(45
)
$1
$(4
)
$26
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities:
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
3,346
1,613
(910
)
(1,389
)
(78
)
3,389
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
1,709
(844
)
(380
)
(56
)
1,619
bank loans and bridge loans
11,285
4,595
(2,794
)
(2,738
)
1,178
(1,205
)
11,235
corporate debt securities
2,480
1,143
(961
)
(438
)
(197
)
2,821
state and municipal obligations
(90
)
(22
)
other debt obligations
1,451
(25
)
(355
)
(125
)
(623
)2
1,185
equities and convertible debentures
13,667
3,071
(702
)
(1,278
)
(2,152
)
14,855
total
$34,685
$1,691
$2,013
$11,996
$(6,696
)
$(6,415
)
$2,790
$(4,315
)
$35,749
level3 cash instrument liabilities at fair value for the year ended december2012
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealized(gains)/losses
netunrealized(gains)/lossesrelating toinstrumentsstill held atyear-end
purchases
sales
settlements
transfersintolevel3
transfersout oflevel3
balance,end of
year
total
$905
$(19
)
$(54
)
$(530
)
$366
$45
$63
$(134
)
$642
1.
includes both originations and secondary market purchases.
2.
primarily reflects transfers related to the firms reinsurance business of level3 other debt obligations within cash instruments at fair value to
level3 other assets, within other financial assets at fair value, as this business was classified as held for sale as of december2012. see note8 for further information.
3.
the aggregate amounts include approximately $617million, $2.13billion and $962million reported in market making, other
principal transactions and interest income, respectively.
the net unrealized gain on level3 cash instruments of $2.07billion (reflecting
$2.01billion on cash instrument assets and $54million on cash instrument liabilities) for the year ended december2012 primarily consisted of gains on private equity investments, mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities,
bank loans and bridge loans, and corporate debt securities. unrealized gains during the year ended december2012 primarily reflected the impact of an increase in global equity prices and tighter credit spreads.
transfers into level3 during the year ended december2012 primarily reflected transfers from level2 of certain bank loans
and bridge loans, and private equity investments,
principally due to a lack of market transactions in theseinstruments.  transfers out of level3 during the year ended december2012 primarily reflected transfers to level2 of certain private equity investments and bank loans and bridge loans. transfers of
private equity investments to level2 were principally due to improved transparency of market prices as a result of market transactions in these instruments. transfers of bank loans and bridge loans to level2 were principally due to
market transactions in these instruments and unobservable inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of certain loans.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 cash instrument assets at fair value for the year ended december2011
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
net realizedgains/(losses)
netunrealizedgains/(losses)relating toinstrumentsstill held at
year-end
purchases
sales
settlements
nettransfersin and/or(out) oflevel3
balance,end of
year
non-u.s. government obligations
$
$25
$(63
)
$27
$(123
)
$(8
)
$290
$148
mortgage and other asset-backed loans andsecurities:
loans and securities backed by commercialrealestate
3,976
1,099
(1,124
)
(831
)
(76
)
3,346
loans and securities backed by residentialrealestate
2,501
(81
)
(702
)
(456
)
(574
)
1,709
bank loans and bridge loans
9,905
(216
)
6,725
(2,329
)
(1,554
)
(1,786
)
11,285
corporate debt securities
2,737
(132
)
1,319
(1,137
)
(697
)
(1
)
2,480
state and municipal obligations
(1
)
(591
)
(13
)
(10
)
other debt obligations
1,274
(17
)
(388
)
(212
)
1,451
equities and convertible debentures
11,060
2,731
(1,196
)
(855
)
1,349
13,667
total
$32,207
$1,807
$(92
)2
$13,677
$(7,590
)
$(4,626
)
$(698
)
$34,685
level3 cash instrument liabilities at fair value for the year ended december2011
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealized(gains)/losses
netunrealized(gains)/lossesrelating toinstrumentsstill held at
year-end
purchases
sales
settlements
net transfersin
and/or(out) oflevel3
balance,end of
year
total
$ 446
$(27
)
$218
$(491
)
$475
$272
$12
$905
1.
includes both originations and secondary market purchases.
2.
the aggregate amounts include approximately $(202)million, $623million and $1.29billion reported in market making, other
principal transactions and interest income, respectively.
the net unrealized loss on level3 cash instruments of $310million (reflecting
losses of $92million on cash instrument assets and $218million on cash instrument liabilities) for the year ended december2011 primarily consisted of losses on bank loans and bridge loans and corporate debt securities, primarily
reflecting the impact of unfavorable credit markets and losses on relationship lending. these losses were partially offset by gains in private equity investments, where prices were generally corroborated through market transactions in similar
financial instruments during the year.  significant transfers in or out of level3 during the year ended
december2011 included:
bank loans and bridge loans: net transfer out of level3 of $1.79billion, primarily due to transfers to level2 of certain loans due
to improved transparency of market prices as a result of market transactions in these or similar loans, partially offset by transfers to level3 of other loans primarily due to reduced transparency of market prices as a result of less market
activity in these loans.
equities and convertible debentures: net transfer into level3 of $1.35billion, primarily due to transfers to level3 of certain
private equity investments due to reduced transparency of market prices as a result of less market activity in these financial instruments, partially offset by transfers to level2 of other private equity investments due to improved
transparency of market prices as a result of market transactions in these financialinstruments.
loans and securities backed by residential real estate:net transfer out of level3 of $574million, principally due to transfers to
level2 of certain loans due to improved transparency of market prices used to value these loans, as well as unobservable inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of these loans.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
investments in funds that calculate net asset value per share
cash instruments at fair value include investments in funds that are valued based on the
net asset value per share (nav) of the investment fund. the firm uses nav as its measure of fair value for fund investments when (i)the fund investment does not have a readily determinable fair value and (ii)the nav of the investment
fund is calculated in a manner consistent with the measurement principles of investment company accounting, including measurement of the underlying investments at fairvalue.
the firms investments in funds that calculate nav primarily consist of investments in firm-sponsored funds where
the firm co-invests with third-party investors. the private equity, credit and real estate funds are primarily closed-end funds in which the firms investments are not eligible for redemption. distributions will be received from these funds as
the underlying assets are liquidated and it is estimated that substantially all of the underlying assets of
existing funds will be liquidated over the next seven years. the firm continues to manage its existing funds taking into account the transition periods under the volcker rule of the u.s.
dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act (dodd-frank act), although the rules have not yet beenfinalized.
the firms investments in hedge funds are generally redeemable on a quarterly basis with 91days notice, subject to a
maximum redemption level of 25% of the firms initial investments at any quarter-end. the firm currently plans to comply with the volcker rule by redeeming certain of its interests in hedge funds. the firm redeemed approximately
$1.06billion of these interests in hedge funds during the year ended december2012.  the table below presents the
fair value of the firms investments in, and unfunded commitments to, funds that calculatenav.
as of december2012
as of december2011
inmillions
fairvalueofinvestments
unfundedcommitments
fair value ofinvestments
unfundedcommitments
private equity funds1
$7,680
$2,778
$8,074
$3,514
credit funds2
3,927
2,843
3,596
3,568
hedge funds3
2,167
3,165
real estate
funds4
2,006
1,531
1,613
total
$15,780
$6,491
$16,366
$8,695
1.
these funds primarily invest in a broad range of industries worldwide in a variety of situations, including leveraged buyouts, recapitalizations and growth
investments.
2.
these funds generally invest in loans and other fixed income instruments and are focused on providing private high-yield capital for mid- to large-sized
leveraged and management buyout transactions, recapitalizations, financings, refinancings, acquisitions and restructurings for private equity firms, private family companies and corporate issuers.
3.
these funds are primarily multi-disciplinary hedge funds that employ a fundamental bottom-up investment approach across various asset classes and strategies
including long/short equity, credit, convertibles, risk arbitrage, special situations and capital structure arbitrage.
4.
these funds invest globally, primarily in real estate companies, loan portfolios, debt recapitalizations and direct property.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 7. derivatives and hedging activities
note7.
derivatives and hedging activities  derivative activities
derivatives are instruments that derive their value from underlying asset prices, indices,
reference rates and other inputs, or a combination of these factors. derivatives may be privately negotiated contracts, which are usually referred to as over-the-counter (otc) derivatives, or they may be listed and traded on an exchange
(exchange-traded).  market-making. as a market maker, the firm enters into derivative transactions to provide liquidity and to facilitate the transfer and hedging of risk. in this capacity, the firm typically acts as principal and is
consequently required to commit capital to provide execution. as a market maker, it is essential to maintain an inventory of financial instruments sufficient to meet expected client and marketdemands.
risk management. the firm
also enters into derivatives to actively manage risk exposures that arise from market-making and investing and lending activities in derivative and cash instruments. the firms holdings and exposures are hedged, in many cases, on either a
portfolio or risk-specific basis, as opposed to an instrument-by-instrument basis. the offsetting impact of this economic hedging is reflected in the same business segment as the related revenues. in addition, the firm may enter into derivatives
designated as hedges under u.s. gaap. these derivatives are used to manage foreign currency exposure on the net investment in certain non-u.s. operations and to manage interest rate exposure in certain fixed-rate unsecured long-term and short-term
borrowings, anddeposits.
the firm enters into various types of derivatives,including:
futures and forwards. contracts
that commit counterparties to purchase or sell financial instruments, commodities or currencies in thefuture.
swaps. contracts that require
counterparties to exchange cash flows such as currency or interest payment streams. the amounts exchanged are based on the specific terms of the contract with reference to specified rates, financial instruments, commodities, currencies
orindices.
options. contracts in which the
option purchaser has the right, but not the obligation, to purchase from or sell to the option writer financial instruments, commodities or currencies within a defined time period for a specifiedprice.
derivatives are accounted for at fair value, net of cash collateral received or posted under credit support agreements. derivatives are
reported on a net-by-counterparty basis (i.e., the net payable or receivable for derivative assets and liabilities for a given counterparty) when a legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable netting agreement. derivative assets and
liabilities are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value,respectively.
substantially all gains and losses on derivatives not designated as hedges under asc 815 are included in market making and
other principaltransactions.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents the fair value of derivatives on a net-by-counterparty basis.
asofdecember2012
asofdecember2011
inmillions
derivativeassets
derivativeliabilities
derivativeassets
derivativeliabilities
exchange-traded
$3,772
$2,937
$5,880
$3,172
over-the-counter
67,404
47,490
74,148
55,281
total
$71,176
$50,427
$80,028
$58,453
the table below presents the fair value and the notional amount of derivative contracts by
major product type on a gross basis. gross fair values in the table below exclude the effects of both netting of receivable balances with payable balances under enforceable netting agreements, and netting of cash collateral received or posted under
credit support
agreements, and therefore are not representative of the firms exposure. notional amounts, which represent the sum of gross long and short derivative contracts, provide an indication of the
volume of the firms derivative activity; however, they do not represent anticipatedlosses.
as of december2012
as of december2011
inmillions
derivative
assets
derivative
liabilities
notional
amount
derivative
assets
derivative
liabilities
notional
amount
derivatives not accounted for as hedges
interest rates
$584,584
$545,605
$34,891,763
$624,189
$582,608
$38,111,097
credit
85,816
74,927
3,615,757
150,816
130,659
4,032,330
currencies
72,128
60,808
3,833,114
88,654
71,736
3,919,525
commodities
23,320
24,350
774,115
35,966
38,050
799,925
equities
49,483
43,681
1,202,181
64,135
51,928
1,433,087
subtotal
815,331
749,371
44,316,930
963,760
874,981
48,295,964
derivatives accounted for as hedges
interest rates
23,772
128,302
21,981
109,860
currencies
8,452
8,307
subtotal
23,793
136,754
22,105
118,167
gross fair value/notional amount of derivatives
$839,124
$749,523
$44,453,684
$985,865
$875,015
$48,414,131
counterparty netting1
(668,460
)
(668,460
)
(787,733
)
(787,733
)
cash collateral
netting2
(99,488
)
(30,636
)
(118,104
)
(28,829
)
fair value included in financial instruments owned
$71,176
$80,028
fair value included in financial instruments sold,but not yet purchased
$50,427
$58,453
1.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty under enforceable netting agreements.
2.
represents the netting of cash collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis under credit support agreements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
valuation techniques for derivatives
the firms level2 and level3 derivatives are valued using derivative pricing models (e.g., models that incorporate option
pricing methodologies, monte carlo simulations and discounted cash flows). price transparency of derivatives can generally be characterized by producttype.  interest rate. in general, the prices and other inputs used to value interest rate
derivatives are transparent, even for long-dated contracts. interest rate swaps and options denominated in the currencies of leading industrialized nations are characterized by high trading volumes and tight bid/offer spreads. interest rate
derivatives that reference indices, such as an inflation index, or the shape of the yield curve (e.g., 10-year swap rate vs. 2-year swap rate) are more complex, but the prices and other inputs are generallyobservable.
credit. price
transparency for credit default swaps, including both single names and baskets of credits, varies by market and underlying reference entity or obligation. credit default swaps that reference indices, large corporates and major sovereigns generally
exhibit the most price transparency. for credit default swaps with other underliers, price transparency varies based on credit rating, the cost of borrowing the underlying reference obligations, and the availability of the underlying reference
obligations for delivery upon the default of the issuer. credit default swaps that reference loans, asset-backed securities and emerging market debt instruments tend to have less price transparency than those that reference corporate bonds. in
addition, more complex credit derivatives, such as those sensitive to the correlation between two or more underlying reference obligations, generally have less pricetransparency.
currency. prices for
currency derivatives based on the exchange rates of leading industrialized nations, including those with longer tenors, are generally transparent. the primary difference between the price transparency of developed and emerging market currency
derivatives is that emerging markets tend to be observable for contracts with shortertenors.
commodity. commodity derivatives include transactions referenced to energy (e.g., oil and natural gas), metals (e.g., precious and base) and soft commodities (e.g., agricultural). price transparency varies based on
the underlying commodity, delivery location, tenor and product quality (e.g., diesel fuel compared to unleaded gasoline). in general, price transparency for commodity derivatives is greater for contracts with shorter tenors and contracts that are
more closely aligned with major and/or benchmark commodityindices.
equity. price
transparency for equity derivatives varies by market and underlier. options on indices and the common stock of corporates included in major equity indices exhibit the most price transparency. equity derivatives generally have observable market
prices, except for contracts with long tenors or reference prices that differ significantly from current market prices. more complex equity derivatives, such as those sensitive to the correlation between two or more individual stocks, generally have
less pricetransparency.  liquidity is essential to observability of all product types. if transaction volumes decline,
previously transparent prices and other inputs may become unobservable. conversely, even highly structured products may at times have trading volumes large enough to provide observability of prices and other inputs. see note5 for an overview
of the firms fair value measurementpolicies.  level1 derivatives
level1 derivatives include short-term contracts for future delivery of securities when the underlying security is a level1
instrument, and exchange-traded derivatives if they are actively traded and are valued at their quoted marketprice.  level2 derivatives
level2 derivatives include otc derivatives for which all significant valuation inputs are corroborated by market
evidence and exchange-traded derivatives that are not actively traded and/or that are valued using models that calibrate to market-clearing levels of otcderivatives.  the selection of a particular model to value a derivative depends on the contractual terms of and specific risks inherent in the instrument, as well as the availability of pricing information in the
market. for derivatives that trade in liquid markets, model selection does not involve significant management judgment because outputs of models can be calibrated to market-clearinglevels.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
valuation models require a variety of inputs, including contractual terms, market prices,
yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates, loss severity rates and correlations of such inputs. inputs to the valuations of level2 derivatives can be verified to market transactions, broker or dealer quotations or
other alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. consideration is given to the nature of the quotations (e.g., indicative or firm) and the relationship of recent market activity to the prices provided from alternative
pricingsources.  level3 derivatives  level3 derivatives are valued using models which utilize observable level1 and/or level2 inputs, as well as unobservable level3inputs.
for the majority of the firms interest rate and currency derivatives classified within level3, significant unobservable inputs include
correlations of certain currencies and interest rates (e.g., the correlation between euro inflation and euro interest rates) and specific interest ratevolatilities.
for level3 credit derivatives, significant level3 inputs include illiquid credit spreads, which are unique to specific reference
obligations and reference entities, recovery rates and certain correlations required to value credit and mortgage derivatives (e.g., the likelihood of default of the underlying reference obligation relative to oneanother).
for level3 equity derivatives, significant level3 inputs generally include equity volatility inputs for options that are very long-dated
and/or have strike prices that differ significantly from current market prices. in addition, the valuation of certain structured trades requires the use of level3 inputs for the correlation of the price performance of two or more individual
stocks or the correlation of the price performance for a basket of stocks to another asset class such ascommodities.
for level3 commodity derivatives, significant level3 inputs include volatilities for options with strike prices that differ
significantly from current market prices and prices or spreads for certain products for which the product quality or physical location of the commodity is not aligned with benchmarkindices.
subsequent to the initial valuation of a level3 derivative, the firm updates the
level1 and level2 inputs to reflect observable market changes and any resulting gains and losses are recorded in level3. level3 inputs are changed when corroborated by evidence such as similar market transactions, third-party
pricing services and/or broker or dealer quotations or other empirical market data. in circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model value by reference to market transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model could produce a
materially different estimate of fair value. see below for further information about unobservable inputs used in the valuation of level3derivatives.  valuation adjustments  valuation adjustments are integral to determining the fair
value of derivatives and are used to adjust the mid-market valuations, produced by derivative pricing models, to the appropriate exit price valuation. these adjustments incorporate bid/offer spreads, the cost of liquidity, credit valuation
adjustments (cva) and funding valuation adjustments, which account for the credit and funding risk inherent in derivative portfolios. market-based inputs are generally used when calibrating valuation adjustments to market-clearinglevels.
in addition, for derivatives that include significant unobservable inputs, the firm makes model or exit price adjustments to
account for the valuation uncertainty present in thetransaction.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
significant unobservable inputs
the table below presents the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value the
firms level3 derivatives. these ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the valuation of each type of derivative. the ranges, averages and medians of these inputs are not representative of the appropriate
inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one derivative.
for example, the highest correlation presented in the table for interest rate derivatives is appropriate for valuing a specific interest rate derivative but may not be appropriate for valuing any
other interest rate derivative. accordingly, the ranges of inputs presented below do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair value measurements of the firms level3 derivatives.
level 3
derivative product type
netlevel3assets/(liabilities) as of
december2012 (inmillions)
significant unobservable inputs
of derivative pricing models
range of
significant unobservable inputs (average /
median)1 as of december2012
interest rates
$(355)
correlation2
volatility
22% to 97% (67% / 68%)  37
basis points per annum (bpa) to 59bpa (48 bpa / 47 bpa)
credit
$6,228
correlation2
credit spreads
recovery rates
5% to 95% (50% / 50%)  9 bps
to 2,341 bps (225 bps / 140 bps)3
15% to 85% (54% / 53%)
currencies
$35
correlation2
65% to 87% (76% / 79%)
commodities
$(304)
volatility
spread permillion british thermal units (mmbtu)
ofnaturalgas  price per megawatt hour of power
price per barrel of oil
13% to 53% (30% / 29%)
$(0.61) to $6.07 ($0.02 / $0.00)
$17.30 to $57.39 ($33.17 / $32.80)
$86.64 to $98.43 ($92.76 / $93.62)
equities
$(1,248)
correlation2
volatility
48% to 98% (68% / 67%)  15%
to 73% (31% / 30%)
1.
averages represent the arithmetic average of the inputs and are not weighted by the relative fair value or notional of the respective financial instruments.
an average greater than the median indicates that the majority of inputs are below the average.
2.
the range of unobservable inputs for correlation across derivative product types (i.e., cross-asset correlation) was (51)% to 66% (average: 30% / median: 35%)
as of december2012.
3.
the difference between the average and the median for the credit spreads input indicates that the majority of the inputs fall in the lower end of the range.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
range of significant unobservable inputs
the following provides further information about the ranges of unobservable inputs used to value the firms level3
derivativeinstruments.
correlation:ranges for correlation cover a variety of underliers both within one market (e.g., equity index and equity single stock names) and
across markets (e.g., correlation of a commodity price and a foreign exchange rate), as well as across regions.generally, cross-asset correlation inputs are used to value more complex instruments and are lower than correlation inputs on assets
within the same derivative producttype.
volatility:ranges for volatility cover numerous underliers across a variety of markets, maturities and strike prices. for example, volatility
of equity indices is generally lower than volatility of singlestocks.
credit spreads and recovery rates: the ranges for credit spreads and recovery rates cover a variety of underliers (index and single names), regions,
sectors, maturities and credit qualities (high-yield and investment-grade).the broad range of this population gives rise to the width of the ranges of unobservableinputs.
commodity prices and spreads: the ranges for commodity prices and spreads cover variability in products, maturities and locations, as well as peak
and off-peakprices.
sensitivity of fair value measurement to changes in significant unobservable inputs
the following provides a description of the directional sensitivity of the firms level3 fair value measurements to changes in
significant unobservable inputs, in isolation. due to the distinctive nature of each of the firms level3 derivatives, the interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform within each producttype.
correlation: in general, for contracts where the holder benefits from the convergence of the underlying asset or index prices (e.g., interest rates,
credit spreads, foreign exchange rates, inflation rates and equity prices), an increase in correlation results in a higher fair valuemeasurement.
volatility: in general, for purchased options an increase in volatility results in a higher fair valuemeasurement.
credit spreads and recovery rates: in general, the fair value of purchased credit protection increases as credit spreads increase or recovery rates
decrease. credit spreads and recovery rates are strongly related to distinctive risk factors of the underlying reference obligations, which include reference entity-specific factors such as leverage, volatility and industry, market-based risk
factors, such as borrowing costs or liquidity of the underlying reference obligation, and macro-economicconditions.
commodity prices and spreads: in general, for contracts where the holder is receiving a commodity, an increase in the spread (price difference from
a benchmark index due to differences in quality or delivery location) or price results in a higher fair valuemeasurement.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
fair value of derivatives by level
the tables below present the fair value of derivatives on a gross basis by level and major
product type. gross fair values in the tables below exclude the effects of both netting of receivable balances with payable balances under
enforceable netting agreements, and netting of cash received or posted under credit support agreements both in and across levels of the fair value hierarchy, and therefore are not representative
of the firms exposure.
derivative assets at fair value as of december2012
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
cross-level
netting
total
interest rates
$13
$608,151
$192
$
$608,356
credit
74,907
10,909
85,816
currencies
71,157
72,149
commodities
22,697
23,320
equities
48,698
49,483
gross fair value of derivative assets
825,610
13,458
839,124
counterparty
netting1
(662,798
)
(3,538
)
(2,124
)3
(668,460
)
subtotal
$56
$162,812
$9,920
$(2,124
)
$170,664
cash collateral
netting2
(99,488
)
fair value included in financial instruments owned
$71,176
derivative liabilities at fair value as of december2012
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
cross-level
netting
total
interest rates
$14
$545,110
$547
$
$545,671
credit
70,246
4,681
74,927
currencies
59,937
60,894
commodities
23,423
24,350
equities
41,641
1,990
43,681
gross fair value of derivative liabilities
740,357
9,102
749,523
counterparty
netting1
(662,798
)
(3,538
)
(2,124
)3
(668,460
)
subtotal
$64
$77,559
$5,564
$(2,124
)
$81,063
cash collateral
netting2
(30,636
)
fair value included in financial instruments sold,but not yet purchased
$50,427
1.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty under enforceable netting agreements.
2.
represents the netting of cash collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis under credit support agreements.
3.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty across levels of the fair value hierarchy under enforceable
netting agreements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
derivative assets at fair value as of december2011
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
cross-level
netting
total
interest rates
$33
$645,923
$214
$
$646,170
credit
137,110
13,706
150,816
currencies
86,752
2,026
88,778
commodities
35,062
35,966
equities
62,684
1,427
64,135
gross fair value of derivative assets
967,531
18,277
985,865
counterparty
netting1
(778,639
)
(6,377
)
(2,717
)3
(787,733
)
subtotal
$57
$188,892
$11,900
$(2,717
)
$198,132
cash collateral
netting2
(118,104
)
fair value included in financial instruments owned
$80,028
derivative liabilities at fair value as of december2011
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
cross-level
netting
total
interest rates
$24
$582,012
$585
$
$582,621
credit
123,253
7,406
130,659
currencies
70,573
1,184
71,757
commodities
36,541
1,509
38,050
equities
49,884
1,859
51,928
gross fair value of derivative liabilities
862,263
12,543
875,015
counterparty
netting1
(778,639
)
(6,377
)
(2,717
)3
(787,733
)
subtotal
$209
$83,624
$6,166
$(2,717
)
$87,282
cash collateral
netting2
(28,829
)
fair value included in financial instruments sold,but not yet purchased
$58,453
1.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty under enforceable netting agreements.
2.
represents the netting of cash collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis under credit support agreements.
3.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty across levels of the fair value hierarchy under enforceable
netting agreements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 rollforward
if a derivative was transferred to level3 during a reporting period, its entire gain
or loss for the period is included in level3. transfers between levels are reported at the beginning of the reporting period in which theyoccur.  gains and losses on level3 derivatives should be considered in the context of thefollowing:
a derivative with level1 and/or level2 inputs is classified in level3 in its entirety if it has at least one significant
level3input.
if there is one significant level3 input, the entire gain or loss from adjusting only observable inputs (i.e., level1 and level2
inputs) is classified as level3.
gains or losses that have been reported in level3 resulting from changes in level1 or level2 inputs are frequently offset by gains
or losses attributable to level1 or level2 derivatives and/or level1, level2 and level3 cash instruments. as a result, gains/(losses) included in the level3 rollforward below do not necessarily represent the
overall impact on the firms results of operations, liquidity or capitalresources.
the tables below present changes in fair value for all derivatives categorized as level3 as of the end of
theyear.
level3 derivative assets and liabilities at fair value for the year ended december2012
inmillions
asset/
(liability)balance,beginningof year
net
realizedgains/(losses)
netunrealizedgains/(losses)relating toinstrumentsstill held atyear-end
purchases
sales
settlements
transfersinto
level3
transfers out
of level3
asset/
(liability) balance,end
of year
interest rates  net
$(371
)
$(60
)
$19
$7
$(28
)
$71
$68
$(61
)
$(355
)
credit  net
6,300
(701
)
(270
)
(1,597
)
2,503
(391
)
6,228
currencies  net
(17
)
(502
)
(5
)
(144
)
(221
)
commodities  net
(605
)
(11
)
(410
)
(41
)3
(304
)
equities  net
(432
)
(80
)
(276
)
(724
)
(50
)3
(76
)
(1,248
)
total derivatives  net
$5,734
$78
$(1,232
)1, 2
$348
$(1,437
)
$(1,096
)
$2,545
$(584
)
$4,356
1.
the aggregate amounts include approximately $(903)million and $(251)million reported in market making and other principal
transactions, respectively.
2.
principally resulted from changes in level2 inputs.
3.
reflects a net transfer to level3 of derivative liabilities.
4.
reflects a net transfer to level2 of derivative liabilities.
the net unrealized loss on level3 derivatives of $1.23billion for the year
ended december2012 was primarily attributable to the impact of tighter credit spreads, changes in foreign exchange rates and increases in global equity prices on certain derivatives, partially offset by the impact of a decline in volatility on
certain commodityderivatives.  transfers into level3 derivatives during the year ended december2012 primarily
reflected transfers from level2 of certain credit derivative assets, principally due to unobservable inputs becoming significant to the valuation of these derivatives, and transfers from level2 of other credit derivative assets,
principally due to reduced transparency of correlation inputs used to value thesederivatives.
transfers out of level3 derivatives during the year ended december2012
primarily reflected transfers to level2 of certain credit derivative assets, principally due to unobservable inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of these derivatives, transfers to level2 of certain currency derivative
assets, principally due to unobservable correlation inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of these derivatives, and transfers to level2 of certain commodity derivative liabilities, principally due to increased transparency of
volatility inputs used to value thesederivatives.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 derivative assets and liabilities at fair value for the year ended december2011
inmillions
asset/
(liability)balance,beginningof year
net
realizedgains/(losses)
netunrealizedgains/(losses)relating toinstrumentsstill held at
year-end
purchases
sales
settlements
nettransfersin and/or(out) oflevel3
asset/
(liability) balance,end
of year
interest rates  net
$194
$(38
)
$(305
)
$23
$(29
)
$84
$(300
)
$(371
)
credit  net
7,040
2,525
(1,310
)
(1,713
)
(636
)
6,300
currencies  net
1,098
(26
)
(351
)
(25
)
(54
)
commodities  net
(35
)
(835
)
(489
)
(605
)
equities  net
(990
)
(683
)
(432
)
total derivatives  net
$7,562
$131
$2,279
1, 2
$907
$(2,882
)
$(1,374
)
$(889
)
$5,734
1.
the aggregate amounts include approximately $2.35billion and $62million reported in market making and other principal
transactions, respectively.
2.
principally resulted from changes in level2 inputs.
the net unrealized gain on level3 derivatives of $2.28billion for the year
ended december2011 was primarily attributable to the impact of changes in interest rates and exchange rates underlying certain credit derivatives. unrealized gains on level3 derivatives were substantially offset by unrealized losses on
derivatives classified within level2 which economically hedge derivatives classified within level3.  significant
transfers in or out of level3 derivatives during the year ended december2011included:
credit  net: net transfer out of level3 of $636million, primarily reflecting transfers to level2 of certain credit
derivative assets principally due to unobservable inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of these derivatives, and transfers into level3 of certain credit derivative liabilities due to reduced transparency of the correlation
inputs used to value these derivatives. the impact of these transfers was partially offset by transfers into level3 of certain credit and mortgage derivative assets, primarily due to reduced transparency of the correlation inputs used to value
thesederivatives.
commodities  net: net transfer out of level3 of $489million, primarily reflecting transfers to level2, due to increased
transparency of market prices used to value certain commodity derivative assets as a result of market activity in similar instruments, and unobservable inputs becoming less significant to the valuation of other commodity derivative assets. in
addition, certain commodity derivative liabilities were transferred into level3 due to reduced transparency of volatility inputs used to value thesederivatives.
impact of credit spreads on derivatives
on an ongoing basis, the firm realizes gains or losses relating to changes in credit risk through the unwind of derivative contracts and
changes in creditmitigants.  the net gain/(loss), including hedges, attributable to the impact of changes in credit
exposure and credit spreads (counterparty and the firms) on derivatives was $(735)million, $573million and $68million for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively.
bifurcated embedded derivatives  the table below presents the fair value and the notional amount of derivatives that have been bifurcated from their related borrowings. these derivatives, which are recorded at fair value, primarily
consist of interest rate, equity and commodity products and are included in unsecured short-term borrowings and unsecured long-term borrowings. see note8 for furtherinformation.
as of december
inmillions
fair value of assets
$320
$422
fair value of liabilities
net asset/(liability)
$(78
)
$118
notional amount
$10,567
$9,530
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
otc derivatives
the tables below present the fair values of otc derivative assets and liabilities by tenor
and by product type. tenor is based on expected duration for mortgage-related credit
derivatives and generally on remaining contractual maturity for other derivatives.
inmillions
otc derivatives as of december2012
assets product type
0 -12
months
1 - 5
years
5yearsor greater
total
interest rates
$10,318
$28,445
$80,449
$119,212
credit
2,190
12,244
7,970
22,404
currencies
11,100
8,379
11,044
30,523
commodities
3,840
3,862
8,006
equities
3,757
7,730
6,957
18,444
netting across product types1
(2,811
)
(5,831
)
(5,082
)
(13,724
)
subtotal
$28,394
$54,829
$101,642
184,865
cross maturity netting2
(17,973
)
cash collateral
netting3
(99,488
)
total
$67,404
liabilities product type
0 - 12
months
1 - 5
years
5yearsor greater
total
interest rates
$6,266
$17,860
$32,422
$56,548
credit
7,537
3,168
11,514
currencies
8,586
4,849
5,782
19,217
commodities
3,970
3,119
2,267
9,356
equities
3,775
5,476
3,937
13,188
netting across product types1
(2,811
)
(5,831
)
(5,082
)
(13,724
)
subtotal
$20,595
$33,010
$42,494
96,099
cross maturity netting2
(17,973
)
cash collateral
netting3
(30,636
)
total
$47,490
1.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty across product types within a tenor category under enforceable
netting agreements. receivable and payable balances with the same counterparty in the same product type and tenor category are netted within such product type and tenor category.
2.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty across tenor categories under enforceable netting agreements.
3.
represents the netting of cash collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis under credit support agreements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
inmillions
otc derivatives as of december2011
assets product type
0 - 12
months
1 - 5
years
5yearsor
greater
total
interest rates
$10,931
$32,194
$82,480
$125,605
credit
3,054
15,468
13,687
32,209
currencies
11,253
11,592
16,023
38,868
commodities
5,286
5,931
11,364
equities
6,663
7,768
7,468
21,899
netting across product types1
(3,071
)
(6,033
)
(6,027
)
(15,131
)
subtotal
$34,116
$66,920
$113,778
214,814
cross maturity netting2
(22,562
)
cash collateral
netting3
(118,104
)
total
$74,148
liabilities product type
0 - 12
months
1 - 5
years
5yearsor
greater
total
interest rates
$5,787
$18,607
$37,739
$62,133
credit
1,200
6,957
3,894
12,051
currencies
9,826
5,514
6,502
21,842
commodities
6,322
5,174
2,727
14,223
equities
3,290
4,018
4,246
11,554
netting across product types1
(3,071
)
(6,033
)
(6,027
)
(15,131
)
subtotal
$23,354
$34,237
$49,081
106,672
cross maturity netting2
(22,562
)
cash collateral
netting3
(28,829
)
total
$55,281
1.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty across product types within a tenor category under enforceable
netting agreements. receivable and payable balances with the same counterparty in the same product type and tenor category are netted within such product type and tenor category.
2.
represents the netting of receivable balances with payable balances for the same counterparty across tenor categories under enforceable netting agreements.
3.
represents the netting of cash collateral received and posted on a counterparty basis under credit support agreements.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
derivatives with credit-related contingent features
certain of the firms derivatives have been transacted under bilateral agreements with counterparties who may require the firm to
post collateral or terminate the transactions based on changes in the firms credit ratings. the firm assesses the impact of these bilateral agreements by determining the collateral or termination payments that would occur assuming a downgrade
by all rating agencies. a downgrade by any one rating agency, depending on the agencys relative ratings of the firm at the time of the downgrade, may have an impact which is comparable to the impact of a downgrade by all rating agencies. the
table below presents the aggregate fair value of net derivative liabilities under such agreements (excluding application of collateral posted to reduce these liabilities), the related aggregate fair value of the assets posted as collateral, and the
additional collateral or termination payments that could have been called at the reporting date by counterparties in the event of a one-notch and two-notch downgrade in the firms credit ratings.
as of december
inmillions
net derivative liabilities under bilateral agreements
$27,885
$35,066
collateral posted
24,296
29,002
additional collateral or termination paymentsfor a one-notch downgrade
1,534
1,303
additional collateral or termination payments for a two-notch downgrade
2,500
2,183
credit derivatives
the firm enters into a broad array of credit derivatives in locations around the world to facilitate client transactions and to manage the
credit risk associated with market-making and investing and lending activities. credit derivatives are actively managed based on the firms net riskposition.  credit derivatives are individually negotiated contracts and can have various settlement and payment conventions. credit events include failure to pay, bankruptcy, acceleration of indebtedness,
restructuring, repudiation and dissolution of the reference entity.  credit
default swaps. single-name credit default swaps protect the buyer against the loss of principal on one or more bonds, loans or mortgages (reference obligations) in the event the issuer
(reference entity) of the reference obligations suffers a credit event. the buyer of protection pays an initial or periodic premium to the seller and receives
protection for the period of the contract. if there is no credit event, as defined in the contract, the seller of protection makes no payments to the buyer of protection. however, if a credit
event occurs, the seller of protection is required to make a payment to the buyer of protection, which is calculated in accordance with the terms of the contract.  credit indices, baskets and tranches. credit derivatives may reference a basket of
single-name credit default swaps or a broad-based index. if a credit event occurs in one of the underlying reference obligations, the protection seller pays the protection buyer. the payment is typically a pro-rata portion of the transactions
total notional amount based on the underlying defaulted reference obligation. in certain transactions, the credit risk of a basket or index is separated into various portions (tranches), each having different levels of subordination. the most junior
tranches cover initial defaults and once losses exceed the notional amount of these junior tranches, any excess loss is covered by the next most senior tranche in the capital structure.
total return swaps. a
total return swap transfers the risks relating to economic performance of a reference obligation from the protection buyer to the protection seller. typically, the protection buyer receives from the protection seller a floating rate of interest and
protection against any reduction in fair value of the reference obligation, and in return the protection seller receives the cash flows associated with the reference obligation, plus any increase in the fair value of the reference obligation.
credit
options. in a credit option, the option writer assumes the obligation to purchase or sell a reference obligation at a specified price or credit spread. the option purchaser buys the
right, but does not assume the obligation, to sell the reference obligation to, or purchase it from, the option writer. the payments on credit options depend either on a particular credit spread or the price of the reference obligation.
the firm economically hedges its exposure to written credit derivatives primarily by entering into offsetting purchased credit derivatives
with identical underlyings. substantially all of the firms purchased credit derivative transactions are with financial institutions and are subject to stringent collateral thresholds. in addition, upon the occurrence of a specified trigger
event, the firm may take possession of the reference obligations underlying a particular written credit derivative, and consequently may, upon liquidation of the reference obligations, recover amounts on the underlying reference obligations in the
event of default.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
as of december2012, written and purchased credit derivatives had total gross notional
amounts of $1.76trillion and $1.86trillion, respectively, for total net notional purchased protection of $98.33billion. as of december2011, written and purchased credit derivatives had total gross notional amounts of
$1.96trillion and $2.08trillion, respectively, for total net notional purchased protection of $116.93billion.
the table below presents certain information about credit derivatives. in the table below:
fair values exclude the effects of both netting of receivable balances with payable balances under enforceable netting agreements, and netting of
cash received or posted under credit support agreements, and therefore are not representative of the firms creditexposure;
tenor is based on expected duration for mortgage-related credit derivatives and on remaining contractual maturity for other credit derivatives; and
the credit spread on the underlying, together with the tenor of the contract, are indicators of payment/performance risk. the firm is less likely to
pay or otherwise be required to perform where the credit spread and the tenor are lower.
maximum payout/notional amount
of written credit derivatives by tenor
maximum payout/notionalamount of purchasedcredit derivatives
fair value of
written credit derivatives
$ inmillions
0 - 12months
1 - 5
years
5years
or greater
total
offsettingpurchasedcreditderivatives
otherpurchasedcreditderivatives
asset
liability
net asset/
(liability)
as of december2012
credit spread on underlying
(basis points)
0 - 250
$360,289
$989,941
$103,481
$1,453,711
$1,343,561
$201,459
$28,817
$8,249
$20,568
251 - 500
13,876
126,659
35,086
175,621
157,371
19,063
4,284
7,848
(3,564
)
501 - 1,000
9,209
52,012
5,619
66,840
60,456
8,799
4,499
(3,730
)
greater than 1,000
11,453
49,721
3,622
64,796
57,774
10,812
21,970
(21,402
)
total
$394,827
$1,218,333
$147,808
$1,760,968
$1,619,162
$240,133
$34,438
$42,566
$(8,128
)
as of december2011
credit spread on underlying
(basis points)
0 - 250
$282,851
$794,193
$141,688
$1,218,732
$1,122,296
$180,316
$17,572
$16,907
$665
251 - 500
42,682
269,687
69,864
382,233
345,942
47,739
4,517
20,810
(16,293
)
501 - 1,000
29,377
140,389
21,819
191,585
181,003
23,176
15,398
(15,260
)
greater than 1,000
30,244
114,103
22,995
167,342
147,614
28,734
57,201
(56,689
)
total
$385,154
$1,318,372
$256,366
$1,959,892
$1,796,855
$279,965
$22,739
$110,316
$(87,577
)
1.
offsetting purchased credit derivatives represent the notional amount of purchased credit derivatives to the extent they economically hedge written credit
derivatives with identical underlyings.
2.
this purchased protection represents the notional amount of purchased credit derivatives in excess of the notional amount included in offsetting
purchased creditderivatives.
hedge accounting
the firm applies hedge accounting for (i)certain interest rate swaps used to manage
the interest rate exposure of certain fixed-rate unsecured long-term and short-term borrowings and certain fixed-rate certificates of deposit and (ii)certain foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency-denominated debt used to
manage foreign currency exposures on the firms net investment in certain non-u.s. operations.
to qualify for hedge accounting, the derivative hedge must be highly effective at reducing
the risk from the exposure being hedged. additionally, the firm must formally document the hedging relationship at inception and test the hedging relationship at least on a quarterly basis to ensure the derivative hedge continues to be highly
effective over the life of the hedging relationship.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
interest rate hedges  the firm designates certain interest rate swaps as fair value hedges. these interest rate swaps hedge changes in fair value attributable to the relevant benchmark interest rate (e.g., london interbank
offered rate (libor)), effectively converting a substantial portion of fixed-rate obligations into floating-rate obligations.
the firm applies a statistical method that utilizes regression analysis when assessing the effectiveness of its fair value hedging
relationships in achieving offsetting changes in the fair values of the hedging instrument and the risk being hedged (i.e., interest rate risk). an interest rate swap is considered highly effective in offsetting changes in fair value attributable to
changes in the hedged risk when the regression analysis results in a coefficient of determination of 80% or greater and a slope between 80% and 125%.  for qualifying fair value hedges, gains or losses on derivatives are included in interest expense. the change in fair value of the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged is reported
as an adjustment to its carrying value and is subsequently amortized into interest expense over its remaining life. gains or losses resulting from hedge ineffectiveness are included in interest expense. when a derivative is no longer
designated as a hedge, any remaining difference between the carrying value and par value of the hedged item is amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the hedged item using the effective interest method. see note23 for further
information about interest income and interest expense.
the table below presents the gains/(losses) from interest rate derivatives accounted for as hedges, the related hedged
borrowings and bank deposits, and the hedge ineffectiveness on these derivatives.
year ended december
inmillions
interest rate hedges
$(2,383
)
$4,679
$1,617
hedged borrowings and bank deposits
(6,300
)
(3,447
)
hedge
ineffectiveness1
(1,718
)
(1,621
)
(1,836
)
1.
primarily consisted of amortization of prepaid credit spreads resulting from the passage of time.
the gain/(loss) excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness was not material for the years ended
december2012, december2011 and december2010.
net investment hedges  the firm seeks to reduce the impact of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates on its net investment in certain non-u.s. operations through the use of foreign currency forward contracts and foreign
currency-denominated debt. for foreign currency forward contracts designated as hedges, the effectiveness of the hedge is assessed based on the overall changes in the fair value of the forward contracts (i.e., based on changes in forward rates). for
foreign currency-denominated debt designated as a hedge, the effectiveness of the hedge is assessed based on changes in spot rates.  for qualifying net investment hedges, the gains or losses on the hedging instruments, to the extent effective, areincluded in currency translation adjustment, net oftax within the
consolidated statements of comprehensiveincome.
the table below presents the gains/(losses) from net investment hedging.
year ended december
inmillions
currency hedges
$(233
)
$160
$(261
)
foreign currency-denominateddebthedges
(147
)
(498
)
the gain/(loss) related to ineffectiveness was not material for the years ended december2012, december2011
and december2010. the loss reclassified to earnings from accumulated other comprehensive income was not material for the years ended december2012 and december2010, and was $186million for the year ended december2011.
as of december2012 and december2011, the firm had designated $2.77billion and $3.11billion,
respectively, of foreign currency-denominated debt, included in unsecuredlong-term borrowings and unsecured short-term borrowings, as hedges of net investments in non-u.s.subsidiaries.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 8. fair value option
note8.
fair value option
other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value
in addition to all cash and derivative instruments included in financial instruments
owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, the firm has elected to account for certain of its other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value under the fair
valueoption.  the primary reasons for electing the fair value option areto:
reflect economic events in earnings on a timely basis;
mitigate volatility in earnings from using different measurement attributes (e.g., transfers of financial instruments owned accounted for as
financings are recorded at fair value whereas the related secured financing would be recorded on an accrual basis absent electing the fair value option); and
address simplification and cost-benefit considerations (e.g., accounting for hybrid financial instruments at fair value in their entirety versus
bifurcation of embedded derivatives and hedge accounting for debt hosts).  hybrid financial instruments are
instruments that contain bifurcatable embedded derivatives and do not require settlement by physical delivery of non-financial assets (e.g., physical commodities). if the firm elects to bifurcate the embedded derivative from the associated debt, the
derivative is accounted for at fair value and the host contract is accounted for at amortized cost, adjusted for the effective portion of any fair value hedges. if the firm does not elect to bifurcate, the entire hybrid financial instrument is
accounted for at fair value under the fair value option.  other financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at
fair value under the fair value option include:
repurchase agreements and substantially all resale agreements;
securities borrowed and loaned within fixed income, currency and commodities client execution;
substantially all other secured financings, including transfers of assets accounted for as financings rather than sales and certain other
nonrecourse financings;
certain unsecured short-term borrowings, consisting of all promissory notes and commercial paper and certain hybrid financial instruments;
certain unsecured long-term borrowings, including prepaid commodity transactions and certain hybrid financialinstruments;
certain receivables from customers and counterparties, including certain margin loans and transfers of assets accounted for as secured loans rather
than purchases;
certain insurance and reinsurance contract assets and liabilities and certain guarantees;
certain subordinated liabilities issued by consolidated vies;and
certain time deposits issued by the firms bank subsidiaries (deposits with no stated maturity are not eligible for a fair value option
election), including structured certificates of deposit, which are hybrid financial instruments.
these financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value are
generally valued based on discounted cash flow techniques, which incorporate inputs with reasonable levels of price transparency, and are generally classified as level2 because the inputs are observable. valuation adjustments may be made for
liquidity and for counterparty and the firms credit quality.
see below for information about the significant inputs used to value other financial assets and financial liabilities
at fair value, including the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value the level3 instruments within these categories. these ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the valuation of each type of
other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value. the ranges and weighted averages of these inputs are not representative of the appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one instrument. for example, the highest
yield presented below for resale and repurchase agreements is appropriate for valuing a specific agreement in that category but may not be appropriate for valuing any other agreements in that category. accordingly, the range of inputs presented
below do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair value measurements of the firms level3 other financial assets and financial liabilities.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
resale and
repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loaned. the significant inputs to the valuation of resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loaned are collateral
funding spreads, the amount and timing of expected future cash flows and interest rates.
the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value level3 resale and repurchase agreements as of december2012 are as follows:
yield: 1.7% to 5.4% (weighted average: 1.9%)
duration: 0.4 to 4.5years (weighted average: 4.1years)
generally, increases in yield or duration, in isolation, would result in a lower fair value measurement. due to the distinctive nature of
each of the firms level3 resale and repurchase agreements, the interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform across such agreements.  see note9 for further information about collateralized agreements.
other secured
financings. the significant inputs to the valuation of other secured financings at fair value are the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, interest rates, collateral funding
spreads, the fair value of the collateral delivered by the firm (which is determined using the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, market prices, market yields and recovery assumptions) and the frequency of additional collateral calls.
the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value level3 other secured financings as of december2012 are as follows:
yield: 0.3% to 20.0% (weighted average: 4.2%)
duration: 0.3 to 10.8years (weighted average: 2.4years)
generally, increases in yield or duration, in isolation, would result in a lower fair value measurement. due to the distinctive nature of
each of the firms level3 other secured financings, the interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform across such financings.  see note9 for further information about collateralized financings.
unsecured
short-term and long-term borrowings. the significant inputs to the valuation of unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings at fair value are the amount and timing of expected future
cash flows, interest rates, the credit spreads of the firm, as well as commodity prices in the case of prepaid commodity transactions. the inputs used to value the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments are consistent with the
inputs used to value the firms other derivative instruments. see note7 for further information about derivatives. see notes15 and 16 for further information about unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings, respectively.
certain of the firms unsecured short-term and long-term instruments are included in level3, substantially all of
which are hybrid financial instruments. as the significant unobservable inputs used to value hybrid financial instruments primarily relate to the embedded derivative component of these borrowings, these inputs are incorporated in the firms
derivative disclosures related to unobservable inputs in note7.
insurance and reinsurance contracts. insurance and reinsurance contracts at fair value are primarily included in receivables from customers and counterparties and other liabilities and accrued expenses. in addition,
assets related to the firms reinsurance business that were classified as held for sale as of december2012 are included in other assets. the insurance and reinsurance contracts for which the firm has elected the fair value
option are contracts that can be settled only in cash and that qualify for the fair value option because they are recognized financial instruments. these contracts are valued using market transactions and other market evidence where possible,
including market-based inputs to models, calibration to market-clearing transactions or other alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. significant inputs are interest rates, inflation rates, volatilities, funding
spreads, yield and duration, which incorporates policy lapse and projected mortality assumptions. when unobservable inputs to a valuation model are significant to the fair value measurement of an instrument, the instrument is classified in
level3.
the range of significant unobservable inputs used to value level3 insurance and reinsurance contracts as of december2012 is as follows:
funding spreads: 64bps to 105bps (weighted average: 85bps)
yield: 4.4% to 15.1% (weighted average: 6.2%)
duration: 5.3 to 8.8years (weighted average: 7.6years)
generally, increases in funding spreads, yield or duration, in isolation, would result in a lower fair value measurement.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
receivables from
customers and counterparties. receivables from customers and counterparties at fair value, excluding insurance and reinsurance contracts, are primarily comprised of transfers of assets
accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases. the significant inputs to the valuation of such receivables are commodity prices, interest rates, the amount and timing of expected future cash flows and funding spreads. the range of significant
unobservable inputs used to value level3 receivables from customers and counterparties as of december2012 is asfollows:
funding spreads: 57bps to 145bps (weighted average: 105bps)
generally, an increase in funding spreads would result in a lower fair value measurement.
receivables from customers and counterparties not accounted for at fair value are accounted for at amortized cost net of estimated
uncollectible amounts, which generally approximates fair value. such receivables are primarily comprised of customer margin loans and collateral posted in connection with certain derivative transactions. while these items are carried at amounts that
approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had
these items been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of december2012. receivables from customers and counterparties not accounted for at fair value also includes
loans held for investment, which are primarily comprised of collateralized loans to private wealth management clients and corporate loans. as of december2012 and december2011, the carrying value of such loans was $6.50billion and
$3.76billion, respectively, which generally approximated fair value. as of december2012, had these loans been carried at fair value and included in the fair value hierarchy, $2.41billion and $4.06billion would have been
classified in level2 and level3,respectively.
deposits. the significant inputs to the valuation of time deposits are interest rates and the amount and timing of future cash flows. the inputs used to value the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial
instruments are consistent with the inputs used to value the firms other derivative instruments. see note7 for further information about derivatives. see note14 for further information aboutdeposits.
the firms deposits that are included in level3 are hybrid financial instruments. as the significant
unobservable inputs used to value hybrid financial instruments primarily relate to the embedded derivative component of these deposits, these inputs are incorporated in the firms derivative disclosures related to unobservable inputs in
note7.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
fair value of other financial assets and financial  liabilities by level
the tables below present, by level within the fair value hierarchy, other financial assets
and financial liabilities
accounted for at fair value primarily under the fair valueoption.
otherfinancialassetsatfairvalueasofdecember2012
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
securities segregated for regulatory and other
purposes1
$21,549
$8,935
$
$30,484
securities purchased under agreements to resell
141,053
141,331
securities borrowed
38,395
38,395
receivables from customers and counterparties
7,225
7,866
other
assets2
4,420
8,499
13,426
total
$25,969
$204,107
$1,426
$231,502
otherfinancialliabilitiesatfairvalueasofdecember
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
deposits
$
$4,741
$359
$5,100
securities sold under agreements to repurchase
169,880
1,927
171,807
securities loaned
1,558
1,558
other secured financings
28,925
1,412
30,337
unsecured short-term borrowings
15,011
2,584
17,595
unsecured long-term borrowings
10,676
1,917
12,593
other liabilities and accrued expenses
11,274
12,043
total
$
$231,560
$19,473
$251,033
1.
includes securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes accounted for at fair value under the fair value option, which consists of securities
borrowed and resale agreements. the table above includes $21.55billion of level1 securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes accounted for at fair value under other u.s. gaap, consisting of u.s. treasury securities and money
market instruments.
2.
consists of assets classified as held for sale related to the firms reinsurance business, primarily consisting of securities accounted for as
available-for-sale and insurance separate account assets which are accounted for at fair value under other u.s. gaap. such assets were previously included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes, respectively.
3.
consists of insurance contracts and derivatives classified as held for sale. see insurance and reinsurance contracts above and note7 for
further information about valuation techniques and inputs related to insurance contracts and derivatives, respectively.
4.
includes $692million of liabilities classified as held for sale related to the firms reinsurance business accounted for at fair value under the
fair value option.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
other financial assets at fair value as of december2011
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
securities segregated for regulatory and other
purposes1
$21,263
$20,751
$
$42,014
securities purchased under agreements to resell
187,232
187,789
securities borrowed
47,621
47,621
receivables from customers and counterparties
8,887
9,682
total
$21,263
$264,491
$1,352
$287,106
otherfinancialliabilitiesatfairvalueasofdecember
inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
deposits
$
$4,513
$13
$4,526
securities sold under agreements to repurchase
162,321
2,181
164,502
securities loaned
other secured financings
28,267
1,752
30,019
unsecured short-term borrowings
14,560
3,294
17,854
unsecured long-term borrowings
14,971
2,191
17,162
other liabilities and accrued expenses
8,996
9,486
total
$
$225,229
$18,427
$243,656
1.
includes securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes accounted for at fair value under the fair value option, which consists of securities
borrowed and resale agreements. the table above includes $21.26billion of level1 and $528million of level2 securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes accounted for at fair value under other u.s. gaap, principally
consisting of u.s. treasury securities, money market instruments and insurance separate accountassets.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
transfers between levels of the fair valuehierarchy
transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the beginning of the reporting period in which they occur. there were
no transfers of other financial assets and financial liabilities between level1 and level2 during the year ended december2012. the tables below present information about transfers between level2 and level3.
level3 rollforward
if a financial asset or financial liability was transferred to level3 during a reporting year, its entire gain or loss for the year
is included in level3.
the tables below present changes in fair value for other financial assets and financial
liabilities accounted for at fair value categorized as level3 as of the end of the year. level3 other financial assets and liabilities are frequently economically hedged with cash instruments and derivatives. accordingly, gains or losses
that are reported in level3 can be partially offset by gains or losses attributable to level1, 2 or 3 cash instruments or derivatives. as a result, gains or losses included in the level3 rollforward below do not necessarily
represent the overall impact on the firms results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
level3 other financial assets at fair value for the year ended december2012
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealizedgains/ (losses)
netunrealizedgains/(losses)relatingtoinstrumentsstillheldatyear-end
purchases
sales
issuances
settlements
transfers
intolevel3
transfersout oflevel3
balance,end ofyear
securitiespurchasedunder agreementstoresell
$557
$7
$
$116
$
$
$(402
)
$
$
$278
receivables from customers andcounterparties
(17
)
(373
)
other assets
(23
)
total
$1,352
$7
$119
$315
$
$
$(442
)
$448
$(373
)
$1,426
1.
the aggregate amounts include gains/(losses) of approximately $119million, $(3)million and $10million reported in market making,
other principal transactions and interest income, respectively.
level3 other financial liabilities at fair value for the year ended december2012
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealized(gains)/ losses
netunrealized(gains)/lossesrelatingtoinstrumentsstillheldat
year-end
purchases
sales
issuances
settlements
transfers
intolevel3
transfersout oflevel3
balance,end ofyear
deposits
$13
$
$5
$
$
$326
$(1
)
$16
$
$359
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, atfairvalue
2,181
(254
)
1,927
other secured financings
1,752
(51
)
(1,155
)
1,412
unsecured short-term borrowings
3,294
(13
)
(13
)
(1,206
)
(684
)
2,584
unsecured long-term borrowings
2,191
(344
)
(801
)
1,917
other liabilities andaccrued expenses
8,996
1,617
(360
)
11,274
total
$18,427
$108
$1,385
$1,604
$
$2,271
$(3,320
)
$483
$(1,485
)
$19,473
1.
the aggregate amounts include losses of approximately $1.37billion, $113million and $15million reported in market making,
other principal transactions and interest expense, respectively.
the net unrealized loss on level3 other financial liabilities of $1.39billion
for the year ended december2012 primarily reflected the impact of tighter funding spreads and changes in foreign exchange rates on certain insurance liabilities, and an increase in global equity prices and tighter credit spreads on certain
hybrid financialinstruments.
transfers into level3 of other financial assets during the year ended
december2012 reflected transfers of level3 assets classified as held for sale related to the firms reinsurance business, which were previously included in level3 financial instruments owned, at fairvalue.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
transfers out of level3 of other financial assets during the year ended
december2012 reflected transfers to level2 of certain insurance receivables primarily due to increased transparency of the mortality inputs used to value thesereceivables.
transfers into level3 of other financial liabilities during the year ended december2012 primarily reflected transfers from
level2 of certain hybrid financial instruments, principally due to decreased transparency of certain correlation and volatility inputs used to value theseinstruments.
transfers out of level3 of other financial liabilities during the year ended
december2012 primarily reflected transfers to level2 of certain hybrid financial instruments, principally due to increased transparency of certain correlation and volatility inputs used to value these instruments, and unobservable inputs
no longer being significant to the valuation of otherinstruments.
level3 other financial assets at fair value for the year ended december2011
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealizedgains/(losses)
netunrealizedgains/(losses)relatingtoinstrumentsstillheldat
year-end
purchases
sales
issuances
settlements
nettransfers
inand/or(out)oflevel3
balance,end of
year
securities purchased under agreements toresell
$100
$2
$
$620
$
$
$(165
)
$
$557
receivables from customersand counterparties
(25
)
total
$398
$2
$54
$1,088
$
$
$(190
)
$
$1,352
1.
the aggregate amounts include gains of approximately $54million and $2million reported in market making and other principal
transactions, respectively.
level3 other financial liabilities at fair value for the year ended december2011
inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealized(gains)/losses
netunrealized(gains)/lossesrelating toinstrumentsstill held at
year-end
purchases
sales
issuances
settlements
net
transfers inand/or
(out)of
level3
balance,end of
year
deposits
$
$
$
$
$
$13
$
$
$13
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, at fair value
2,060
(178
)
2,181
other secured financings
8,349
(4,062
)
(3,029
)
1,752
unsecured short-term borrowings
3,476
(15
)
(340
)
(5
)
(1,080
)
3,294
unsecured long-term borrowings
2,104
(193
)
(191
)
2,191
other liabilities and accrued expenses
2,409
1,095
5,840
(348
)
8,996
total
$18,398
$18
$763
$5,835
$
$2,051
$(5,861
)
$(2,777
)
$18,427
1.
the aggregate amounts include losses of approximately $766million, $7million and $8million reported in market making,
other principal transactions and interest expense, respectively.
the net unrealized loss on other financial assets and liabilities at fair value of
$709million for the year ended december2011 primarily consisted of losses on other liabilities and accrued expenses, primarily attributable to the impact of a change in interest rates on certain insurance liabilities. these losses were
primarily offset by gains on unsecured short-term borrowings, primarily reflecting gains on certain equity-linked notes, principally due to a decline in global equitymarkets.
significant transfers in or out of level3 during the year ended
december2011included:
other secured financings: net transfer out of level3 of $3.03billion, principally due to transfers to level2 of certain borrowings
as unobservable inputs were no longer significant to the valuation of these borrowings as they nearedmaturity.
unsecured short-term borrowings: net transfer into level3 of $443million, principally due to transfers to level3 of certain
borrowings due to less transparency of market prices as a result of less activity in these financialinstruments.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
gains and losses on financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value under the fair value option
the table below presents the gains and losses recognized as a result of the firm electing
to apply the fair value option to certain financial assets and financial liabilities. these gains and losses are included in market making and other principal transactions. the table below also includes gains and losses on
the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments included in unsecured short-term borrowings and unsecured long-term borrowings. these
gains and losses would have been recognized under other u.s. gaap even if the firm had not elected to account for the entire hybrid instrument at fairvalue.
the amounts in the table exclude contractual interest, which is included in interest income and interest expense,
for all instruments other than hybrid financial instruments. see note23 for further information about interest income and interestexpense.
gains/(losses)onfinancialassetsandfinancialliabilitiesatfair
valueunderthefairvalueoption
year ended december
inmillions
receivables from customers and
counterparties1
$190
$97
$(97
)
other secured financings
(190
)
(63
)
(227
)
unsecured short-term borrowings2
(973
)
2,149
(1,455
)
unsecured long-term borrowings3
(1,523
)
2,336
(1,169
)
other liabilities and accrued expenses4
(1,486
)
(911
)
other5
(81
)
(10
)
total
$(4,063
)
$3,698
$(2,908
)
1.
primarily consists of gains/(losses) on certain reinsurance contracts and certain transfers accounted for as receivables rather than purchases.
2.
includes gains/(losses) on the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments of $(814)million, $2.01billion, and
$(1.49)billion as of december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively.
3.
includes gains/(losses) on the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments of $(887)million, $1.80billion and
$(1.32)billion as of december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively.
4.
primarily consists of gains/(losses) on certain insurance contracts.
5.
primarily consists of gains/(losses) on resale and repurchase agreements, securities borrowed and loaned and deposits.
excluding the gains and losses on the instruments accounted for under the fair value option
described above, market making and other principal transactions
primarily represent gains and losses on financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fairvalue.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
loans and lending commitments  the table below presents the difference between the aggregate fair value and the aggregate contractual principal amount for loans and long-term receivables for which the fair value option
waselected.
as of december
inmillions
aggregate contractual principal amount ofperforming loans and long-termreceivables in excess of therelated fair
value
$2,742
$3,826
aggregate contractual principal amountof loans on nonaccrual status and/or more than
90days past due in excessof the related fair value
22,610
23,034
total1
$25,352
$26,860
aggregate fair value of loans on nonaccrualstatus and/or more than 90days past
due
$1,832
$3,174
1.
the aggregate contractual principal exceeds the related fair value primarily because the firm regularly purchases loans, such as distressed loans, at values
significantly below contractual principalamounts.
as of december2012 and december2011, the fair value of unfunded lending commitments for which the fair value
option was elected was a liability of $1.99billion and $2.82billion, respectively, and the related total contractual amount of these lending commitments was $59.29billion and $66.12billion, respectively. see note18 for
further information about lendingcommitments.
long-term debt instruments  the aggregate contractual principal amount of long-term other secured financings for which the fair value option was elected exceeded the related fair value by $115million and $239million as
of december2012 and december2011, respectively. the fair value of unsecured long-term borrowings for which the fair value option was elected exceeded the related aggregate contractual principal amount by $379million as of
december2012, whereas the aggregate contractual principal amount exceeded the related fair value by $693million as of december2011. the amounts above include both principal and non-principal-protected long-termborrowings.
impact of credit spreads on loans and lending commitments  the estimated net gain/(loss) attributable to changes in instrument-specific credit spreads on loans and lending commitments for which the fair value option was elected was $3.07billion,
$(805)million and $1.85billion for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively. changes in the fair value of loans and lending commitments are primarily attributable to changes in
instrument-specific credit spreads. substantially all of the firms performing loans and lending commitments are floating-rate.  impact of credit
spreads on borrowings  the table below presents the net gains/(losses) attributable to the impact of changes in the
firms own credit spreads on borrowings for which the fair value option was elected. the firm calculates the fair value of borrowings by discounting future cash flows at a rate which incorporates the firms creditspreads.
year ended december
inmillions
net gains/(losses) including hedges
$(714
)
$596
$198
net gains/(losses) excluding hedges
(800
)
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 9. collateralized agreements and financings
note9.
collateralized agreements and financings
collateralized agreements are securities purchased under agreements to resell (resale
agreements or reverse repurchase agreements) and securities borrowed. collateralized financings are securities sold under agreements to repurchase (repurchase agreements), securities loaned and other secured financings. the firm enters into these
transactions in order to, among other things, facilitate client activities, invest excess cash, acquire securities to cover short positions and finance certain firmactivities.
collateralized agreements and financings are presented on a
net-by-counterparty basis when a legal right of setoff exists. interest on collateralized agreements and collateralized financings is recognized over the life of the transaction and included in interest income and interest
expense, respectively. see note23 for further information about interest income and interestexpense.
the table below presents the carrying value of resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and
loanedtransactions.
as of december
inmillions
securities purchased under agreementsto
resell1
$141,334
$187,789
securities borrowed2
136,893
153,341
securities sold under agreementsto
repurchase1
171,807
164,502
securities
loaned2
13,765
7,182
1.
substantially all resale and repurchase agreements are carried at fair value under the fair value option. see note8 for further information about the
valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine fair value.
2.
as of december2012 and december2011, $38.40billion and $47.62billion of securities borrowed, and $1.56billion and
$107million of securities loaned were at fair value, respectively.
resale and repurchase agreements  a resale agreement is a transaction in which the firm purchases financial instruments from a seller, typically in exchange for cash, and simultaneously enters into an agreement to resell the same or
substantially the same financial instruments to the seller at a stated price plus accrued interest at a futuredate.  a
repurchase agreement is a transaction in which the firm sells financial instruments to a buyer, typically in exchange for cash, and simultaneously enters into an agreement to repurchase the same or substantially the same financial instruments from
the buyer at a stated price plus accrued interest at a futuredate.  the financial instruments purchased or sold in resale
and repurchase agreements typically include u.s. government and federal agency, and investment-grade sovereignobligations.
the firm receives financial instruments purchased under resale agreements, makes delivery of financial instruments sold under repurchase
agreements, monitors the market value of these financial instruments on a daily basis, and delivers or obtains additional collateral due to changes in the market value of the financial instruments, as appropriate. for resale agreements, the firm
typically requires delivery of collateral with a fair value approximately equal to the carrying value of the relevant assets in the consolidated statements of financialcondition.
even though repurchase and resale agreements involve the legal
transfer of ownership of financial instruments, they are accounted for as financing arrangements because they require the financial instruments to be repurchased or resold at the maturity of the agreement. however, repos to maturity are
accounted for as sales. a repo to maturity is a transaction in which the firm transfers a security under an agreement to repurchase the security where the maturity date of the repurchase agreement matches the maturity date of the underlying
security. therefore, the firm effectively no longer has a repurchase obligation and has relinquished control over the underlying security and, accordingly, accounts for the transaction as a sale. the firm had no repos to maturity outstanding as of
december2012 or december2011.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
securities borrowed and loaned transactions
in a securities borrowed transaction, the firm borrows securities from a counterparty in exchange for cash. when the firm returns the
securities, the counterparty returns the cash. interest is generally paid periodically over the life of thetransaction.
in a securities loaned transaction, the firm lends securities to a counterparty typically in exchange for cash or securities, or a letter
of credit. when the counterparty returns the securities, the firm returns the cash or securities posted as collateral. interest is generally paid periodically over the life of thetransaction.
the firm receives securities borrowed, makes delivery of securities loaned, monitors the market value of these securities on a daily
basis, and delivers or obtains additional collateral due to changes in the market value of the securities, as appropriate. for securities borrowed transactions, the firm typically requires collateral with a fair value approximately equal to the
carrying value of the securities borrowedtransaction.  securities borrowed and loaned within fixed income, currency and
commodities client execution are recorded at fair value under the fair value option. see note8 for further information about securities borrowed and loaned accounted for at fairvalue.
securities borrowed and loaned within securities services are
recorded based on the amount of cash collateral advanced or received plus accrued interest. as these arrangements generally can be terminated on demand, they exhibit little, if any, sensitivity to changes in interest rates. therefore, the carrying
value of such arrangements approximates fair value. while these arrangements are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap
and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these arrangements been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have been classified in level2 as of december2012.
as of december2012 and december2011, the firm had $8.94billion and $20.22billion,
respectively, of securities received under resale agreements and securities borrowed transactions that were segregated to satisfy certain regulatory requirements. these securities are included in cash and securities segregated for regulatory
and otherpurposes.
other secured financings
in addition to repurchase agreements and securities lending transactions, the firm funds certain assets through the use of other secured
financings and pledges financial instruments and other assets as collateral in these transactions. these other secured financings consistof:
liabilities of consolidatedvies;
transfers of assets accounted for as financings rather than sales (primarily collateralized central bank financings, pledged commodities, bank loans
and mortgage whole loans);and
other structured financingarrangements.
other secured financings include arrangements that are nonrecourse. as of december2012 and december2011,
nonrecourse other secured financings were $1.76billion and $3.14billion,respectively.
the firm has elected to apply the fair value option to
substantially all other secured financings because the use of fair value eliminates non-economic volatility in earnings that would arise from using different measurement attributes. see note8 for further information about other secured
financings that are accounted for at fairvalue.  other secured financings that are not recorded at fair value are
recorded based on the amount of cash received plus accrued interest, which generally approximates fair value. while these financings are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value
option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these financings been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have
primarily been classified in level3 as of december2012.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents information about other secured financings. in the
tablebelow:
short-term secured financings include financings maturing within one year of the financial statement date and financings that are redeemable within
one year of the financial statement date at the option of theholder;
long-term secured financings that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity
dates;and
long-term secured financings that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holders are reflected at the dates such options
becomeexercisable.
as of december2012
as of december2011
$ inmillions
u.s.dollar
non-u.s.dollar
total
u.s.dollar
non-u.s.dollar
total
other secured financings (short-term):
at fair value
$16,504
$6,181
$22,685
$18,519
$5,140
$23,659
at amortized cost
5,371
5,526
interest rates1
6.18
%
0.10
%
3.85
%
0.22
%
other secured financings (long-term):
at fair value
6,134
1,518
7,652
4,305
2,055
6,360
at amortized cost
1,313
1,024
1,819
interest
rates1
2.61
%
2.55
%
1.88
%
3.28
%
total2
$23,249
$8,761
$32,010
$24,003
$13,361
$37,364
amount of other secured financings collateralized by:
financial instruments3
$22,323
$8,442
$30,765
$22,850
$12,274
$35,124
other assets4
1,245
1,153
1,087
2,240
1.
the weighted average interest rates exclude secured financings at fair value and include the effect of hedging activities. see note7 for further
information about hedging activities.
2.
includes $8.68billion and $9.36billion related to transfers of financial assets accounted for as financings rather than sales as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively. such financings were collateralized by financial assets included in financial instruments owned, at fair value of $8.92billion and $9.51billion as of december2012
and december2011, respectively.
3.
includes $17.24billion and $14.33billion of other secured financings collateralized by financial instruments owned, at fair value as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively, and includes $13.53billion and $20.79billion of other secured financings collateralized by financial instruments received as collateral and repledged as of december2012 and
december2011, respectively.
4.
primarily real estate and cash.
the table below presents other secured financings bymaturity.
inmillions
as of
december2012
other secured financings (short-term)
$23,045
other secured financings (long-term):
4,957
1,446
2018-thereafter
1,422
total other secured financings (long-term)
8,965
total other secured financings
$32,010
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
collateral received and pledged  the firm receives financial instruments (e.g., u.s. government and federal agency, other sovereign and corporate obligations, as well as equities and convertible debentures) as collateral, primarily in
connection with resale agreements, securities borrowed, derivative transactions and customer marginloans.  in many cases,
the firm is permitted to deliver or repledge these financial instruments when entering into repurchase agreements and securities lending agreements, primarily in connection with secured client financing activities. the firm is also permitted to
deliver or repledge these financial instruments in connection with other secured financings, collateralizing derivative transactions and meeting firm or customer settlementrequirements.
the table below presents financial instruments at fair value received as collateral that were available to be delivered or repledged and
were delivered or repledged by thefirm.
as of december
inmillions
collateral available to be deliveredor repledged
$540,949
$622,926
collateral that was delivered or repledged
397,652
454,604
the firm also pledges certain financial instruments owned, at fair value in connection with repurchase agreements,
securities lending agreements and other secured financings, and other assets (primarily real estate and cash) in connection with other secured financings to counterparties who may or may not have the right to deliver or repledge them. the table
below presents information about assets pledged by thefirm.
as of december
inmillions
financial instruments owned, at fair value pledged to counterparties that:
had the right to deliver or repledge
$67,177
$53,989
did not have the right to deliver orrepledge
120,980
110,949
other assets pledged to counterparties that:
did not have the right to deliver orrepledge
2,031
3,444
note 10. securitization activities
note10.
securitization activities  the firm
securitizes residential and commercial mortgages, corporate bonds, loans and other types of financial assets by selling these assets to securitization vehicles (e.g., trusts, corporate entities and limited liability companies) and acts as
underwriter of the beneficial interests that are sold to investors. the firms residential mortgage securitizations are substantially all in connection with government agencysecuritizations.
beneficial interests issued by securitization entities are debt or equity securities that give the investors rights to receive all or
portions of specified cash inflows to a securitization vehicle and include senior and subordinated shares of principal, interest and/or other cash inflows. the proceeds from the sale of beneficial interests are used to pay the transferor for the
financial assets sold to the securitization vehicle or to purchase securities which serve ascollateral.
the firm accounts for
a securitization as a sale when it has relinquished control over the transferred assets. prior to securitization, the firm accounts for assets pending transfer at fair value and therefore does not typically recognize significant gains or losses upon
the transfer of assets. net revenues from underwriting activities are recognized in connection with the sales of the underlying beneficial interests toinvestors.  for transfers of assets that are not accounted for as sales, the assets remain in financial instruments owned, at fair value and the transfer is accounted for as a collateralized financing,
with the related interest expense recognized over the life of the transaction. see notes9 and 23 for further information about collateralized financings and interest expense,respectively.
the firm generally receives cash in exchange for the transferred assets but may also have continuing involvement with
transferred assets, including ownership of beneficial interests in securitized financial assets, primarily in the form of senior or subordinated securities. the firm may also purchase senior or subordinated securities issued by securitization
vehicles (which are typically vies) in connection with secondary market-makingactivities.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the primary risks included in beneficial interests and other interests from the firms
continuing involvement with securitization vehicles are the performance of the underlying collateral, the position of the firms investment in the capital structure of the securitization vehicle and the market yield for the security. these
interests are accounted for at fair value and are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and are generally classified in level2 of the fair value hierarchy. see notes5 through 8 for further information about
fair valuemeasurements.  the table below presents the amount of financial assets securitized and the cash flows received
on retained interests in securitization entities in which the firm had continuinginvolvement.
year ended december
inmillions
residential mortgages
$33,755
$40,131
$47,803
commercial mortgages
1,451
other financial assets
total
$34,055
$40,400
$49,266
cash flows on retainedinterests
$389
$569
$517
the table below presents the firms continuing involvement in nonconsolidated
securitization entities to which the firm sold assets, as well as the total outstanding principal amount of transferred assets in which the firm has continuing involvement. in thistable:
the outstanding principal amount is presented for the purpose of providing information about the size of the securitization entities in which the
firm has continuing involvement and is not representative of the firms risk ofloss;
for retained or purchased interests, the firms risk of loss is limited to the fair value of these interests;and
purchased interests represent senior and subordinated interests, purchased in connection with secondary market-making activities, in securitization
entities in which the firm also holds retainedinterests.
as of december2012
as of december2011
inmillions
outstandingprincipalamount
fairvalueofretainedinterests
fair valueofpurchasedinterests
outstandingprincipalamount
fairvalueofretainedinterests
fairvalueof
purchasedinterests
u.s. government agency-issued collateralized
mortgageobligations1
$57,685
$4,654
$
$70,448
$5,038
$
other residential mortgage-backed2
3,656
4,459
commercial mortgage-backed3
1,253
3,398
cdos, clos and
other4
8,866
9,972
total5
$71,460
$4,812
$387
$88,277
$5,777
$545
1.
outstanding principal amount and fair value of retained interests primarily relate to securitizations during 2012 and 2011 as of december2012, and
securitizations during 2011 and 2010 as of december2011.
2.
outstanding principal amount and fair value of retained interests as of both december2012 and december2011 primarily relate to prime and alt-a
securitizations during 2007 and 2006.
3.
as of december2012, the outstanding principal amount primarily relates to securitizations during 2012 and 2007 and the fair value of retained interests
primarily relate to securitizations during 2012. as of december2011, the outstanding principal amount primarily relates to securitizations during 2010,2007 and 2006 and the fair value of retained interests primarily relates to
securitizations during 2010.
4.
outstanding principal amount and fair value of retained interests as of both december2012 and december2011 primarily relate to cdo and clo
securitizations during 2007 and 2006.
5.
outstanding principal amount includes $835million and $774million as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, related to
securitization entities in which the firms only continuing involvement is retained servicing which is not a variable interest.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
in addition to the interests in the table above, the firm had other continuing involvement
in the form of derivative transactions and guarantees with certain nonconsolidated vies. the carrying value of these derivatives and guarantees was a net asset of $45million and a net liability of $52million as of december2012 and
december2011, respectively. the notional amounts of these derivatives and guarantees are included in maximum exposure to loss in the nonconsolidated vie tables in note11.
the table below presents the weighted average key economic assumptions used in measuring
the fair value of retained interests and the sensitivity of this fair value to immediate adverse changes of 10% and 20% in thoseassumptions.
as of december2012
as of december2011
type of retained interests
type of retained interests
$ inmillions
mortgage-backed
other1
mortgage-backed
other1
fair value of retained interests
$4,761
$51
$5,745
$32
weighted average life (years)
8.2
2.0
7.1
4.7
constant prepayment rate2
10.9
%
n.m.
14.1
%
n.m.
impact of 10% adverse change2
$(57
)
n.m.
$(55
)
n.m.
impact of 20% adverse change2
(110
)
n.m.
(108
)
n.m.
discount rate3
4.6
%
n.m.
5.4
%
n.m.
impact of 10% adverse change
$(96
)
n.m.
$(125
)
n.m.
impact of 20% adverse change
(180
)
n.m.
(240
)
n.m.
1.
due to the nature and current fair value of certain of these retained interests, the weighted average assumptions for constant prepayment and discount rates
and the related sensitivity to adverse changes are not meaningful as of december2012 and december2011. the firms maximum exposure to adverse changes in the value of these interests is the carrying value of $51million and
$32million as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
2.
constant prepayment rate is included only for positions for which constant prepayment rate is a key assumption in the determination of fair value.
3.
the majority of mortgage-backed retained interests are u.s. government agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations, for which there is no anticipated
credit loss. for the remainder of retained interests, the expected credit loss assumptions are reflected in the discount rate.
the preceding table does not give effect to the offsetting benefit of other financial
instruments that are held to mitigate risks inherent in these retained interests. changes in fair value based on an adverse variation in assumptions generally cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in assumptions to the change
in fair value is
not usually linear. in addition, the impact of a change in a particular assumption in the preceding table is calculated independently of changes in any other assumption. in practice, simultaneous
changes in assumptions might magnify or counteract the sensitivities disclosedabove.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 11. variable interest entities
note11.
variable interest entities
vies generally finance the purchase of assets by issuing debt and equity securities that
are either collateralized by or indexed to the assets held by the vie. the debt and equity securities issued by a vie may include tranches of varying levels of subordination. the firms involvement with vies includes securitization of financial
assets, as described in note10, and investments in and loans to other types of vies, as described below. see note10 for additional information about securitization activities, including the definition of beneficial interests. see
note3 for the firms consolidation policies, including the definition of avie.  the firm is principally
involved with vies through the following businessactivities:
mortgage-backed vies and corporate cdo and clo vies. the firm sells residential and commercial mortgage loans and securities to mortgage-backed vies and corporate bonds and loans to corporate cdo and clo vies and may retain beneficial interests in the
assets sold to these vies. the firm purchases and sells beneficial interests issued by mortgage-backed and corporate cdo and clo vies in connection with market-making activities. in addition, the firm may enter into derivatives with certain of these
vies, primarily interest rate swaps, which are typically not variable interests. the firm generally enters into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate its risk from derivatives with thesevies.
certain mortgage-backed and corporate cdo and clo vies, usually referred to as synthetic cdos or credit-linked note vies, synthetically
create the exposure for the beneficial interests they issue by entering into credit derivatives, rather than purchasing the underlying assets. these credit derivatives may reference a single asset, an index, or a portfolio/basket of assets or
indices. see note7 for further information about credit derivatives. these vies use the funds from the sale of beneficial interests and the premiums received from credit derivative counterparties to purchase securities which serve to
collateralize the beneficial interest holders and/or the credit derivative counterparty. these vies may enter into other derivatives, primarily interest rate swaps, which are typically not variable interests. the firm may be a counterparty to
derivatives with these vies and generally enters into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate itsrisk.
real estate, credit-related and other
investing vies. the firm purchases equity and debt securities issued by and makes loans to vies that hold real estate, performing and nonperforming debt, distressed loans and equity
securities. the firm typically does not sell assets to, or enter into derivatives with, thesevies.  other asset-backed vies. the firm structures vies that issue notes to clients and purchases and sells beneficial interests issued by other
asset-backed vies in connection with market-making activities. in addition, the firm may enter into derivatives with certain other asset-backed vies, primarily total return swaps on the collateral assets held by these vies under which the firm pays
the vie the return due to the note holders and receives the return on the collateral assets owned by the vie. the firm generally can be removed as the total return swap counterparty. the firm generally enters into derivatives with other
counterparties to mitigate its risk from derivatives with these vies. the firm typically does not sell assets to the other asset-backed vies itstructures.  power-related vies. the firm purchases debt and equity securities issued by, and may
provide guarantees to, vies that hold power-related assets. the firm typically does not sell assets to, or enter into derivatives with, thesevies.  investment funds. the firm purchases equity securities issued by and may provide guarantees
to certain of the investment funds it manages. the firm typically does not sell assets to, or enter into derivatives with, thesevies.  principal-protected note vies. the firm structures vies that issue principal-protected
notes to clients. these vies own portfolios of assets, principally with exposure to hedge funds. substantially all of the principal protection on the notes issued by these vies is provided by the asset portfolio rebalancing that is required under
the terms of the notes. the firm enters into total return swaps with these vies under which the firm pays the vie the return due to the principal-protected note holders and receives the return on the assets owned by the vie. the firm may enter into
derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate the risk it has from the derivatives it enters into with these vies. the firm also obtains funding through thesevies.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
vie consolidation analysis  a variable interest in a vie is an investment (e.g., debt or equity securities) or other interest (e.g., derivatives or loans and lending commitments) in a vie that will absorb portions of the vies
expected losses and/or receive portions of the vies expected residualreturns.  the firms variable interests
in vies include senior and subordinated debt in residential and commercial mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securitization entities, cdos and clos; loans and lending commitments; limited and general partnership interests; preferred and common
equity; derivatives that may include foreign currency, equity and/or credit risk; guarantees; and certain of the fees the firm receives from investment funds. certain interest rate, foreign currency and credit derivatives the firm enters into with
vies are not variable interests because they create rather than absorbrisk.
the enterprise with a controlling financial interest in a vie is
known as the primary beneficiary and consolidates the vie. the firm determines whether it is the primary beneficiary of a vie by performing an analysis that principallyconsiders:
which variable interest holder has the power to direct the activities of the vie that most significantly impact the vies
economicperformance;
which variable interest holder has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the vie that could potentially be
significant to thevie;
the vies purpose and design, including the risks the vie was designed to create and pass through to its variable interest holders;
the vies capitalstructure;
the terms between the vie and its variable interest holders and other parties involved with the vie;and
related-partyrelationships.  the firm reassesses its initial evaluation of whether an entity is a vie when certain reconsideration events occur. the firm reassesses its determination of whether it is the primary beneficiary of a vie
on an ongoing basis based on current facts andcircumstances.
nonconsolidated vies  the firms exposure to the obligations of vies is generally limited to its interests in these entities. in certain instances, the firm provides guarantees, including derivative guarantees, to vies or
holders of variable interests invies.  the tables below present information about nonconsolidated vies in which the firm
holds variable interests. nonconsolidated vies are aggregated based on principal business activity. the nature of the firms variable interests can take different forms, as described in the rows under maximum exposure to loss. in the
tablesbelow:
the maximum exposure to loss excludes the benefit of offsetting financial instruments that are held to mitigate the risks associated with these
variableinterests.
for retained and purchased interests and loans and investments, the maximum exposure to loss is the carrying value of theseinterests.
for commitments and guarantees, and derivatives, the maximum exposure to loss is the notional amount, which does not represent anticipated losses
and also has not been reduced by unrealized losses already recorded. as a result, the maximum exposure to loss exceeds liabilities recorded for commitments and guarantees, and derivatives provided tovies.
the carrying values of the firms variable interests in nonconsolidated vies are included in the consolidated statement of financial
condition asfollows:
substantially all assets held by the firm related to mortgage-backed, corporate cdo and clo and other asset-backed vies and investment funds are
included in financial instruments owned, at fair value. substantially all liabilities held by the firm related to corporate cdo and clo and other asset-backed vies are included in financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased,
at fairvalue.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
assets and liabilities held by the firm related to real estate, credit-related and other investing vies are primarily included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value and in financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, and other liabilities and accrued expenses,respectively.
assets and liabilities held by the firm related to power-related vies are primarily included in financial instruments owned, at fair
value and other assets and in other liabilities and accrued expenses,respectively.
nonconsolidated vies
as of december2012
inmillions
mortgage-backed
corporatecdos andclos
realestate,credit-relatedand otherinvesting
otherasset-backed
power-related
investmentfunds
total
assets in vie
$79,171
$23,842
$9,244
$3,510
$147
$1,898
$117,812
carrying value of the firms variable interests
assets
6,269
1,193
1,801
9,519
liabilities
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated vies
retained interests
4,761
4,812
purchased interests
1,162
2,025
commitments and guarantees1
derivatives1
1,574
6,761
9,287
loans and investments
1,801
1,876
total
$7,536
$7,472
$2,239
$1,156
$32
$5
$18,440
nonconsolidated vies
as of december2011
inmillions
mortgage-backed
corporatecdos andclos
realestate,credit-relatedand otherinvesting
otherasset-backed
power-
related
investmentfunds
total
assets in vie
$94,047
$20,340
$8,974
$4,593
$519
$2,208
$130,681
carrying value of the firms variable interests
assets
7,004
1,495
10,056
liabilities
maximum exposure to loss in nonconsolidated vies
retained interests
5,745
5,777
purchased interests
1,663
commitments and guarantees1
derivatives1
2,469
7,529
1,221
11,219
loans and investments
1,495
1,870
total
$9,258
$7,930
$1,868
$1,554
$334
$5
$20,949
1.
the aggregate amounts include $3.25billion and $4.17billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, related to guarantees
and derivative transactions with vies to which the firm transferred assets.
2.
assets in vie and maximum exposure to loss include $3.57billion and $1.72billion, respectively, as of december2012, and $6.15billion
and $2.62billion, respectively, as of december2011, related to cdos backed by mortgage obligations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
consolidated vies
the tables below present the carrying amount and classification of assets and liabilities
in consolidated vies, excluding the benefit of offsetting financial instruments that are held to mitigate the risks associated with the firms variable interests. consolidated vies are aggregated based on principal business activity and their
assets and liabilities are presented net of intercompany eliminations. the majority of the assets in principal-protected notes vies are intercompany and are eliminated inconsolidation.
substantially all the assets in consolidated vies can only be used to settle obligations of
thevie.  the tables below exclude vies in which the firm holds a majority voting interest if (i)the vie meets the
definition of a business and (ii)the vies assets can be used for purposes other than the settlement of itsobligations.  the liabilities of real estate, credit-related and other investing vies and cdos, mortgage-backed and other asset-backed vies do not have recourse to the general credit of thefirm.
consolidated vies
as of december2012
inmillions
realestate,credit-relatedand otherinvesting
cdos,
mortgage-backedand
otherasset-backed
principal-protected notes
total
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$236
$107
$
$343
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
financial instruments owned, at fair value
2,958
3,845
other assets
1,080
1,080
total
$4,413
$870
$216
$5,499
liabilities
other secured financings
$594
$699
$301
$1,594
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion ofunsecured long-term borrowings
1,584
1,584
unsecured long-term borrowings
other liabilities and accrued expenses
1,478
1,478
total
$2,076
$806
$2,219
$5,101
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
consolidated vies
as of december2011
inmillions
real estate,credit-relatedand otherinvesting
cdos,
mortgage-backedandother
asset-backed
principal-protected
notes
total
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$660
$51
$1
$712
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
receivables from customers and counterparties
financial instruments owned, at fair value
2,369
2,833
other assets
1,552
1,989
total
$4,724
$856
$113
$5,693
liabilities
other secured financings
$1,418
$298
$3,208
$4,924
payables to customers and counterparties
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion ofunsecured long-term borrowings
1,941
2,126
unsecured long-term borrowings
other liabilities and accrued expenses
2,046
2,086
total
$3,653
$347
$5,420
$9,420
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 12. other assets
note12.
other assets
other assets are generally less liquid, non-financial assets. the table below presents
other assets by type.
as of december
inmillions
property, leasehold improvementsand
equipment1
$8,217
$8,697
goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets2
5,099
5,468
income tax-related assets3
5,620
5,017
equity-method investments4
miscellaneous receivables and other5
20,234
3,306
total
$39,623
$23,152
1.
net of accumulated depreciation and amortization of $9.05billion and $8.46billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
2.
includes $149million of intangible assets classified as held for sale. see note13 for further information about goodwill and identifiable
intangibleassets.
3.
see note24 for further information about income taxes.
4.
excludes investments accounted for at fair value under the fair value option where the firm would otherwise apply the equity method of accounting of
$5.54billion and $4.17billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, which are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value. the firm has generally elected the fair value option for such
investments acquired after the fair value option became available.
5.
includes $16.77billion of assets related to the firms reinsurance business which were classified as held for sale as of december2012.
assets held for sale  in the fourth quarter of 2012, the firm classified its reinsurance business within its institutional client services segment as held for sale. assets related to this business of $16.92billion,
consisting primarily of available-for-sale securities and separate account assets at fair value, are included in other assets. liabilities related to the business of $14.62billion are included in other liabilities and accrued
expenses. see note8 for further information about insurance-related assets and liabilities held for sale at fairvalue.  the firm expects to complete the sale of a majority stake in its reinsurance business in 2013 and does not expect to recognize a material gain or loss upon the sale. upon completion of the sale, the firm
will no longer consolidate thisbusiness.
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and equipment included $6.20billion and $6.48billion as of december2012 and
december2011, respectively, related to property, leasehold improvements and equipment that the firm uses in connection with its operations. the remainder is held by investment entities, including vies, consolidated by thefirm.
substantially all property and equipment are depreciated on a straight-line basis
over the useful life of the asset. leasehold improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the improvement or the term of the lease, whichever is shorter. certain costs of software developed or obtained for internal use
are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of thesoftware.  property, leasehold
improvements and equipment are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying value may not be fully recoverable. the firms policy for impairment testing of
property, leasehold improvements and equipment is the same as is used for identifiable intangible assets with finite lives. see note13 for further information.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
impairments
as a result of a decline in the market conditions in which certain of the firms
consolidated investments operate, during 2012 and 2011, the firm tested certain property, leasehold improvements and equipment, intangible assets and other assets for impairment in accordance with asc 360. the carrying value of these assets exceeded
the projected undiscounted cash flows over the estimated remaining useful lives of these assets; as such, the firm determined the assets were impaired and recorded impairment losses. in addition, the firm sold assets during 2012 and 2011 and
recognized impairment losses prior to the sale of these assets. these impairment losses represented the excess of the carrying values of these assets over their estimated fair values, which are primarily level3 measurements, using a
combination of discounted cash flow analyses and relative value analyses, including the estimated cash flows expected to be received from the disposition of certain of these assets.
the impairment losses were approximately $400million during the year ended
december2012, substantially all of which were included in depreciation and amortization within the firms investing& lending segment. impairment losses related to property, leasehold improvements and equipment were
approximately $250million, including approximately $160million attributable to commodity-related assets. impairment losses related to intangible and other assets were approximately $150million, including approximately
$80million attributable to commodity-related assets and approximately $40million attributable to the firms new york stock exchange (nyse) designated market maker (dmm)rights.
the impairment losses were approximately $440million during the year ended december2011 (approximately $220million
related to assets classified as held for sale, primarily related to litton loan servicing lp (litton), approximately $120million related to commodity-related intangible assets and approximately $100million related to property, leasehold
improvements and equipment), all of which were included in depreciation and amortization. the impairment losses related to commodity-related intangible assets and property, leasehold improvements and equipment were included in the
firms investing& lending segment and the impairment losses related to assets classified as held for sale were principally included in the firms institutional client services segment. litton was sold in the third quarter of 2011
and the firm received total consideration that approximated the firms adjusted carrying value for litton. see note18 for further information about the sale of litton.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 13. goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
note13.
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
the tables below present the carrying values of goodwill and identifiable intangible
assets, which are included in otherassets.
goodwill
as of december
inmillions
investment banking:
financial advisory
$98
$104
underwriting
institutional client services:
fixed income, currency and commodities clientexecution
equities client execution
2,402
2,390
securities services
investing& lending
investment management
total
$3,702
$3,802
identifiable intangibleassets
as of december
inmillions
investment banking:
financial advisory
$1
$4
underwriting
institutional client services:
fixed income, currency and commodities clientexecution
equities client execution
investing& lending
investment management
total
$1,397
$1,666
goodwill  goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of net assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the acquisition date.
goodwill is assessed annually in the fourth quarter for impairment or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that
indicate an impairment may exist. qualitative factors are assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. if results of the qualitative assessment are not conclusive,
a quantitative goodwill impairment test is performed.  the quantitative goodwill impairment test consists of twosteps.
the first step compares the estimated fair value of each reporting unit with its estimated net book value (including goodwill and identified
intangible assets). if the reporting units fair value exceeds its estimated net book value, goodwill is not impaired.
if the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its estimated net book value, the second step of the goodwill impairment test is
performed to measure the amount of impairment loss, if any. an impairment loss is equal to the excess of the carrying amount of goodwill over its fairvalue.
goodwill was tested for impairment, using a quantitative test, during the fourth quarter of 2012 and goodwill was notimpaired.
to estimate the fair value of each reporting unit, both relative value and residual income valuation techniques are used
because the firm believes market participants would use these techniques to value the firms reporting units.  relative
value techniques apply average observable price-to-earnings multiples of comparable competitors to certain reporting units net earnings. for other reporting units, fair value is estimated using price-to-book multiples based on residual income
techniques, which consider a reporting units return on equity in excess of the firms cost of equity capital. the net book value of each reporting unit reflects an allocation of total shareholders equity and represents the estimated
amount of shareholders equity required to support the activities of the reporting unit under guidelines issued by the basel committee on banking supervision (basel committee) in december2010.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
identifiable intangible assets
the table below presents the gross carrying amount, accumulated amortization and net
carrying amount of
identifiable intangible assets and their weighted average remaining lives.
as of december
$ inmillions
weightedaverageremaining lives(years)
customer lists
gross carrying amount
$1,099
$1,119
accumulated amortization
(643
)
(593
)
net carrying amount
commodities-related intangibles1
gross carrying amount
accumulated amortization
(226
)
(237
)
net carrying amount
television broadcast royalties
gross carrying amount
accumulated amortization
(186
)
(123
)
net carrying amount
insurance-related intangibles2
gross carrying amount
accumulated amortization
(231
)
(146
)
net carrying amount
n/a2
other3
gross carrying amount
accumulated amortization
(819
)
(751
)
net carrying amount
total
gross carrying amount
3,502
3,516
accumulated amortization
(2,105
)
(1,850
)
net carrying amount
$1,397
$1,666
1.
primarily includes commodity-related customer contracts and relationships, permits and access rights.
2.
primarily related to the firms reinsurance business, which is classified as held for sale. see note12 for further information.
3.
primarily includes the firms exchange-traded fund lead market maker rights and nyse dmm rights.
substantially all of the firms identifiable intangible assets are
considered to have finite lives and are amortized (i)over their estimated lives, (ii)based on economic usage for certain commodity-related intangibles or (iii)in proportion
to estimated gross profits or premium revenues. amortization expense for identifiable intangible assets is included in depreciation and amortization.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the tables below present amortization expense for identifiable intangible assets for the
years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, and the estimated future amortization expense through 2017 for identifiable intangible assets as of december2012.
year ended december
inmillions
amortization expense
$338
$389
$520
inmillions
as of
december2012
estimated future amortization expense:
$225
identifiable intangible assets are tested for recoverability whenever events
or changes in circumstances indicate that an assets or asset groups carrying value may not berecoverable.  if
a recoverability test is necessary, the carrying value of an asset or asset group is compared to the total of the undiscounted cash flows expected to be received over the remaining useful life and from the disposition of the asset or
assetgroup.
if the total of the undiscounted cash flows exceeds the carrying value, the asset or asset group is not impaired.
if the total of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value, the asset or asset group is not fully recoverable and an impairment
loss is recognized as the difference between the carrying amount of the asset or asset group and its estimated fair value.
see note12 for information about impairments of the firms identifiable intangible assets.
note 14. deposits
note14.
deposits  the table below presents
deposits held in u.s. and non-u.s. offices, substantially all of which were interest-bearing. substantially all u.s. deposits were held at goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank usa) and substantially all non-u.s.
deposits were held at goldman sachs bank (europe) plc (gs bank europe) and goldman sachs international bank (gsib). on january18,2013, gs bank europe surrendered its banking license
to the central bank of ireland after transferring its deposits to gsib.
as of december
inmillions
u.s. offices
$62,377
$38,477
non-u.s. offices
7,747
7,632
total
$70,124
$46,109
the table below presents maturities of time deposits held in u.s. and non-u.s. offices.
as of december2012
inmillions
u.s.
non-u.s.
total
$5,248
$2,083
$7,331
3,866
3,866
3,285
3,285
1,687
1,687
2,377
2,377
2018 - thereafter
5,069
5,069
total
$21,532
$2,083
$23,615
1.
includes $5.10billion and $4.53billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, of time deposits accounted for at fair value
under the fair value option. see note8 for further information about deposits accounted for at fair value.
2.
includes $44million greater than $100,000, of which $7million matures within three months, $24million matures within three to six months,
$8million matures within six to twelve months, and $5million matures after twelve months.
3.
substantially all were greater than $100,000.
as of december2012, savings and demand deposits, which represent deposits with no stated maturity, were
$46.51billion, which were recorded based on the amount of cash received plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value. in addition, the firm designates certain derivatives as fair value hedges on substantially all of its time deposits
for which it has not elected the fair value option. accordingly, $18.52billion of time deposits were effectively converted from fixed-rate obligations to floating-rate obligations and were recorded at amounts that generally approximate fair
value. while these savings and demand deposits and time deposits are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and
therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these deposits been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have been classified in level2.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 15. short-term borrowings
note15.
short-term borrowings
short-term borrowings were comprised of the following:
as of december
inmillions
other secured financings (short-term)
$23,045
$29,185
unsecured short-term borrowings
44,304
49,038
total
$67,349
$78,223
see note9 for further information about other securedfinancings.
unsecured short-term borrowings include the portion of unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement
date and unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial statement date at the option of the holder.  the firm accounts for promissory notes, commercial paper and certain hybrid financial instruments at fair value under the fair value option. see note8 for further information about unsecured
short-term borrowings that are accounted for at fair value. the carrying value of short-term borrowings that are not recorded at fair value generally approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of the obligations. while these short-term
borrowings are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value
hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these borrowings been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of december2012.
the table below presents unsecured short-term borrowings.
as of december
$ inmillions
current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings1, 2
$25,344
$28,836
hybrid financial instruments
12,295
11,526
promissory notes
1,328
commercial paper
1,491
other short-term borrowings
5,521
5,857
total
$44,304
$49,038
weighted average interest rate3
1.57
%
1.89
%
1.
as of december2012, no borrowings guaranteed by the federal deposit insurance corporation (fdic) under the temporary liquidity guarantee program (tlgp)
were outstanding and the program had expired for new issuances. includes $8.53billion as of december2011, issued by group inc. and guaranteed by the fdic under the tlgp.
2.
includes $24.65billion and $27.95billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, issued by group inc.
3.
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings include the effect of hedging activities and exclude financial instruments accounted for at fair
value under the fair value option. see note7 for further information about hedging activities.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 16. long-term borrowings
note16.
long-term borrowings  long-term
borrowings were comprised of the following:
as of december
inmillions
other secured financings (long-term)
$8,965
$8,179
unsecured long-term borrowings
167,305
173,545
total
$176,270
$181,724
see note9 for further information about other secured financings. the table below
presents unsecured long-term
borrowings extending through 2061 and consisting principally of senior borrowings.
as of december2012
as of december2011
inmillions
u.s.
dollar
non-u.s.
dollar
total
u.s.
dollar
non-u.s.
dollar
total
fixed-rate obligations1
group inc.
$86,170
$36,207
$122,377
$82,396
$38,012
$120,408
subsidiaries
2,391
3,053
1,662
2,219
floating-rate obligations2
group inc.
17,075
19,227
36,302
19,936
25,878
45,814
subsidiaries
3,719
1,854
5,573
3,500
1,604
5,104
total
$109,355
$57,950
$167,305
$107,494
$66,051
$173,545
1.
interest rates on u.s. dollar-denominated debt ranged from 0.20% to 10.04% (with a weighted average rate of 5.48%) and 0.10% to 10.04% (with a weighted
average rate of 5.62%) as of december2012 and december2011, respectively. interest rates on non-u.s. dollar-denominated debt ranged from 0.10% to 14.85% (with a weighted average rate of 4.66%) and 0.85% to 14.85% (with a weighted average
rate of 4.75%) as of december2012 and december2011,respectively.
2.
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or the federal funds target rate. equity-linked and indexed instruments are included in
floating-rateobligations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents unsecured long-term borrowings by maturity date. in the table
below:
unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement date and unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable
within one year of the financial statement date at the option of the holders are included as unsecured short-term borrowings;
unsecured long-term borrowings that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity dates; and
unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holders are reflected at the dates such options become
exercisable.
as of december2012
inmillions
groupinc.
subsidiaries
total
$22,279
$496
$22,775
20,734
21,145
21,717
21,889
20,218
20,712
2018 - thereafter
73,731
7,053
80,784
total1
$158,679
$8,626
$167,305
1.
includes $10.51billion related to interest rate hedges on certain unsecured long-term borrowings, by year of maturity as follows: $564million in
2014, $536million in 2015, $1.15billion in 2016, $1.44billion in 2017 and $6.82billion in 2018 and thereafter.
the firm designates certain derivatives as fair value hedges to effectively convert a
substantial portion of its fixed-rate unsecured long-term borrowings which are not accounted for at fair value into floating-rate obligations. accordingly, excluding the cumulative impact of changes in the firms credit spreads, the carrying
value of unsecured long-term borrowings approximated fair value as of december2012 and december2011. see note7 for further information about hedging activities. for unsecured long-term borrowings for which the firm did not elect
the fair value option, the cumulative impact due to changes in the firms own credit spreads would be an increase of less than 2% and a reduction of less than 4% in the carrying value of total unsecured long-term borrowings as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively. as these borrowings are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap, their fair value is not included in the firms
fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these borrowings been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of december2012.
the table below presents unsecured long-term borrowings, after giving effect to hedging activities that converted a substantial portion of
fixed-rate obligations to floating-rateobligations.
as of december2012
as of december2011
inmillions
groupinc.
subsidiaries
total
groupinc.
subsidiaries
total
fixed-rate obligations
at fair value
$28
$94
$122
$10
$66
$76
at amortized cost1
22,500
2,047
24,547
26,839
1,934
28,773
floating-rate obligations
at fair value
8,166
4,305
12,471
12,903
4,183
17,086
at amortized
cost1
127,985
2,180
130,165
126,470
1,140
127,610
total
$158,679
$8,626
$167,305
$166,222
$7,323
$173,545
1.
the weighted average interest rates on the aggregate amounts were 2.47% (5.26% related to fixed-rate obligations and 1.98% related to floating-rate
obligations) and 2.59% (5.18% related to fixed-rate obligations and 2.03% related to floating-rate obligations) as of december2012 and december2011, respectively. these rates exclude financial instruments accounted for at fair value
under the fair value option.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
subordinated borrowings
unsecured long-term borrowings include subordinated debt and junior subordinated debt.
junior subordinated debt is junior in right of payment to other subordinated borrowings, which are junior to senior borrowings. as of
december2012 and december2011, subordinated debthad maturities ranging from 2015 to 2038 and 2017to2038, respectively. the table below presents
subordinatedborrowings.
as of december2012
as of december2011
$ inmillions
par
amount
carrying
amount
rate
par
amount
carrying
amount
rate
subordinated debt2
$14,409
$17,358
4.24
%
$14,310
$17,362
4.39
%
junior subordinated debt
2,835
4,228
3.16
%
5,085
6,533
2.43
%
total subordinated borrowings
$17,244
$21,586
4.06
%
$19,395
$23,895
3.87
%
1.
weighted average interest rate after giving effect to fair value hedges used to convert these fixed-rate obligations into floating-rate obligations. see
note7 for further information about hedging activities. see below for information about interest rates on junior subordinated debt.
2.
par amount and carrying amount of subordinated debt issued by group inc. was $13.85billion and $16.80billion, respectively, as of
december2012, and $13.75billion and $16.80billion, respectively, as of december2011.
junior subordinated debt
junior subordinated debt issued to apex
trusts. in 2007, group inc. issued a total of $2.25billion of remarketable junior subordinated debt to goldman sachs
capital ii and goldman sachs capital iii (apex trusts), delaware statutory trusts. the apex trusts issued $2.25billion of guaranteed perpetual normal automatic preferred enhanced capital securities (apex) to third parties and a de minimis
amount of common securities to group inc. group inc. also entered into contracts with the apex trusts to sell $2.25billion of group inc. perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock (the stock purchase contracts). see note19 for more
information about the preferred stock that group inc. has issued in connection with the stock purchase contracts.  the
firm accounted for the stock purchase contracts as equity instruments and, accordingly, recorded the cost of the stock purchase contracts as a reduction to additional paid-in capital.
during the first quarter of 2012, pursuant to a remarketing provided for by the initial terms of the junior subordinated debt, goldman
sachs capital ii sold all of its $1.75billion of junior subordinated debt to murray street investment trust i (murray street trust), a new trust sponsored by the firm. on june1,2012, pursuant to the stock purchase contracts,
goldman sachs capital ii used the proceeds ofthis sale to purchase shares of group inc.s perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock, seriese (seriese preferred stock).
during the third quarter of 2012, pursuant to a remarketing provided for by the initial
terms of the junior subordinated debt, goldman sachs capital iii sold all of its $500million of junior subordinated debt to vesey street investment trust i (vesey street trust), a new trust sponsored by the firm. on
september4,2012, pursuant to the stock purchase contracts, goldman sachs capital iii used the proceeds of this sale to purchase shares of group inc.s perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesf (seriesf preferred
stock).  in connection with the remarketing of the junior subordinated debt to the murray street trust and vesey street trust
(together, the 2012 trusts), pursuant to the terms of the junior subordinated debt, the interest rate and other terms were modified. following such sales, the firm pays interest semi-annually on the $1.75billion of junior subordinated debt
held by the murray street trust at a fixed annual rate of 4.647% and the debt matures on march9,2017 and on the $500million of junior subordinated debt held by the vesey street trust at a fixed annual rate of 4.404% and the debt
matures on september1,2016. to fund the purchase of the junior subordinated debt, the 2012 trusts issued an aggregate of $2.25billion of senior guaranteed trust securities. the 2012 trusts are required to pay distributions on their
senior guaranteed trust securities in the same amounts and on the same dates that they are scheduled to receive interest on the junior subordinated debt they hold, and are required to redeem their respective senior guaranteed trust securities upon
the maturity or earlier redemption of the junior subordinated debt they hold. group inc. fully and unconditionally guarantees the payment of these distribution and redemption amounts when due on a senior basis and, as such, the $2.25billion of
junior subordinated debt held by the 2012 trusts for the benefit of investors is no longer classified as junior subordinated debt.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the firm has the right to defer payments on the junior subordinated debt, subject to
limitations. during any such extension period, the firm will not be permitted to, among other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of its common or preferred stock. if the firm were to defer payment of interest on the junior
subordinated debt and the 2012 trusts were therefore unable to make scheduled distributions to the holders of the senior guaranteed trust securities, under the guarantee, group inc. would be obligated to make those payments to the holders of the
senior guaranteed trust securities.  the apex trusts and the 2012 trusts are wholly-owned finance subsidiaries of the firm for
regulatory and legal purposes but are not consolidated for accounting purposes.  in connection with the apex issuance, the firm
covenanted in favor of certain of its debtholders, who were initially and are currently the holders of group inc.s 6.345% junior subordinated debentures due february15,2034, that, subject to certain exceptions, the firm would not
redeem or purchase apex or shares of group inc.s seriese preferred stock or seriesf preferred stock prior to the date that is ten years after the applicable stock purchase date, unless the applicable redemption or purchase price
does not exceed a maximum amount determined by reference to the aggregate amount of net cash proceeds that the firm has received from the sale of qualifying securities.
junior subordinated debt issued in connection
with trust preferred securities. group inc. issued $2.84billion of junior subordinated debentures in 2004 to goldman sachs
capital i (trust), a delaware statutory trust. the trust issued $2.75billion of guaranteed preferred beneficial interests to third parties and $85million of common beneficial interests to group inc. and used the proceeds from the
issuances to purchase the junior subordinated debentures from group inc. the trust is a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of the firm for regulatory and legal purposes but is not consolidated for accounting purposes.
the firm pays interest semi-annually on the debentures at an annual rate of 6.345% and the debentures mature on
february15,2034. the coupon rate and the payment dates applicable to the beneficial interests are the same as the interest rate and payment dates for the debentures. the firm has the right, from time to time, to defer payment of interest
on the debentures, and therefore cause payment on the trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in each case up to ten consecutive semi-annual periods. during any such extension period, the firm will not be permitted to, among
other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of its common stock. the trust is not permitted to pay any distributions on the common beneficial interests held by group inc. unless all dividends payable on the preferred beneficial
interests have been paid infull.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 17. other liabilities and accrued expenses
note17.
other liabilities and accrued expenses
the table below presents other liabilities and accrued expenses by type.
as of december
inmillions
compensation and benefits
$8,292
$5,701
insurance-related liabilities1
10,274
18,614
noncontrolling interests2
1,450
income tax-related liabilities3
2,724
employee interests in consolidated funds
subordinated liabilities issuedby consolidatedvies
1,360
1,090
accrued expenses and
other4
18,991
4,108
total
$42,395
$31,801
1.
as of december2012, certain insurance-related liabilities were classified as held for sale and included within accrued expenses and other.
see note12 for further information.
2.
includes $419million and $1.17billion related to consolidated investment funds as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
3.
see note24 for further information about income taxes.
4.
includes $14.62billion of liabilities related to the firms reinsurance business which were classified as held for sale as of december2012.
see note12 for further information.
the table below presents insurance-related liabilities by type.
as of december
inmillions
separate account liabilities
$
$3,296
liabilities for future benefitsand unpaid claims
10,274
14,213
contract holder account balances
reserves for guaranteed minimum death andincomebenefits
total1
$10,274
$18,614
1.
as of december2012, certain insurance-related liabilities were classified as held for sale and included within accrued expenses and other.
see note12 for further information.
separate account liabilities are supported by separate account assets, representing
segregated contract holder funds under variable annuity and life insurance contracts. as of december2011, separate account assets were included in cash and securities segregated for regulatory and otherpurposes.
liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims include liabilities arising from reinsurance provided by the firm to other insurers. the
firm had a receivable of $1.30billion as of december2011 related to such reinsurance contracts, which was reported in receivables from customers and counterparties. in addition, the firm has ceded risks to reinsurers related
to certain of its liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims and had a receivable of $648million as of december2011 related to such reinsurance contracts, which was reported in receivables from customers and
counterparties. contracts to cede risks to reinsurers do not relieve the firm of its obligations to contract holders.liabilities for future benefits and unpaid claims include $10.27billion and $8.75billion carried at fair
value under the fair value option as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.  contract holder account
balances primarily include fixed annuities under reinsurance contracts.  reserves for guaranteed minimum death and income
benefits represent a liability for the expected value of guaranteed benefits in excess of projected annuity account balances. these reserves are based on total payments expected to be made less total fees expected to be assessed over the life of the
contract. as of december2011, such reserves were related to $5.52billion of contract holder account balances. the net amount at risk, representing guaranteed minimum death and income benefits in excess of contract holder account
balances, was $1.51billion as of december2011. the weighted average attained age of these contract holders was 69years as of december2011.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 18. commitments, contingencies and guarantees
note18.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees  commitments
the table below presents the firms commitments.
commitment amount by period
of expiration as of december2012
total commitments
as of december
inmillions
2014-
2016-
2018-
thereafter
commitments to extend credit1
commercial lending:2
investment-grade
$7,765
$11,632
$33,620
$719
$53,736
$51,281
non-investment-grade
2,114
4,462
9,833
4,693
21,102
14,217
warehouse financing
total commitments to extend credit
10,435
16,322
43,453
5,412
75,622
65,745
contingent and forward starting resale and securitiesborrowing agreements3
47,599
47,599
54,522
forward starting repurchase and secured lending
agreements3
6,144
6,144
17,964
letters of credit4
1,353
investment commitments
1,378
2,174
3,529
7,339
9,118
other
4,471
4,624
5,342
total commitments
$70,641
$18,709
$43,742
$9,025
$142,117
$154,044
1.
commitments to extend credit are presented net of amounts syndicated to third parties.
2.
includes commitments associated with the former william street credit extension program.
3.
these agreements generally settle within three business days.
4.
consists of commitments under letters of credit issued by various banks which the firm provides to counterparties in lieu of securities or cash to satisfy
various collateral and margin deposit requirements.
commitments to extend credit
the firms commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend with fixed termination
dates and depend on the satisfaction of all contractual conditions to borrowing. the total commitment amount does not necessarily reflect actual future cash flows because the firm may syndicate all or substantial portions of these commitments and
commitments can expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the counterpartys request.
the firm generally accounts for commitments to extend credit at fair value.
losses, if any, are generally recorded, net of any fees in other principal transactions.
as of december2012, approximately $16.09billion of the firms lending commitments were held for
investment and were accounted for on an accrual basis. as of december2012, the carrying value and the estimated fair value of such lending commitments were liabilities of $63million and $523million, respectively. as these lending
commitments are not accounted for at fair value under the
fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap, their fair value is not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6, 7 and 8. had these commitments
been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have primarily been classified in level3 as of december2012.  commercial lending. the firms commercial lending commitments are extended to
investment-grade and non-investment-grade corporate borrowers. commitments to investment-grade corporate borrowers are principally used for operating liquidity and general corporate purposes. the firm also extends lending commitments in connection
with contingent acquisition financing and other types of corporate lending as well as commercial real estate financing. commitments that are extended for contingent acquisition financing are often intended to be short-term in nature, as borrowers
often seek to replace them with other funding sources.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg) provides the firm with credit loss protection
on certain approved loan commitments (primarily investment-grade commercial lending commitments). the notional amount of such loan commitments was $32.41billion and $31.94billion as of december2012 and december2011,
respectively. the credit loss protection on loan commitments provided by smfg is generally limited to 95% of the first loss the firm realizes on such commitments, up to a maximum of approximately $950million. in addition, subject to the
satisfaction of certain conditions, upon the firms request, smfg will provide protection for 70% of additional losses on such commitments, up to a maximum of $1.13billion, of which $300million of protection had been provided as of
both december2012 and december2011. the firm also uses other financial instruments to mitigate credit risks related to certain commitments not covered by smfg. these instruments primarily include credit default swaps that reference the
same or similar underlying instrument or entity or credit default swaps that reference a market index.  warehouse financing. the firm provides financing to clients who warehouse financial assets.
these arrangements are secured by the warehoused assets, primarily consisting of commercial mortgage loans.  contingent and
forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements/forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements  the
firm enters into resale and securities borrowing agreements and repurchase and secured lending agreements that settle at a future date. the firm also enters into commitments to provide contingent financing to its clients and counterparties through
resale agreements. the firms funding of these commitments depends on the satisfaction of all contractual conditions to the resale agreement and these commitments can expire unused.
investment commitments  the firms investment commitments consist of commitments to invest in private equity, real estate and other assets directly and through funds that the firm raises and manages. these commitments
include $872million and $1.62billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, related to real estate private investments and $6.47billion and $7.50billion as of december2012 and december2011,
respectively, related to corporate and other private investments. of these amounts, $6.21billion and $8.38billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, relate to commitments to invest in funds managed by the
firm, which will be funded at market value on the date of investment.  leases
the firm has contractual obligations under long-term noncancelable lease agreements, principally for office space, expiring on various
dates through 2069. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges. the table below presents future minimum rental payments, net of minimum subleaserentals.
inmillions
as ofdecember2012
$439
2018 - thereafter
1,375
total
$3,189
rent charged to operating expense for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010 was
$374million, $475million and $508million, respectively.
operating leases include office space held in excess of current
requirements. rent expense relating to space held for growth is included in occupancy. the firm records a liability, based on the fair value of the remaining lease rentals reduced by any potential or existing sublease rentals, for leases
where the firm has ceased using the space and management has concluded that the firm will not derive any future economic benefits. costs to terminate a lease before the end of its term are recognized and measured at fair value on termination.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
contingencies
legal proceedings. see note27 for information about legal proceedings, including certain mortgage-relatedmatters.  certain mortgage-related contingencies. there are multiple areas of focus by regulators,
governmental agencies and others within the mortgage market that may impact originators, issuers, servicers and investors. there remains significant uncertainty surrounding the nature and extent of any potential exposure for participants in
thismarket.
representations and warranties. the firm has not been a significant originator of residential mortgage loans. the firm did purchase loans originated by others and generally received loan-level representations of the type described below
from the originators. during the period 2005 through 2008, the firm sold approximately $10billion of loans to government-sponsored enterprises and approximately $11billion of loans to other third parties. in addition, the firm
transferred loans to trusts and other mortgage securitization vehicles. as of december2012 and december2011, the outstanding balance of the loans transferred to trusts and other mortgage securitization vehicles during the period 2005
through 2008 was approximately $35billion and $42billion, respectively. this amount reflects paydowns and cumulative losses of approximately $90billion ($20billion of which are cumulative losses) as of december2012 and
approximately $83billion ($17billion of which are cumulative losses) as of december2011. a small number of these goldman sachs-issued securitizations with an outstanding principal balance of $540million and total paydowns and
cumulative losses of $1.52billion ($508million of which are cumulative losses) as of december2012, and an outstanding principal balance of $635million and total paydowns and cumulative losses of $1.42billion
($465million of which are cumulative losses) as of december2011, were structured with credit protection obtained from monoline insurers. in connection with both sales of loans and securitizations, the firm provided loan level
representations of the type described below and/or assigned the loan level representations from the party from whom the firm purchased the loans.
the loan level representations made in connection with the sale or securitization of mortgage loans varied among transactions but were generally detailed representations applicable to each loan
in the portfolio and addressed matters relating to the property, the borrower and the note. these representations generally included, but were not limited to, the following: (i)certain attributes of the borrowers financial status;
(ii)loan-to-value ratios, owner occupancy status and certain other characteristics of the property; (iii)the lien position; (iv)the fact that the loan was originated in compliance with law; and (v)completeness of the
loandocumentation.
the firm has received repurchase claims for residential mortgage loans based on alleged breaches of representations, from government-sponsored enterprises, other
third parties, trusts and other mortgage securitization vehicles, which have not been significant. during the years ended december2012 and december2011, the firm repurchased loans with an unpaid principal balance of less than
$10million. the loss related to the repurchase of these loans was not material for the years ended december2012 and december2011.
ultimately, the firms exposure to claims for repurchase of residential mortgage loans based on alleged breaches of representations will depend on a number
of factors including the following: (i)the extent to which these claims are actually made; (ii)the extent to which there are underlying breaches of representations that give rise to valid claims for repurchase; (iii)in the case of
loans originated by others, the extent to which the firm could be held liable and, if it is, the firms ability to pursue and collect on any claims against the parties who made representations to the firm; (iv)macro-economic factors,
including developments in the residential real estate market; and (v)legal and regulatorydevelopments.
based upon the large number of defaults in residential mortgages, including those sold or securitized by the firm, there is a potential for increasing claims for
repurchases. however, the firm is not in a position to make a meaningful estimate of that exposure at this time.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
foreclosure and other mortgage loan servicing practices and procedures. the firm had received a number of requests for information from regulators and other agencies, including state attorneys general and banking
regulators, as part of an industry-wide focus on the practices of lenders and servicers in connection with foreclosure proceedings and other aspects of mortgage loan servicing practices and procedures. the requests sought information about the
foreclosure and servicing protocols and activities of litton, a residential mortgage servicing subsidiary sold by the firm to ocwen financial corporation (ocwen) in the third quarter of 2011. the firm is cooperating with the requests and these
inquiries may result in the imposition of fines or other regulatory action. in the third quarter of 2010, prior to the firms sale of litton, litton had temporarily suspended evictions and foreclosure and real estate owned sales in a number of
states, including those with judicial foreclosure procedures. litton resumed these activities beginning in the fourth quarter of 2010.
in connection with the sale of litton, the firm provided customary representations and warranties, and indemnities for breaches of these representations and
warranties, to ocwen. these indemnities are subject to various limitations, and are capped at approximately $50million. the firm has not yet received any claims relating to these indemnities. the firm also agreed to provide specific
indemnities to ocwen related to claims made by third parties with respect to servicing activities during the period that litton was owned by the firm and which are in excess of the related reserves accrued for such matters by litton at the time of
the sale. these indemnities are capped at approximately $125million. the firm has recorded a reserve for the portion of these potential losses that it believes is probable and can be reasonably estimated. as of december2012, the firm had
not received material claims with respect to these indemnities and had not made material payments in connection with these claims.
the firm further agreed to provide indemnities to ocwen not subject to a cap, which primarily relate to potential liabilities constituting fines or civil
monetary penalties which could be imposed in settlements with certain terms with u.s. states attorneys general or in consent orders with certain terms with the federal reserve, the office of thrift supervision, the office of the comptroller of
the currency, the fdic or the new york state department of financial services, in each case relating to littons
foreclosure and servicing practices while it was owned by the firm. the firm has entered into a settlement in principle with the board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal reserve
board) relating to foreclosure and servicing matters as described below.
under the litton sale agreement the firm also retained liabilities associated with claims related to littons failure to maintain lender-placed mortgage
insurance, obligations to repurchase certain loans from government-sponsored enterprises, subpoenas from one of littons regulators, and fines or civil penalties imposed by the federal reserve or the new york state department of financial
services in connection with certain compliance matters. management is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum potential amount of future payments under these indemnities because the firm has received no claims under these indemnities other than
an immaterial amount with respect to government-sponsored enterprises. however, management does not believe, based on currently available information, that any payments under these indemnities will have a material adverse effect on the firms
financial condition.
on september1,2011, group inc. and gs bank usa entered into a consent order (the order) with the federal reserve board relating to the servicing of
residential mortgage loans.the terms of the order were substantially similar and, in many respects, identical to the orders entered into with the federal reserve board by other large u.s. financial institutions.the order set forth
various allegations of improper conduct in servicing by litton, requires that group inc. and gs bank usa cease and desist such conduct, and required that group inc. and gs bank usa, and their boards of directors, take various affirmative
steps.the order required (i)group inc. and gs bank usa to engage a third-party consultant to conduct a review of certain foreclosure actions or proceedings that occurred or were pending between january1,2009 and
december31,2010; (ii)the adoption of policies and procedures related to management of third parties used to outsource residential mortgage servicing, loss mitigation or foreclosure; (iii)a validation report from
an independent third-party consultant regarding compliance with the order for the first year; and (iv)submission of quarterly progress reports as to compliance with the order by the boards of directors (or committees thereof) of group inc. and
gsbank usa.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
on january16,2013, group inc. and gs bank usa entered into a settlement in principle with the federal reserve board relating to the servicing of residential mortgage loans and
foreclosure processing.this settlement in principle, amends the order which is described above, provides for the termination of the independent foreclosure review under the order and calls for group inc. and gs bank usa collectively to:
(i)make cash payments into a settlement fund for distribution to eligible borrowers; and (ii)provide other assistance for foreclosure prevention and loss mitigation over the next two years. the other provisions of the order will remain
in effect.the firms reserves for legal and regulatory matters as of december2012 include provisions relating to this settlement.
in addition, on september1,2011, gs bank usa entered into an agreement on mortgage servicing practices with the new york state department of
financial services, litton and ocwen relating to the servicing of residential mortgage loans, and, in a related agreement with the new york state department of financial services, group inc. agreed to forgive 25% of the unpaid principal balance on
certain delinquent first lien residential mortgage loans owned by group inc. or a subsidiary, totaling approximately $13million in principal forgiveness.
guarantees  the firm enters into various derivatives that meet the definition of a guarantee under u.s. gaap, including written equity and commodity put options, written currency contracts and interest rate caps,
floors and swaptions. disclosures about derivatives are not required if they may be cash settled and the firm has no basis to conclude it is probable that the counterparties held the underlying instruments at inception of the contract. the firm has
concluded that these conditions have been met for certain large, internationally active commercial and investment bank counterparties and certain other counterparties. accordingly, the firm has not included such contracts in the table below.
the firm, in its capacity as an agency lender, indemnifies most of its securities lending customers against losses incurred in
the event that borrowers do not return securities and the collateral held is insufficient to cover the market value of the securities borrowed.  in the ordinary course of business, the firm provides other financial guarantees of the obligations of third parties (e.g., standby letters of credit and other guarantees to enable clients to complete
transactions and fund-related guarantees). these guarantees represent obligations to make payments to beneficiaries if the guaranteed party fails to fulfill its obligation under a contractual arrangement with that beneficiary.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents certain information about derivatives that meet the definition of
a guarantee and certain other guarantees. the maximum payout in the table below is based on the notional amount of the contract and therefore does not represent anticipated losses. see note7 for further information about credit derivatives
that meet the definition of a guarantee which are not included below.
because derivatives are accounted for at fair value, the carrying value is considered the
best indication of payment/performance risk for individual contracts. however, the carrying values below exclude the effect of a legal right of setoff that may exist under an enforceable netting agreement and the effect of netting of cash collateral
posted under credit support agreements.
as of december2012
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration
inmillions
carryingvalue of netliability
2014-2015
2016-2017
2018-thereafter
total
derivatives1
$8,581
$339,460
$213,012
$49,413
$61,264
$663,149
securities lending indemnifications2
27,123
27,123
other financial
guarantees3
1,195
3,479
1.
these derivatives are risk managed together with derivatives that do not meet the definition of a guarantee, and therefore these amounts do not reflect the
firms overall risk related to its derivative activities. as of december2011, the carrying value of the net liability related to derivative guarantees was $11.88billion.
2.
collateral held by the lenders in connection with securities lending indemnifications was $27.89billion as of december2012. because the
contractual nature of these arrangements requires the firm to obtain collateral with a market value that exceeds the value of the securities lent to the borrower, there is minimal performance risk associated with these guarantees.
3.
other financial guarantees excludes certain commitments to issue standby letters of credit that are included in commitments to extend credit. see
table in commitments above for a summary of the firms commitments. as of december2011, the carrying value of the net liability related to other financial guarantees was $205million.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
guarantees of securities issued by
trusts. the firm has established trusts, including goldman sachs capital i, the apex trusts, the 2012 trusts, and other entities for the limited purpose of issuing securities to third
parties, lending the proceeds to the firm and entering into contractual arrangements with the firm and third parties related to this purpose. the firm does not consolidate these entities. see note16 for further information about the
transactions involving goldman sachs capital i, the apex trusts, and the 2012 trusts.  the firm effectively provides for the
full and unconditional guarantee of the securities issued by these entities. timely payment by the firm of amounts due to these entities under the guarantee, borrowing, preferred stock and related contractual arrangements will be sufficient to cover
payments due on the securities issued by these entities.  management believes that it is unlikely that any circumstances will
occur, such as nonperformance on the part of paying agents or other service providers, that would make it necessary for the firm to make payments related to these entities other than those required under the terms of the guarantee, borrowing,
preferred stock and related contractual arrangements and in connection with certain expenses incurred by these entities.
indemnities and guarantees of service providers. in the ordinary course of business, the firm indemnifies and guarantees certain service providers, such as clearing and custody agents, trustees and administrators, against specified potential losses in
connection with their acting as an agent of, or providing services to, the firm or itsaffiliates.  the firm may also be
liable to some clients for losses caused by acts or omissions of third-party service providers, including sub-custodians and third-party brokers. in addition, the firm is a member of payment, clearing and settlement networks as well as securities
exchanges around the world that may require the firm to meet the obligations of such networks and exchanges in the event of memberdefaults.
in connection with its prime brokerage and clearing businesses, the firm agrees to clear
and settle on behalf of its clients the transactions entered into by them with other brokerage firms. the firms obligations in respect of such transactions are secured by the assets in the clients account as well as any proceeds received
from the transactions cleared and settled by the firm on behalf of the client. in connection with joint venture investments, the firm may issue loan guarantees under which it may be liable in the event of fraud, misappropriation, environmental
liabilities and certain other matters involving the borrower.  the firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout
under these guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under these arrangements, and no material liabilities related to these guarantees and indemnifications
have been recognized in the consolidated statements of financial condition as of december2012 and december2011.
other representations, warranties and indemnifications. the firm provides representations and warranties to counterparties in connection with a variety of commercial transactions and occasionally indemnifies them against potential losses caused by the breach
of those representations and warranties. the firm may also provide indemnifications protecting against changes in or adverse application of certain u.s. tax laws in connection with ordinary-course transactions such as securities issuances,
borrowings or derivatives.  in addition, the firm may provide indemnifications to some counterparties to protect them in the
event additional taxes are owed or payments are withheld, due either to a change in or an adverse application of certain non-u.s. tax laws.  these indemnifications generally are standard contractual terms and are entered into in the ordinary course of business. generally, there are no stated or notional amounts included in these
indemnifications, and the contingencies triggering the obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur. the firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes that
it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under these arrangements, and no material liabilities related to these arrangements have been recognized in the consolidated statements of financial condition as of december2012
and december2011.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
guarantees of subsidiaries. group inc. fully and unconditionally guarantees the securities issued by gs finance corp., a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of
thefirm.  group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.), gs bank
usa and goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec), subject to certain exceptions.  in november2008, the
firm contributed subsidiaries into gs bank usa, and group inc. agreed to guarantee the reimbursement of certain losses, including credit-related losses, relating to assets held by the contributed entities. in connection with this guarantee, group
inc. also agreed to pledge to gs bank usa certain collateral, including interests in subsidiaries and other illiquid assets.
in addition, group inc. guarantees many of the obligations of its other consolidated subsidiaries on a transaction-by-transaction basis,
as negotiated with counterparties. group inc. is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under its subsidiary guarantees; however, because these guaranteed obligations are also obligations of consolidated subsidiaries included in the
table above, group inc.s liabilities as guarantor are not separatelydisclosed.
note 19. shareholders' equity
note19.
shareholders equity  common equity
dividends declared per common share were $1.77 in 2012, $1.40 in 2011 and $1.40 in 2010. on january15,2013, group inc.
declared a dividend of $0.50 per common share to be paid on march28,2013 to common shareholders of record on february28,2013.  the firms share repurchase program is intended to help maintain the appropriate level of common equity. the repurchase program is effected primarily through regular open-market purchases, the
amounts and timing of which are determined primarily by the firms current and projected capital positions (i.e., comparisons of the firms desired level and composition of capital to its actual level and composition of capital), but which
may also be influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of the firms common stock. any repurchase of the firms common stock requires approval by the federal reserve board.
during 2012,2011 and 2010, the firm repurchased 42.0million shares, 47.0million shares and 25.3million shares of
its common stock at an average cost per share of $110.31, $128.33 and $164.48, for a total cost of $4.64billion, $6.04billion and $4.16billion, respectively, under the share repurchase program. in addition, pursuant to the terms of
certain share-based compensation plans, employees may remit shares to the firm or the firm may cancel restricted stock units (rsus) to satisfy minimum statutory employee tax withholding requirements. under these plans, during 2012,2011 and
2010, employees remitted 33,477 shares, 75,517 shares and 164,172 shares with a total value of $3million, $12million and $25million, and the firm cancelled 12.7million, 12.0million and 6.2million of rsus with a
total value of $1.44billion, $1.91billion and $972million, respectively.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
preferred equity  the table below presents perpetual preferred stock issued and outstanding as of december2012.
series
sharesauthorized
sharesissued
sharesoutstanding
dividend rate
redemptionvalue(inmillions)
a
50,000
30,000
29,999
3month libor + 0.75%, withfloorof3.75%perannum
$750
b
50,000
32,000
32,000
6.20% per annum
c
25,000
8,000
8,000
3month libor + 0.75%, withfloorof4.00%perannum
d
60,000
54,000
53,999
3month libor + 0.67%, withfloorof4.00%perannum
1,350
e
17,500
17,500
17,500
3month libor + 0.77%, withfloorof4.00%perannum
1,750
f
5,000
5,000
5,000
3month libor + 0.77%, withfloorof4.00%perannum
i
34,500
34,000
34,000
5.95% per annum
242,000
180,500
180,498
$6,200
each share of non-cumulative seriesa preferred stock, seriesb preferred stock,
seriesc preferred stock and seriesd preferred stock issued and outstanding has a par value of $0.01, has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is represented by 1,000 depositary shares and is redeemable at the firms option, subject
to the approval of the federal reserve board, at a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus declared and unpaid dividends. on october24,2012, group inc. issued 34,000 shares of non-cumulative seriesi preferred stock, par value $0.01
per share. each share of seriesi preferred stock issued and outstanding has a liquidation preference of $25,000, is represented by 1,000 depositary shares and is redeemable at the firms option beginning november10,2017,
subject to the approval of the federal reserve board, at a redemption price equal to $25,000 plus accrued and unpaid dividends.
in 2007, the board of directors of group inc. (board) authorized 17,500 shares of seriese preferred stock, and 5,000 shares of
seriesf preferred stock, in connection with the apex trusts. on june1,2012, group inc. issued 17,500 shares of seriese preferred stock to goldman sachs capital ii pursuant to the stock purchase contracts held by goldman sachs
capital ii. on september4,2012, group
inc. issued 5,000 shares of seriesf preferred stock to goldman sachs capital iii pursuant to the stock purchase contracts held by goldman sachs capital iii. each share of seriese and
seriesf preferred stock issued and outstanding has a par value of $0.01, has a liquidation preference of $100,000 and is redeemable at the option of the firm at any time subject to approval from the federal reserve board and to certain
covenant restrictions governing the firms ability to redeem or purchase the preferred stock without issuing common stock or other instruments with equity-like characteristics, at a redemption price equal to $100,000 plus declared and unpaid
dividends. see note16 for further information about the apex trusts.  all series of preferred stock are pari passu and
have a preference over the firms common stock on liquidation. dividends on each series of preferred stock, if declared, are payable quarterly in arrears. the firms ability to declare or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise
acquire, its common stock is subject to certain restrictions in the event that the firm fails to pay or set aside full dividends on the preferred stock for the latest completed dividend period.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
in march2011, the firm provided notice to berkshire hathaway inc. and certain of its
subsidiaries (collectively, berkshire hathaway) that it would redeem in full the 50,000 shares of the firms 10% cumulative perpetual preferred stock, seriesg (seriesg preferred stock) held by berkshire hathaway for the stated
redemption price of $5.50billion ($110,000 per share), plus accrued and unpaid dividends. in connection with this notice, the firm recognized a preferred dividend of $1.64billion (calculated as the difference between the carrying value
and the redemption value of the preferred stock), which was recorded as a reduction to earnings applicable to common shareholders for the first quarter of 2011. the redemption also resulted in the acceleration of $24million of preferred
dividends related to the period from april1,2011 to the redemption date, which was included in the firms results during the three months ended march2011.
the seriesg preferred stock was redeemed on april18,2011. berkshire hathaway continues to hold a five-year warrant, issued in october2008, to purchase up to
43.5million shares of common stock at an exercise price of $115.00 per share.  on january9,2013, group inc.
declared dividends of $234.38, $387.50, $250.00, $250.00 and $437.99 per share of seriesa preferred stock, seriesb preferred stock, seriesc preferred stock, seriesd preferred stock and seriesi preferred stock,
respectively, to be paid on february11,2013 to preferred shareholders of record on january27,2013. in addition, the firm declared dividends of $977.78 per each share of seriese preferred stock and seriesf
preferred stock, to be paid on march1,2013 to preferred shareholders of record on february14,2013.  the
table below presents preferred dividends declared on preferred stock.
year ended december
pershare
inmillions
pershare
inmillions
pershare
inmillions
seriesa
$960.94
$29
$950.51
$28
$950.51
$28
seriesb
1,550.00
1,550.00
1,550.00
seriesc
1,025.01
1,013.90
1,013.90
seriesd
1,025.01
1,013.90
1,013.90
seriese
2,055.56
seriesf
1,000.00
seriesg1
2,500.00
10,000.00
total
$183
$266
$641
1.
amount for the year ended december2011 excludes preferred dividends related to the redemption of the firms seriesg preferred stock.
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)  the tables below present accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) by type.
as of december2012
inmillions
currencytranslationadjustment,net of tax
pension andpostretirement liabilityadjustments,net of tax
netunrealizedgains/(losses) onavailable-for-salesecurities,netoftax
accumulatedothercomprehensiveincome/(loss),
net of tax
balance, beginning of year
$(225
)
$(374
)
$83
$(516
)
other comprehensive income/(loss)
(89
)
balance, end of year
$(314
)
$(206
)
$327
$(193
)
as of december2011
inmillions
currencytranslationadjustment,net of tax
pensionandpostretirement liabilityadjustments,net of tax
netunrealizedgains/(losses)onavailable-for-salesecurities,netoftax
accumulatedothercomprehensiveincome/(loss), net of tax
balance, beginning of year
$(170
)
$(229
)
$113
$(286
)
other comprehensive loss
(55
)
(145
)
(30
)
(230
)
balance, end of year
$(225
)
$(374
)
$83
$(516
)
1.
substantially all consists of net unrealized gains on securities held by the firms insurance subsidiaries as of both december2012 and
december2011.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 20. regulation and capital adequacy
note20.
regulation and capital adequacy
the federal reserve board is the primary regulator of group inc., a bank holding company
under the bank holding company act of 1956 (bhc act) and a financial holding company under amendments to the bhc act effected by the u.s. gramm-leach-bliley act of 1999. as a bank holding company, the firm is subject to consolidated regulatory
capital requirements that are computed in accordance with the federal reserve boards risk-based capital requirements (which are based on the basel1 capital accord of the basel committee). these capital requirements are
expressed as capital ratios that compare measures of capital to risk-weighted assets (rwas). the firms u.s. bank depository institution subsidiaries, including gs bank usa, are subject to similar capital requirements.
under the federal reserve boards capital adequacy requirements and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action that is
applicable to gs bank usa, the firm and its u.s. bank depository institution subsidiaries must meet specific capital requirements that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items as calculated under
regulatory reporting practices. the firm and its u.s. bank depository institution subsidiaries capital amounts, as well as gs bank usas prompt corrective action classification, are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators
about components, risk weightings and other factors.  many of the firms subsidiaries, including gs&co. and the
firms other broker-dealer subsidiaries, are subject to separate regulation and capital requirements as described below.  group inc.
federal reserve board regulations require bank holding companies to maintain a minimum tier1 capital ratio of 4% and
a minimum total capital ratio of 8%. the required minimum tier1 capital ratio and total capital ratio in order to be considered a well-capitalized bank holding company under the federal reserve board guidelines are 6% and 10%,
respectively. bank holding companies may be expected to maintain ratios well above the minimum levels, depending on their particular condition, risk profile and growth plans. the minimum tier1 leverage ratio is 3% for bank holding companies
that have received the highest supervisory rating under federal reserve board guidelines or that have implemented the federal reserve boards risk-based capital measure for market risk. other bank holding companies must have a minimum
tier1 leverage ratio of4%.
the table below presents information regarding group inc.s regulatory capital ratios.
as of december
$ inmillions
tier1 capital
$66,977
$63,262
tier2 capital
$13,429
$13,881
total capital
$80,406
$77,143
risk-weighted assets
$399,928
$457,027
tier1 capital ratio
16.7
%
13.8
%
total capital ratio
20.1
%
16.9
%
tier1 leverage ratio
7.3
%
7.0
%
rwas under the federal reserve boards risk-based capital requirements are calculated based on the amount of market
risk and credit risk. rwas for market risk are determined by reference to the firms value-at-risk (var) model, supplemented by other measures to capture risks not reflected in the firms var model. credit risk for on-balance sheet assets
is based on the balance sheet value. for off-balance sheet exposures, including otc derivatives and commitments, a credit equivalent amount is calculated based on the notional amount of each trade. all such assets and exposures are then assigned a
risk weight depending on, among other things, whether the counterparty is a sovereign, bank or a qualifying securities firm or other entity (or if collateral is held, depending on the nature of the collateral).
tier1 leverage ratio is defined as tier1 capital under basel1 divided by average adjusted total assets (which includes
adjustments for disallowed goodwill and intangible assets, and the carrying value of equity investments in non-financial companies that are subject to deductions from tier1 capital).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
regulatory reform
changes to the market risk capital rules of the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies (the
agencies) became effective on january1,2013. these changes require the addition of several new model-based capital requirements, as well as an increase in capital requirements for securitization positions, and are designed to implement
the new market risk framework of the basel committee, as well as the prohibition on the use of external credit ratings, as required by the dodd-frank act. this revised market risk framework is a significant part of the regulatory capital changes
that will ultimately be included in the firms capital ratios under the guidelines issued by the basel committee in december2010 (basel3). these changes resulted in increased regulatory capital requirements for market risk, and will
be reflected in all of the firms basel-based capital ratios for periods beginning on or after january1,2013.
the firm is currently working to implement the requirements set out in the agencies risk-based capital standards: advanced capital
adequacy framework basel2, as applicable to group inc. as a bank holding company and as an advanced approach banking organization (basel2). these requirements are based on the advanced approaches under the revised framework
for the international convergence of capital measurement and capital standards issued by the basel committee. basel2, among other things, revises the regulatory capital framework for credit risk, equity investments, and introduces a new
operational risk capital requirement. the firm will adopt basel2 once approved to do so by regulators. the firms capital adequacy ratio will also be impacted by the further changes outlined below under basel3 and provisions of the
dodd-frank act.
the collins amendment of the dodd-frank act requires advanced approach banking
organizations to continue, upon adoption of basel2, to calculate risk-based capital ratios under both basel2 and basel1. for each of the tier1 and total capital ratios, the lower of the basel1 and basel2 ratios
calculated will be used to determine whether such advanced approach banking organizations meet their minimum risk-based capital requirements. furthermore, the june2012 proposals described below include provisions which, if enacted as proposed,
would modify these minimum risk-based capital requirements.  in june2012, the agencies proposed further modifications to
their capital adequacy regulations to address aspects of both the dodd-frank act and basel3. if enacted as proposed, the most significant changes that would impact the firm include (i)revisions to the definition of tier1 capital,
including new deductions from tier1 capital, (ii)higher minimum capital and leverage ratios, (iii)a new minimum ratio of tier1 common equity to rwas, (iv)new capital conservation and counter-cyclical capital buffers,
(v)an additional leverage ratio that includes measures of off-balance sheet exposures, (vi)revisions to the methodology for calculating rwas, particularly for credit risk capital requirements for derivatives and (vii)a new
standardized approach to the calculation of rwas that would replace the federal reserves current basel1 risk-based capital framework in 2015, including for purposes of calculating the requisite capital floor under the collins
amendment. in november2012, the agencies announced that the proposed effective date of january1,2013 for these modifications would be deferred, but have not indicated a revised effective date. these proposals incorporate the
phase-out of tier1 capital treatment for the firms junior subordinated debt issued to trusts; such capital would instead be eligible as tier2 capital under the proposals. under the collins amendment, this phase-out was scheduled to
begin on january1,2013. due to the aforementioned deferral of the effective date of the proposed capital rules, however, the application of this phase-out remains uncertain at this time.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
in november2011, the basel committee published its final provisions for assessing the
global systemic importance of banking institutions and the range of additional tier1 common equity that should be maintained by banking institutions deemed to be globally systemically important. the additional capital for these institutions
would initially range from 1% to 2.5% of tier1 common equity and could be as much as 3.5% for a banking institution that increases its systemic footprint (e.g., by increasing total assets). in november2012, the financial stability board
(established at the direction of the leaders of the group of 20) indicated that the firm, based on its 2011 financial data, would be required to hold an additional 1.5% of tier1 common equity as a globally systemically important banking
institution under the basel committees methodology. the final determination of the amount of additional tier1 common equity that the firm will be required to hold will be based on the firms 2013 financial data and the manner and
timing of the u.s. banking regulators implementation of the basel committees methodology. the basel committee indicated that globally systemically important banking institutions will be required to meet the capital surcharges on a
phased-in basis from 2016 through 2019.  in october2012, the basel committee published its final provisions for
calculating incremental capital requirements for domestic systemically important banking institutions. the provisions are complementary to the framework outlined above for global systemically important banking institutions, but are more
principles-based in order to provide an appropriate degree of national discretion. the impact of these provisions on the regulatory capital requirements of gs bank usa and the firms other subsidiaries, including goldman sachs international
(gsi), will depend on how they are implemented by the banking and non-banking regulators in the united states and otherjurisdictions.
the basel committee has released other consultation papers that may result in further
changes to the regulatory capital requirements, including a fundamental review of the trading book. and revisions to the basel securitization framework. the full impact of these developments on the firm will not be known with
certainty until after any resulting rules are finalized.  the dodd-frank act contains provisions that require the registration
of all swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. the firm has registered certain subsidiaries as swap dealers under the u.s. commodity futures trading commission (cftc)
rules, including gs&co., gs bank usa, gsi and j. aron& company. these entities and other entities that would require registration under the cftc or sec rules will be subject to regulatory capital requirements, which have not yet been
finalized by the cftc and sec.  the interaction among the dodd-frank act, other reform initiatives contemplated by the
agencies, the basel committees proposed and announced changes and other proposed or announced changes from other governmental entities and regulators (including the european union (eu) and the u.k.s financial services authority (fsa))
adds further uncertainty to the firms future capital and liquidity requirements and those of the firms subsidiaries.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
bank subsidiaries
gs bank usa, an fdic-insured, new york state-chartered bank and a member of the federal
reserve system, is supervised and regulated by the federal reserve board, the fdic, the new york state department of financial services and the consumer financial protection bureau, and is subject to minimum capital requirements (described below)
that are calculated in a manner similar to those applicable to bank holding companies. gs bank usa computes its capital ratios in accordance with the regulatory capital requirements currently applicable to state member banks, which are based on
basel1 as implemented by the federal reserve board, for purposes of assessing the adequacy of its capital. under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action that is applicable to gs bank usa, in order to be considered a
well-capitalized depository institution, gs bank usa must maintain a tier1 capital ratio of at least 6%, a total capital ratio of at least 10% and a tier1 leverage ratio of at least 5%. gsbank usa has agreed with the
federal reserve board to maintain minimum capital ratios in excess of these well-capitalized levels. accordingly, for a period of time, gsbank usa is expected to maintain a tier1 capital ratio of at least 8%, a total capital
ratio of at least 11% and a tier1 leverage ratio of at least 6%. as noted in the table below, gs bank usa was in compliance with these minimum capital requirements as of december2012 and december2011.
the table below presents information regarding gs bank usas regulatory capital ratios under basel1 as implemented by the
federal reserve board.
as of december
$ inmillions
tier1 capital
$20,704
$19,251
tier2 capital
$39
$6
total capital
$20,743
$19,257
risk-weighted assets
$109,669
$112,824
tier1 capital ratio
18.9
%
17.1
%
total capital ratio
18.9
%
17.1
%
tier1 leverage ratio
17.6
%
18.5
%
effective january1,2013, gs bank usa implemented the revised market risk regulatory framework outlined
above. these changes resulted in increased regulatory capital requirements for market risk, and will be reflected in all of gs bank usas basel-based capital ratios for periods beginning on or after january1,2013.
gs bank usa is also currently working to implement the basel2 framework, as
implemented by the federal reserve board. gs bank usa will adopt basel2 once approved to do so by regulators.  in
addition, the capital requirements for gs bank usa are expected to be impacted by the june2012 proposed modifications to the agencies capital adequacy regulations outlined above, including the requirements of a floor to the advanced
risk-based capital ratios. if enacted as proposed, these proposals would also change the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action that is applicable to gs bank usa by, among other things, introducing a common equity tier1 ratio
requirement, increasing the minimum tier1 capital ratio requirement and introducing a supplementary leverage ratio as a component of the prompt corrective action analysis. gs bank usa will also be impacted by aspects of the dodd-frank act,
including new stresstests.  the deposits of gs bank usa are insured by the fdic to the extent provided by law. the
federal reserve board requires depository institutions to maintain cash reserves with a federal reserve bank. the amount deposited by the firms depository institution held at the federal reserve bank was approximately $58.67billion and
$40.06billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively, which exceeded required reserve amounts by $58.59billion and $39.51billion as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
transactions between gs bank usa and its subsidiaries and group inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliates (other than, generally,
subsidiaries of gs bank usa) are regulated by the federal reserve board. these regulations generally limit the types and amounts of transactions (including credit extensions from gs bank usa) that may take place and generally require those
transactions to be on market terms or better to gs bankusa.  the firms principal non-u.s. bank subsidiaries include
gsib, a wholly-owned credit institution, regulated by the fsa, and gs bank europe, a wholly-owned credit institution, regulated by the central bank of ireland, which are both subject to minimum capital requirements. as of december2012 and
december2011, gsib and gsbank europe were both in compliance with all regulatory capital requirements. on january18,2013, gs bank europe surrendered its banking license to the central bank of ireland after transferring its
deposits to gsib.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
broker-dealer subsidiaries  the firms u.s. regulated broker-dealer subsidiaries include gs&co. and gsec. gs&co. and gsec are registered u.s. broker-dealers and futures commission merchants, and are subject to
regulatory capital requirements, including those imposed by the sec, the cftc, chicago mercantile exchange, the financial industry regulatory authority, inc. (finra) and the national futures association. rule15c3-1 of the sec and
rule1.17 of the cftc specify uniform minimum net capital requirements, as defined, for their registrants, and also effectively require that a significant part of the registrants assets be kept in relatively liquid form. gs&co. and
gsec have elected to compute their minimum capital requirements in accordance with the alternative net capital requirement as permitted by rule15c3-1.  as of december2012 and december2011, gs&co. had regulatory net capital, as defined by rule15c3-1, of $14.12billion and $11.24billion, respectively, which exceeded the
amount required by $12.42billion and $9.34billion, respectively. as of december2012 and december2011, gsec had regulatory net capital, as defined by rule15c3-1, of $2.02billion and $2.10billion,
respectively, which exceeded the amount required by $1.92billion and $2.00billion, respectively.  in addition to
its alternative minimum net capital requirements, gs&co. is also required to hold tentative net capital in excess of $1billion and net capital in excess of $500million in accordance with the market and credit risk standards of
appendix e of rule15c3-1. gs&co. is also required to notify the sec in the event that its tentative net capital is less than $5billion. as of december2012 and december2011, gs&co. had tentative net capital and net
capital in excess of both the minimum and the notificationrequirements.  insurance subsidiaries
the firm has u.s. insurance subsidiaries that are subject to state insurance regulation and oversight in the states in which they are
domiciled and in the other states in which they are licensed. in addition, certain of the firms insurance subsidiaries outside of the u.s. are regulated by the fsa and certain are regulated by the bermuda monetary authority. the firms
insurance subsidiaries were in compliance with all regulatory capital requirements as of december2012 and december2011.
other non-u.s. regulated subsidiaries  the firms principal non-u.s. regulated subsidiaries include gsi and goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl). gsi, the firms regulated u.k. broker-dealer, is subject to the capital requirements
imposed by the fsa. gsjcl, the firms regulated japanese broker-dealer, is subject to the capital requirements imposed by japans financial services agency. as of december2012 and december2011, gsi and gsjcl were in compliance
with their local capital adequacy requirements. certain other non-u.s. subsidiaries of the firm are also subject to capital adequacy requirements promulgated by authorities of the countries in which they operate. as of december2012 and
december2011, these subsidiaries were in compliance with their local capital adequacy requirements.  restrictions on payments
the regulatory requirements referred to above restrict group inc.s ability to withdraw capital from its regulated subsidiaries. as
of december2012 and december2011, group inc. was required to maintain approximately $31.01billion and $25.53billion, respectively, of minimum equity capital in these regulated subsidiaries. this minimum equity capital
requirement includes certain restrictions imposed by federal and state laws as to the payment of dividends to group inc. by its regulated subsidiaries. in addition to limitations on the payment of dividends imposed by federal and state laws, the
federal reserve board, the fdic and the new york state department of financial services have authority to prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends by the banking organizations they supervise (including gs bank usa) if, in the relevant
regulators opinion, payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in the light of the financial condition of the banking organization.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 21. earnings per common share
note21.
earnings per common share
basic earnings per common share (eps) is calculated by dividing net earnings applicable to
common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. common shares outstanding includes common stock and rsus for which no future service is required as a condition to the delivery of the underlying common stock. diluted
eps includes the determinants of
basic eps and, in addition, reflects the dilutive effect of the common stock deliverable for stock warrants and options and for rsus for which future service is required as a condition to the
delivery of the underlying common stock.
the table below presents the computations of basic and diluted eps.
year ended december
inmillions, except per share amounts
numerator for basic and diluted eps  net earnings applicable to common
shareholders
$7,292
$2,510
$7,713
denominator for basic eps
weighted average number of common shares
496.2
524.6
542.0
effect of dilutive securities:
rsus
11.3
14.6
15.0
stock options and warrants
8.6
17.7
28.3
dilutive potential common shares
19.9
32.3
43.3
denominator for diluted eps  weighted average number of common shares and
dilutivepotential common shares
516.1
556.9
585.3
basic eps
$14.63
$4.71
$14.15
diluted eps
14.13
4.51
13.18
in the table above, unvested share-based payment awards that have non-forfeitable rights to
dividends or dividend equivalents are treated as a separate class of securities in calculating eps. the impact of applying this methodology was a reduction in basic eps of $0.07 for both the years
ended december2012 and december2011, and $0.08 for the year ended december2010.  the diluted eps computations in the table above do not include the following:
year ended december
inmillions
number of antidilutive rsus and common shares underlying antidilutive stock options and
warrants
52.4
9.2
6.2
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 22. transactions with affiliated funds
note22.
transactions with affiliated funds
the firm has formed numerous nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party investors.
as the firm generally acts as the investment manager for these funds, it is entitled to receive management fees and, in certain cases, advisory fees or incentive fees from these funds. additionally, the firm invests alongside the third-party
investors in certain funds.  the tables below present fees earned from affiliated funds, fees receivable from affiliated funds
and the aggregate carrying value of the firms interests in affiliated funds.
year ended december
inmillions
fees earned from affiliated funds
$2,935
$2,789
$2,882
as of december
inmillions
fees receivable from funds
$704
$721
aggregate carrying value of interests in funds
14,725
14,960
as of december2012 and december2011, the firm had outstanding loans and
guarantees to certain of its funds of $582million and $289million, respectively, which are collateralized by certain fund assets. these amounts relate primarily to certain real estate funds for which the firm voluntarily provided
financial support to alleviate liquidity constraints during the financial crisis and, more recently, to enable them to fund investment opportunities. as of december2012 and december2011, the firm had no outstanding commitments to extend
credit to these funds.  the volcker rule, as currently drafted, would restrict the firm from providing additional voluntary
financial support to these funds after july2014 (subject to extension by the federal reserve board).as a general matter, in the ordinary course of business, the firm does not expect to provide additional voluntary financial support to
these funds; however, in the event that such support is provided, the amount of any such support is not expected to be material.in addition, in the ordinary course of business, the firm may also engage in other activities with these funds,
including, among others, securities lending, trade execution, market making, custody, and acquisition and bridge financing.see note18 for the firms investment commitments related to these funds.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 23. interest income and interest expense
note23.
interest income and interest expense
interest income is recorded on an accrual basis based on contractual interest rates. the
table below presents the
sources of interest income and interest expense.
year ended december
inmillions
interest income
deposits with banks
$156
$125
$86
securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds sold1
(77
)
financial instruments owned, at fair value
9,817
10,718
10,346
other
interest2
1,485
1,665
1,337
total interest income
11,381
13,174
12,309
interest expense
deposits
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to repurchase
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
2,438
2,464
1,859
short-term borrowings3
long-term borrowings3
3,736
3,439
3,155
other
interest4
(475
)
total interest expense
7,501
7,982
6,806
net interest income
$3,880
$5,192
$5,503
1.
includes rebates paid and interest income on securities borrowed.
2.
includes interest income on customer debit balances and other interest-earning assets.
3.
includes interest on unsecured borrowings and other secured financings.
4.
includes rebates received on other interest-bearing liabilities and interest expense on customer credit balances.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 24. income taxes
note24.
income taxes
provision for income taxes
income taxes are provided for using the asset and liability method under which deferred tax
assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. the firm reports interest expense related to income tax matters in provision for taxes and income
tax penalties in otherexpenses.
the tables below present the components of the provision/(benefit) for taxes and a
reconciliation of the u.s. federal statutory income tax rate to the firms effective income taxrate.
year ended december
inmillions
current taxes
u.s. federal
$3,013
$405
$1,791
state and local
non-u.s.
1,083
total current tax expense
4,088
1,001
3,199
deferred taxes
u.s. federal
(643
)
1,516
state and local
non-u.s.
(339
)
total deferred tax (benefit)/expense
(356
)
1,339
provision for taxes
$3,732
$1,727
$4,538
year ended december
u.s. federal statutory income tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
state and local taxes, net of u.s. federal income tax effects
3.8
4.4
2.5
tax credits
(1.0
)
(1.6
)
(0.7
)
non-u.s. operations
(4.8
)
(6.7
)
(2.3
)
tax-exempt income, including dividends
(0.5
)
(2.4
)
(1.0
)
other
0.8
(0.7
)
1.7
effective income tax rate
33.3
%
28.0
%
35.2
%
1.
primarily includes the effect of the sec settlement of $550million, substantially all of which is non-deductible.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
deferred income taxes
deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the
financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. these temporary differences result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years and are measured using the tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such differences are expected
to reverse. valuation allowances are established to reduce
deferred tax assets to the amount that more likely than not will be realized. tax assets and liabilities are presented as a component of other assets and other liabilities and
accrued expenses, respectively.
the table below presents the significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities.
as of december
inmillions
deferred tax assets
compensation and benefits
$2,447
$3,126
unrealized losses
1,477
asc 740 asset related to unrecognized tax benefits
non-u.s. operations
foreign tax credits
net operating losses
occupancy-related
other comprehensive income-related
other, net
6,464
6,290
valuation
allowance1
(168
)
(65
)
total deferred tax assets2
$6,296
$6,225
depreciation and
amortization
1,230
1,959
other comprehensive income-related
total deferred tax liabilities2
$1,315
$1,995
1.
relates primarily to the ability to utilize losses in various tax jurisdictions.
2.
before netting within tax jurisdictions.
the firm has recorded deferred tax assets of $222million and $213million as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively, in connection with u.s. federal, state and local and foreign net operating loss carryforwards. the firm also recorded a valuation allowance of $60million and $59million as of
december2012 and december2011, respectively, related to these net operating loss carryforwards. as of december2012, the u.s. federal and foreign net operating loss carryforwards were $39million and $640million,
respectively. if not utilized, the u.s. federal net operating loss carryforward will begin to expire in 2026. the foreign net operating loss carryforwards can be carried forward indefinitely. state and local net operating loss carryforwards of
$1.19billion will begin to expire in 2013. if these carryforwards expire, they will not have a material impact on the firms results of operations. the firm
had foreign tax credit carryforwards of $0 and $12million as of december2012 and december2011, respectively. the firm recorded a related net deferred income tax asset of $0 and
$6million as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.  the firm had capital loss carryforwards of $0
and $6million as of december2012 and december2011, respectively. the firm recorded a related net deferred income tax asset of $0 and $2million as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
the valuation allowance increased by $103million and $15million during 2012 and 2011, respectively. the increase in 2012 was
primarily due to the acquisition of deferred tax assets considered more likely than not to be unrealizable. the increase in 2011 was due to losses considered more likely than not to expire unused.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the firm permanently reinvests eligible earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries and,
accordingly, does not accrue any u.s. income taxes that would arise if such earnings were repatriated. as of december2012 and december2011, this policy resulted in an unrecognized net deferred tax liability of $3.75billion and
$3.32billion, respectively, attributable to reinvested earnings of $21.69billion and $20.63billion, respectively.
unrecognized tax benefits  the firm recognizes tax positions in the financial statements only when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on examination by the relevant taxing authority based on the
technical merits of the position. a position that meets this standard is measured at the largest amount of benefit that will more likely than not be realized on settlement. a liability is established for differences between positions taken in a tax
return and amounts recognized in the financialstatements.
as of december2012 and december2011, the accrued liability for interest expense
related to income tax matters and income tax penalties was $374million and $233million, respectively. the firm recognized $95million, $21million and $28million of interest and income tax penalties for the years ended
december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively. it is reasonably possible that unrecognized tax benefits could change significantly during the twelve months subsequent to december2012 due to potential audit
settlements, however, at this time it is not possible to estimate any potentialchange.  the table below presents the
changes in the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. this liability is included in other liabilities and accrued expenses. see note17 for furtherinformation.
as of december
inmillions
balance, beginning of year
$1,887
$2,081
$1,925
increases based on tax positions related to the current year
increases based on tax positions related to prior years
decreases related to tax positions of prior years
(109
)
(41
)
(104
)
decreases related to settlements
(35
)
(638
)
(128
)
acquisitions/(dispositions)
(47
)
exchange rate fluctuations
(11
)
(1
)
balance, end of year
$2,237
$1,887
$2,081
related deferred income tax asset1
net unrecognized tax benefit2
$1,552
$1,318
$1,109
1.
included in other assets. see note12.
2.
if recognized, the net tax benefit would reduce the firms effective income tax rate.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
regulatory tax examinations  the firm is subject to examination by the u.s. internal revenue service (irs) and other taxing authorities in jurisdictions where the firm has significant business operations, such as the united kingdom,
japan, hong kong, korea and various states, such as new york. the tax years under examination vary by jurisdiction. the firm believes that during 2013, certain audits have a reasonable possibility of being completed. the firm does not expect
completion of these audits to have a material impact on the firms financial condition but it may be material to operating results for a particular period, depending, in part, on the operating results for that period.
the table below presents the earliest tax years that remain subject to examination by major jurisdiction.
jurisdiction
as of
december2012
u.s. federal1
new york state and city2
united kingdom
japan3
hong kong
korea
1.
irs examination of fiscal 2008 through calendar 2010 began during 2011. irs examination of fiscal 2005,2006 and 2007 began during 2008. irs examination
of fiscal 2003 and 2004 has been completed, but the liabilities for those years are not yet final. the firm anticipates that the audits of fiscal 2005 through calendar 2010 should be completed during 2013, and the audits of 2011 through 2012 should
begin in 2013.
2.
new york state and city examination of fiscal 2004,2005 and 2006 began in2008.
3.
japan national tax agency examination of fiscal 2005 through 2009 began in 2010. the examinations have been completed, but the liabilities for 2008 and 2009
are not yet final.
all years subsequent to the above remain open to examination by the taxing authorities. the firm believes that the
liability for unrecognized tax benefits it has established is adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments.
in january2013, the firm was accepted into the compliance assurance process program by the irs. this program will allow the firm to
work with the irs to identify and resolve potential u.s. federal tax issues before the filing of tax returns. the 2013 tax year will be the first year examined under the program.
note 25. business segments
note25.
business segments  the firm reports
its activities in the following four business segments: investment banking, institutional client services, investing& lending and investment management.  basis of presentation  in reporting segments, certain of the firms business
lines have been aggregated where they have similar economic characteristics and are similar in each of the following areas: (i)the nature of the services they provide, (ii)their methods of distribution, (iii)the types of clients
they serve and (iv)the regulatory environments in which they operate.  the cost drivers of the firm taken as a
whole compensation, headcount and levels of business activity are broadly similar in each of the firms business segments. compensation and benefits expenses in the firms segments reflect, among other factors, the
overall performance of the firm as well as the performance of individual businesses. consequently, pre-tax margins in one segment of the firms business may be significantly affected by the performance of the firms other business
segments.  the firm allocates assets (including allocations of excess liquidity and cash, secured client financing and other
assets), revenues and expenses among the four reportable business segments. due to the integrated nature of these segments, estimates and judgments are made in allocating certain assets, revenues and expenses. transactions between segments are based
on specific criteria or approximate third-party rates. total operating expenses include corporate items that have not been allocated to individual business segments. the allocation process is based on the manner in which management currently views
the performance of the segments.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the segment information presented in the table below is prepared according to the following
methodologies:
revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are included in determining pre-tax earnings.
net revenues in the firms segments include allocations of interest income and interest expense to specific securities, commodities and other
positions in relation to the cash generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying positions. net interest is included in segment
net revenues as it is consistent with the way in which management assesses segment performance.
overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments are allocated ratably based on direct segmentexpenses.
management believes that the following information provides a reasonable representation of each
segments contribution to consolidated pre-tax earnings and totalassets.
for the years ended or as of december
inmillions
investment banking
net revenues
$4,926
$4,355
$4,810
operating expenses
3,330
2,995
3,459
pre-tax earnings
$1,596
$1,360
$1,351
segment assets
$1,712
$1,983
$1,870
institutional client
services
net revenues1
$18,124
$17,280
$21,796
operating expenses
12,480
12,837
14,994
pre-tax earnings
$5,644
$4,443
$6,802
segment assets
$825,496
$813,660
$799,775
investing&
lending
net revenues
$5,891
$2,142
$7,541
operating expenses
2,666
2,673
3,361
pre-taxearnings/(loss)
$3,225
$(531
)
$4,180
segment assets
$98,600
$94,330
$95,373
investment
management
net revenues
$5,222
$5,034
$5,014
operating expenses
4,294
4,020
4,082
pre-tax earnings
$928
$1,014
$932
segment assets
$12,747
$13,252
$14,314
total
net revenues
$34,163
$28,811
$39,161
operating expenses
22,956
22,642
26,269
pre-tax earnings
$11,207
$6,169
$12,892
total assets
$938,555
$923,225
$911,332
1.
includes $121million, $115million and $111million for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010,
respectively, of realized gains on available-for-sale securities held in the firms reinsurance subsidiaries.
total operating expenses in the table above include the following expenses that have not
been allocated to the firmssegments:
charitable contributions of $169million, $103million and $345million for the years ended december2012, december2011
and december2010, respectively; and
real estate-related exit costs of $17million, $14million and $28million for the years ended december2012, december2011
and december2010, respectively. real estate-related exit costs are included in depreciation and amortization and occupancy in the consolidated statements of earnings.
operating expenses related to net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings,
previously not allocated to the firms segments, have now been allocated. this allocation is consistent with the manner in which management currently views the performance of the firms segments. reclassifications have been made to
previously reported segment amounts to conform to the current presentation.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the tables below present the amounts of net interest income or interest expense included in
net revenues, and the amounts of depreciation and amortization expense included in pre-tax earnings.
year ended december
inmillions
investment banking
$(15
)
$(6
)
$
institutional client services
3,723
4,360
4,692
investing& lending
investment management
total net interest income
$3,880
$5,192
$5,503
year ended december
inmillions
investment banking
$164
$174
$172
institutional client services
1,109
investing& lending
investment management
total depreciation and amortization1
$1,738
$1,869
$1,904
1.
includes real estate-related exit costs of $10million and $1million for the years ended december2012 and december2010, respectively,
that have not been allocated to the firms segments.
geographic information  due to the highly integrated nature of international financial markets, the firm manages its businesses based on the profitability of the enterprise as a whole. the methodology for allocating
profitability to geographic regions is dependent on estimates and management judgment because a significant portion of the firms activities require cross-border coordination in order to facilitate the needs of the firms clients.
geographic results are generally allocated as follows:
investment banking: location of the client and investment banking team.
institutional client services: fixed income, currency and commodities client execution, and equities (excluding securities services): location of
the market-making desk; securities services: location of the primary market for the underlying security.
investing& lending: investing: location of the investment; lending: location of the client.
investment management: location of the sales team.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents the total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings of the
firm by geographic region allocated based on the methodology referred to above, as
well as the percentage of total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings (excluding corporate) for each geographicregion.
year ended december
$ inmillions
net revenues
americas1
$20,159
%
$17,873
%
$21,564
%
emea2
8,612
7,074
10,449
asia
3,4
5,392
3,864
7,148
total net revenues
$34,163
%
$28,811
%
$39,161
%
pre-tax earnings
americas1
$6,960
%
$5,307
%
$7,303
%
emea2
2,943
1,210
3,029
asia3
1,490
(231
)
(4
)
2,933
subtotal
11,393
%
6,286
%
13,265
%
corporate5
(186
)
(117
)
(373
)
total pre-tax earnings
$11,207
$6,169
$12,892
net earnings
americas1
$4,259
%
$3,522
%
$4,322
%
emea2
2,369
1,103
2,200
asia3
(103
)
(2
)
2,083
subtotal
7,600
%
4,522
%
8,605
%
corporate
(125
)
(80
)
(251
)
total net earnings
$7,475
$4,442
$8,354
1.
substantially all relates to the u.s.
2.
emea (europe, middle east and africa).
3.
asia also includes australia and new zealand.
4.
net revenues in asia in 2011 primarily reflect lower net revenues in investing& lending, principally due to losses from public equities, reflecting
a significant decline in equity markets in asia during 2011.
5.
consists of charitable contributions of $169million, $103million and $345million for the years ended december2012, december2011
and december2010, respectively, and real estate-related exit costs of $17million, $14million and $28million for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010,respectively. net provisions
for litigation and regulatory proceedings, previously included in corporate have now been allocated to the geographic regions. reclassifications have been made to previously reported geographic region amounts to conform to the current presentation.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 26. credit concentrations
note26.
credit concentrations
credit concentrations may arise from market making, client facilitation, investing,
underwriting, lending and collateralized transactions and may be impacted by changes in economic, industry or political factors. the firm seeks to mitigate credit risk by actively monitoring exposures and obtaining collateral from counterparties as
deemedappropriate.  while the firms activities expose it to many different industries and counterparties, the firm
routinely executes a high volume of transactions with asset managers, investment funds, commercial banks, brokers and dealers, clearing houses and exchanges, which results in significant creditconcentrations.
in the ordinary course of business, the firm may also be subject to a concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty, borrower
or issuer, including sovereign issuers, or to a particular clearing house or exchange.  the table below presents the credit
concentrations in assets held by the firm. as of december2012 and december2011, the firm did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty that exceeded 2% of total assets.
as of december
$ inmillions
u.s. government and federal agency
obligations1
$114,418
$103,468
% of total assets
12.2
%
11.2
%
non-u.s. government and agency obligations1,2
$62,252
$49,025
% of total assets
6.6
%
5.3
%
1.
substantially all included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other
purposes.
2.
principally related to germany, japan and the united kingdom as of both december2012 and december2011.
to reduce credit exposures, the firm may enter into agreements with counterparties that
permit the firm to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties and/or enable the firm to obtain collateral on an upfront or contingent basis. collateral obtained by the firm related to derivative assets is principally cash and is held
by the firm or a third-party custodian. collateral obtained by the firm related to resale agreements and securities borrowed transactions is primarily u.s. government and federal agency obligations and non-u.s. government and agency obligations. see
note9 for further information about collateralized agreements andfinancings.  the table below presents u.s.
government and federal agency obligations, and non-u.s. government and agency obligations that collateralize resale agreements and securities borrowed transactions (including those in cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other
purposes). because the firms primary credit exposure on such transactions is to the counterparty to the transaction, the firm would be exposed to the collateral issuer only in the event of counterpartydefault.
as of december
inmillions
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
$73,477
$94,603
non-u.s. government and agency obligations1
64,724
110,178
1.
principally consisting of securities issued by the governments of germany and france.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 27. legal proceedings
note27.
legal proceedings
the firm is involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings
(including those described below) concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of the firms businesses. many of these proceedings are in early stages, and many of these cases seek an indeterminate amountofdamages.
under asc 450, an event is reasonably possible if the chance of the future event or events occurring is more
than remote but less than likely and an event is remote if the chance of the future event or events occurring is slight. thus, references to the upper end of the range of reasonably possible loss for cases in which the
firm is able to estimate a range of reasonably possible loss mean the upper end of the range of loss for cases for which the firm believes the risk of loss is more than slight. the amounts reserved against such matters are not significant as
compared to the upper end of the range of reasonably possible loss.  with respect to proceedings described below for which
management has been able to estimate a range of reasonably possible loss where (i)plaintiffs have claimed an amount of money damages, (ii)the firm is being sued by purchasers in an underwriting and is not being indemnified by a party
that the firm believes will pay any judgment, or (iii)the purchasers are demanding that the firm repurchase securities, management has estimated the upper end of the range of reasonably possible loss as being equal to (a)in the case of
(i), the amount of money damages claimed, (b)in the case of (ii), the amount of securities that the firm sold in the underwritings and (c)in the case of (iii), the price that purchasers paid for the securities less the estimated value,
if any, as of december2012 of the relevant securities, in each of cases (i), (ii)and (iii), taking into account any factors believed to be relevant to the particular proceeding or proceedings of that type. as of the date hereof, the firm
has estimated the upper end of the range of reasonably possible aggregate loss for such proceedings and for any other proceedings described below where management has been able to estimate a range of reasonably possible aggregate loss to be
approximately $3.5billion.  management is generally unable to estimate a range of reasonably possible loss for
proceedings other than those included in the estimate above, including where (i)plaintiffs have not claimed an amount of money damages, unless
management can otherwise determine an appropriate amount, (ii)the proceedings are in early stages, (iii)there is uncertainty as to the likelihood of a class being certified or the
ultimate size of the class, (iv)there is uncertainty as to the outcome of pending appeals or motions, (v)there are significant factual issues to be resolved, and/or (vi)there are novel legal issues presented. however, for these
cases, management does not believe, based on currently available information, that the outcomes of such proceedings will have a material adverse effect on the firms financial condition, though the outcomes could be material to the firms
operating results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for suchperiod.  ipo process matters. group inc. and gs&co. are among the numerous financial services companies that have been named as defendants in a variety of
lawsuits alleging improprieties in the process by which those companies participated in the underwriting of public offerings.
gs&co. has been named as a defendant in an action commenced on may15,2002 in new york supreme court, new york county, by
an official committee of unsecured creditors on behalf of etoys, inc., alleging that the firm intentionally underpriced etoys, inc.s initial public offering. the action seeks, among other things, unspecified compensatory damages resulting from
the alleged lower amount of offering proceeds. on appeal from rulings on gs&co.s motion to dismiss, the new york court of appeals dismissed claims for breach of contract, professional malpractice and unjust enrichment, but permitted claims
for breach of fiduciary duty and fraud to continue. on remand, the lower court granted gs&co.s motion for summary judgment and, on december8,2011, the appellate court affirmed the lower courts decision. on
september6,2012, the new york court of appeals granted the creditors motion for leave toappeal.  group
inc. and certain of its affiliates have, together with various underwriters in certain offerings, received subpoenas and requests for documents and information from various governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations in connection with
investigations relating to the public offeringprocess. goldman sachs has cooperated with theseinvestigations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
world online litigation. in march2001, a dutch shareholders association initiated legal proceedings for an unspecified amount of damages against gsi and others in amsterdam district court in connection with the
initial public offering of world online in march2000, alleging misstatements and omissions in the offering materials and that the market was artificially inflated by improper public statements and stabilization activities. goldman sachs and
abn amro rothschild served as joint global coordinators of the approximately 2.9billion offering. gsi underwrote 20,268,846 shares and gs&co. underwrote 6,756,282 shares for a total offering price of approximately
1.16billion.  the district court rejected the claims against gsi and abn amro, but found world online liable in an
amount to be determined. on appeal, the netherlands court of appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part the decision of the district court, holding that certain of the alleged disclosure deficiencies were actionable as to gsi and abn amro. on
further appeal, the netherlands supreme court affirmed the rulings of the court of appeals, except that it found certain additional aspects of the offering materials actionable and held that individual investors could potentially hold gsi and abn
amro responsible for certain public statements and press releases by world online and its former ceo. the parties entered into a definitive settlement agreement, dated july15,2011, and gsi has paid the full amount of its contribution. in
the first quarter of 2012, gsi and abn amro, on behalf of the underwriting syndicate, entered into a settlement agreement with respect to a claim filed by another shareholders association, and has paid the settlement amount in full. other
shareholders have made demands for compensation of alleged damages, and gsi and other syndicate members are discussing the possibility of settlement with certain of these shareholders.
adelphia communications fraudulent
conveyance litigation. gs&co. is named as a defendant in two proceedings commenced in the u.s. bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york, one on july6,2003 by
a creditors committee, and the second on or about july31,2003 by an equity committee of adelphia communications, inc. those proceedings were consolidated in a single amended complaint filed by the adelphia recovery trust on
october31,2007. the complaint seeks, among other things, to recover, as fraudulent conveyances, approximately $62.9million allegedly paid to gs&co. by adelphia communications, inc. and its affiliates in respect of margin calls
made in the ordinary course of business on accounts owned by members of the family that formerly controlled adelphia communications, inc. the district court assumed jurisdiction over the action and, on april8,2011, granted
gs&co.s motion for summary judgment. the plaintiff appealed on may6,2011.  specialist matters. spear, leeds& kellogg specialists llc, spear, leeds& kellogg, l.p. and group inc. are among numerous
defendants named in purported class actions brought beginning in october2003 on behalf of investors in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york alleging violations of the federal securities laws and state common law in
connection with nyse floor specialist activities. on october24,2012, the parties entered into a definitive settlement agreement, subject to court approval. the firm has reserved the full amount of its proposed contribution to
thesettlement.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
fannie mae litigation. gs&co. was added as a defendant in an amended complaint filed on august14,2006 in a purported class action pending in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia. the complaint
asserts violations of the federal securities laws generally arising from allegations concerning fannie maes accounting practices in connection with certain fannie mae-sponsored remic transactions that were allegedly arranged by gs&co. the
complaint does not specify a dollar amount of damages. the other defendants include fannie mae, certain of its past and present officers and directors, and accountants. by a decision dated may8,2007, the district court granted
gs&co.s motion to dismiss the claim against it. the time for an appeal will not begin to run until disposition of the claims against other defendants. a motion to stay the action filed by the federal housing finance agency (fhfa), which
took control of the foregoing action following fannie maes conservatorship, was denied on november14,2011.
compensation-related litigation. on january17,2008, group inc., its board, executive officers and members of its management committee were named as defendants in a purported shareholder derivative action in the u.s. district
court for the eastern district of new york predicting that the firms 2008 proxy statement would violate the federal securities laws by undervaluing certain stock option awards and alleging that senior management received excessive compensation
for 2007. the complaint seeks, among other things, an equitable accounting for the allegedly excessive compensation. plaintiffs motion for a preliminary injunction to prevent the 2008 proxy statement from using options valuations that the
plaintiff alleges are incorrect and to require the amendment of sec forms4 filed by certain of the executive officers named in the complaint to reflect the stock option valuations alleged by the plaintiff was denied, and plaintiffs
appeal from this denial was dismissed. on february13,2009, the plaintiff filed an amended complaint, which added purported direct (i.e., non-derivative) claims based on substantially the same theory. the plaintiff filed a further amended
complaint on march24,2010, and the defendants motion to dismiss this further amended complaint was granted on the ground that dismissal of the shareholder plaintiffs prior action relating to the firms 2007 proxy
statement based on the failure to make a demand to
the board precluded relitigation of demand futility. on december19,2011, the appellate court vacated the order of dismissal, holding only that preclusion principles did not mandate
dismissal and remanding for consideration of the alternative grounds for dismissal. on april18,2012, plaintiff disclosed that he no longer is a group inc. shareholder and thus lacks standing to continue to prosecute the action. on
january7,2013, the district court dismissed the claim due to the plaintiffs lack of standing and the lack of any interveningshareholder.  on march24,2009, the same plaintiff filed an action in new york supreme court, new york county, against group inc., its directors and certain senior executives alleging violation of delaware
statutory and common law in connection with substantively similar allegations regarding stock option awards. on january4,2013, another purported shareholder moved to intervene as plaintiff, which defendants have opposed. on
january15,2013, the court dismissed the action only as to the original plaintiff with prejudice due to his lack ofstanding.  mortgage-related matters. on april16,2010, the sec brought an action (sec
action) under the u.s. federal securities laws in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york against gs&co. and fabrice tourre, a former employee, in connection with a cdo offering made in early 2007 (abacus 2007-ac1
transaction), alleging that the defendants made materially false and misleading statements to investors and seeking, among other things, unspecified monetary penalties. investigations of gs&co. by finra and of gsi by the fsa were subsequently
initiated, and group inc. and certain of its affiliates have received subpoenas and requests for information from other regulators, regarding cdo offerings, including the abacus 2007-ac1 transaction, and related matters.
on july14,2010, gs&co. entered into a consent agreement with the sec, settling all claims made against gs&co. in the
sec action, pursuant to which gs&co. paid $550million of disgorgement and civil penalties, and which was approved by the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york onjuly20,2010.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
on january6,2011, aca financial guaranty corp. filed an action against
gs&co. in respect of the abacus2007-ac1 transaction in new york supreme court, new york county. the complaint includes allegations of fraudulent inducement, fraudulent concealment and unjust enrichment and seeks at least $30million
in compensatory damages, at least $90million in punitive damages and unspecified disgorgement. on april25,2011, the plaintiff filed an amended complaint and, on june3,2011, gs&co. moved to dismiss the amended
complaint. by a decision dated april23,2012, the court granted the motion to dismiss as to the unjust enrichment claim and denied the motion as to the other claims, and on may29,2012, gs&co. appealed the decision to the
extent that its motion was denied and filed counterclaims for breach of contract and fraudulent inducement, and third-party claims against aca management, llc for breach of contract, unjust enrichment and indemnification. aca financial guaranty
corp. and aca management, llc moved to dismiss gs&co.s counterclaims and third-party claims on august31,2012. on january30,2013, the court granted acas motion for leave to file an amended complaint naming a
third party to the abacus2007-ac1 transaction as an additional defendant.  since april23,2010, the board has
received letters from shareholders demanding that the board take action to address alleged misconduct by gs&co., the board and certain officers and employees of group inc. and its affiliates. these demands, which the board has rejected,
generally alleged misconduct in connection with the firms securitization practices, including the abacus2007-ac1 transaction, the alleged failure by group inc. to adequately disclose the sec investigation that led to the sec action, and
group inc.s 2009 compensation practices.  in addition, the board has received books and records demands from several
shareholders for materials relating to, among other subjects, the firms mortgage servicing and foreclosure activities, participation in federal programs providing assistance to financial institutions and homeowners, loan sales to fannie mae
and freddie mac, mortgage-related activities and conflicts management.
beginning april26,2010, a number of purported securities law class actions have
been filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york challenging the adequacy of group inc.s public disclosure of, among other things, the firms activities in the cdo market and the sec investigation that led to
the sec action. the purported class action complaints, which name as defendants group inc. and certain officers and employees of group inc. and its affiliates, have been consolidated, generally allege violations of sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the
exchange act and seek unspecified damages. plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended complaint on july25,2011. on october6,2011, the defendants moved to dismiss, and by a decision dated june21,2012, the district
court dismissed the claims based on group inc.s not disclosing that it had received a wells notice from the staff of the sec related to the abacus 2007-ac1 transaction, but permitted the plaintiffs other claims to proceed.
on february1,2013, a putative shareholder derivative action was filed in the u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york against group inc. and certain of its officers and directors in connection with mortgage-related activities during 2006 and 2007, including three cdo offerings. the derivative complaint, which is based on similar allegations to
those at issue in the consolidated class action discussed above and purported shareholder derivative actions that were previously dismissed, includes allegations of breach of fiduciary duty, challenges the accuracy and adequacy of group inc.s
disclosure and seeks, among other things, declaratory relief, unspecified compensatory and punitive damages and restitution from the individual defendants and certain corporate governancereforms.
in june2012, the board received a demand from a shareholder that the board investigate and take action relating to the firms
mortgage-related activities and to stock sales by certain directors and executives of the firm. on february15,2013, this shareholder filed a putative shareholder derivative action in the newyork supreme court, newyork county,
against group inc. and certain current or former directors and employees, based on these activities and stock sales. the derivative complaint includes allegations of breach of fiduciary duty, unjust enrichment, abuse of control, gross mismanagement
and corporate waste, and seeks, among other things, unspecified monetary damages, disgorgement of profits and certain corporate governance and disclosure reforms.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
gs&co., goldman sachs mortgage company (gsmc) and gs mortgage securities corp. (gsmsc)
and three current or former goldman sachs employees are defendants in a putative class action commenced on december11,2008 in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york brought on behalf of purchasers of various
mortgage pass-through certificates and asset-backed certificates issued by various securitization trusts established by the firm and underwritten by gs&co. in 2007. the complaint generally alleges that the registration statement and prospectus
supplements for the certificates violated the federal securities laws, and seeks unspecified compensatory damages and rescission or rescissionary damages. following dismissals of certain of the plaintiffs claims under the initial and three
amended complaints, on may5,2011, the court granted plaintiffs motion for entry of a final judgment dismissing all its claims, thereby allowing plaintiff to appeal. the plaintiff appealed from the dismissal with respect to all 17
of the offerings included in its original complaint. by a decision dated september6,2012, the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit affirmed the district courts dismissal of plaintiffs claims with respect to 10 of the
offerings included in plaintiffs original complaint but vacated the dismissal and remanded the case to the district court with instructions to reinstate the plaintiffs claims with respect to the other seven offerings. on
october26,2012, the defendants filed a petition for certiorari with the u.s. supreme court seeking review of the second circuit decision. on october31,2012, the plaintiff served defendants with a fourth amended complaint
relating to those seven offerings, plus seven additional offerings. on june3,2010, another investor (who had unsuccessfully sought to intervene in the action) filed a separate putative class action asserting substantively similar
allegations relating to one of the offerings included in the initial plaintiffs complaint. the district court twice granted defendants motions to dismiss this separate action, both times with leave to replead. on july9,2012,
that separate plaintiff filed a second amended complaint, and the
defendants moved to dismiss on september21,2012. on december26,2012, that separate plaintiff filed a motion to amend the second amended complaint to add claims with
respect to two additional offerings included in the initial plaintiffs complaint. the securitization trusts issued, and gs&co. underwrote, approximately $11billion principal amount of certificates to all purchasers in the fourteen
offerings at issue in the complaints.  group inc., gs&co., gsmc and gsmsc are among the defendants in a separate putative
class action commenced on february6,2009 in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york brought on behalf of purchasers of various mortgage pass-through certificates and asset-backed certificates issued by various
securitization trusts established by the firm and underwritten by gs&co. in 2006. the other original defendants include three current or former goldman sachs employees and various rating agencies. the second amended complaint generally alleges
that the registration statement and prospectus supplements for the certificates violated the federal securities laws, and seeks unspecified compensatory and rescissionary damages. defendants moved to dismiss the second amended complaint. on
january12,2011, the district court granted the motion to dismiss with respect to offerings in which plaintiff had not purchased securities as well as all claims against the rating agencies, but denied the motion to dismiss with respect
to a single offering in which the plaintiff allegedly purchased securities. these trusts issued, and gs&co. underwrote, approximately $698million principal amount of certificates to all purchasers in the offerings at issue in the complaint
(excluding those offerings for which the claims have been dismissed). on february2,2012, the district court granted the plaintiffs motion for class certification and on june13,2012, the u.s. court of appeals for the
second circuit granted defendants petition to review that ruling. on november8,2012, the court approved a settlement between the parties, and gs&co. has paid the full amount of the settlement into an escrow account. the time
for any appeal from the approval of the settlement hasexpired.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
on september30,2010, a putative class action was filed in the u.s. district
court for the southern district of new york against gs&co., group inc. and two former gs&co. employees on behalf of investors in $821million of notes issued in 2006 and 2007 by two synthetic cdos (hudson mezzanine 2006-1 and 2006-2).
the complaint, which was amended on february4,2011, asserts federal securities law and common law claims, and seeks unspecified compensatory, punitive and other damages. the defendants moved to dismiss on april5,2011, and the
motion was granted as to plaintiffs claim of market manipulation and denied as to the remainder of plaintiffs claims by a decision dated march21,2012. on may21,2012, the defendants counterclaimed for breach of
contract and fraud. on december 17, 2012, the plaintiff moved for class certification.  gs&co., gsmc and gsmsc are among
the defendants in a lawsuit filed in august2011 by cifg assurance of north america, inc. (cifg) in new york supreme court, new york county. the complaint alleges that cifg was fraudulently induced to provide credit enhancement for a 2007
securitization sponsored by gsmc, and seeks, among other things, the repurchase of $24.7million in aggregate principal amount of mortgages that cifg had previously stated to be non-conforming, an accounting for any proceeds associated with
mortgages discharged from the securitization and unspecified compensatory damages. on october17,2011, the goldman sachs defendants moved to dismiss. by a decision dated may1,2012, the court dismissed the fraud and accounting
claims but denied the motion as to certain breach of contract claims that were also alleged. on june6,2012, the goldman sachs defendants filed counterclaims for breach of contract. in addition, the parties have each appealed the
courts may1,2012 decision to the extent adverse. the parties have been ordered to mediate, and proceedings in the trial court have been stayed pending mediation.
in addition, on january15,2013, cifg filed a complaint against gs&co. in new york supreme court, new york county, alleging
that gs&co. falsely represented that a third party would independently select the collateral for a 2006 cdo. cifg seeks unspecified compensatory and punitive damages, including approximately $10 million in connection with its purchase of notes
and over $30 million for payments to discharge alleged liabilities arising from its issuance of a financial guaranty insurance policy guaranteeing payment on a credit default swap referencing thecdo.
various alleged purchasers of, and counterparties involved in transactions relating to,
mortgage pass-through certificates, cdos and other mortgage-related products (including certain allstate affiliates, bank hapoalim b.m., basis yield alpha fund (master), bayerische landesbank, cambridge place investment management inc., the
charlesschwab corporation, deutsche zentral-genossenschaftbank, the fdic (as receiver for guaranty bank), the federal home loan banks of boston, chicago, indianapolis and seattle, the fhfa (as conservator for fannie mae and freddie mac), hsh
nordbank, ikb deutsche industriebank ag, landesbank baden-wrttemberg, joel i. sher (chapter 11 trustee) on behalf of tmst, inc. (tmst), f/k/a thornburg mortgage, inc. and certain tmst affiliates, john hancock and related parties, massachusetts
mutual life insurance company, moneygram payment systems, inc., national australia bank, the national credit union administration, phoenix light sf limited and related parties, prudential insurance company of america and related parties, royal park
investments sa/nv, sealink funding limited, stichting pensioenfonds abp, the union central life insurance company, ameritas life insurance corp., acacia life insurance company, watertown savings bank, and the western and southern life insurance co.)
have filed complaints or summonses with notice in state and federal court or initiated arbitration proceedings against firm affiliates, generally alleging that the offering documents for the securities that they purchased contained untrue statements
of material fact and material omissions and generally seeking rescission and/or damages. certain of these complaints allege fraud and seek punitive damages. certain of these complaints also name other firms asdefendants.
a number of other entities (including american international group, inc. (aig), deutsche bank national trust company, john hancock and
related parties, m&t bank, norges bank investment management and selective insurance company) have threatened to assert claims of various types against the firm in connection with various mortgage-related transactions, and the firm has entered
into agreements with a number of these entities to toll the relevant statuteoflimitations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
as of the date hereof, the aggregate notional amount of mortgage-related securities sold to
plaintiffs in active cases brought against the firm where those plaintiffs are seeking rescission of such securities was approximately $20.7billion (which does not reflect adjustment for any subsequent paydowns or distributions or any residual
value of such securities, statutory interest or any other adjustments that may be claimed). this amount does not include the threatened claims noted above, potential claims by these or other purchasers in the same or other mortgage-related offerings
that have not actually been brought against the firm, or claims that have been dismissed.  in june2011, heungkuk life
insurance co. limited (heungkuk) filed a criminal complaint against certain past and present employees of the firm in south korea relating to its purchase of a cdo securitization from goldman sachs. heungkuk had earlier initiated civil litigation
against the firm relating to this matter. this civil litigation has now been settled and, on january23,2013, heungkuk withdrew the criminal complaint in its entirety.
group inc. and gs bank usa have entered into a consent order and a settlement in principle with the federal reserve board relating to the
servicing of residential mortgage loans and foreclosure practices. in addition, gs bank usa has entered into an agreement on mortgage servicing practices with the new york state department of financial services, litton and ocwen. see note18
for information about thesesettlements.  group inc., gs&co. and gsmc are among the numerous financial services firms
named as defendants in a qui tam action originally filed by a relator on april7,2010 purportedly on behalf of the city of chicago and state of illinois in cook county, illinois circuit court asserting claims under the illinois
whistleblower reward and protection act and chicago false claims act, based on allegations that defendants had falsely certified compliance with various illinois laws, which were purportedly violated in connection with mortgage origination and
servicing activities. the complaint, which was originally filed under seal, seeks treble damages and civil penalties. plaintiff filed an amended complaint on december28,2011, naming
gs&co. and gsmc, among others, as additional defendants and a second amended complaint on february8,2012. on march12,2012, the action was removed to the u.s. district
court for the northern district of illinois, and on september17,2012 the district court granted the plaintiffs motion to remand the action to state court. on november16,2012, the defendants moved to dismiss and to stay
discovery.  group inc., litton and ocwen are defendants in a putative class action filed on january23,2013 in the
u.s. district court for the southern district of new york generally challenging the procurement manner and scope of force-placed hazard insurance arranged by litton when homeowners failed to arrange for insurance as required by their
mortgages. the complaint asserts claims for breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, misappropriation, conversion, unjust enrichment and violation of florida unfair practices law, and seeks unspecified compensatory and punitive damages as well
as declaratory and injunctiverelief.  the firm has also received, and continues to receive, requests for information
and/or subpoenas from federal, state and local regulators and law enforcement authorities, relating to the mortgage-related securitization process, subprime mortgages, cdos, synthetic mortgage-related products, particular transactions involving
these products, and servicing and foreclosure activities, and is cooperating with these regulators and other authorities, including in some cases agreeing to the tolling of the relevant statute oflimitations. see also financial
crisis-related mattersbelow.  the firm expects to be the subject of additional putative shareholder derivative
actions, purported class actions, rescission and put back claims and other litigation, additional investor and shareholder demands, and additional regulatory and other investigations and actions with respect to mortgage-related
offerings, loan sales, cdos, and servicing and foreclosure activities. see note18 for further information regarding mortgage-relatedcontingencies.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
private equity-sponsored acquisitions
litigation. group inc. and gs capital partners are among numerous private equity firms and investment banks named as defendants in a federal antitrust action filed in the u.s.
district court for the district of massachusetts in december2007. as amended, the complaint generally alleges that the defendants have colluded to limit competition in bidding for private equity-sponsored acquisitions of public companies,
thereby resulting in lower prevailing bids and, by extension, less consideration for shareholders of those companies in violation of section1 of the u.s. sherman antitrust act and common law. the complaint seeks, among other things, treble
damages in an unspecified amount. defendants moved to dismiss on august27,2008. the district court dismissed claims relating to certain transactions that were the subject of releases as part of the settlement of shareholder actions
challenging such transactions, and by an order dated december15,2008 otherwise denied the motion to dismiss. on april26,2010, the plaintiffs moved for leave to proceed with a second phase of discovery encompassing additional
transactions. on august18,2010, the court permitted discovery on eight additional transactions, and the plaintiffs filed a fourth amended complaint on october7,2010. on january13,2011, the court granted
defendants motion to dismiss certain aspects of the fourth amended complaint. on march1,2011, the court granted the motion filed by certain defendants, including group inc., to dismiss another claim of the fourth amended complaint
on the grounds that the transaction was the subject of a release as part of the settlement of a shareholder action challenging the transaction. on june14,2012, the plaintiffs filed a fifth amended complaint encompassing additional
transactions. on july18,2012, the court granted defendants motion to dismiss certain newly asserted claims on the grounds that certain transactions are subject to releases as part of settlements of shareholder actions challenging
those transactions, and denied defendants motion to dismiss certain additional claims as time-barred. on july23,2012, the defendants filed motions for summaryjudgment.
indymac pass-through certificates
litigation. gs&co. is among numerous underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities class action filed on may14,2009 in the u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york. as to the underwriters, plaintiffs allege that the offering documents in connection with various securitizations of mortgage-related assets violated the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws. the defendants
include indymac-related entities formed in connection with the securitizations, the underwriters of the offerings, certain ratings agencies which evaluated the credit quality of the securities, and certain former officers and directors of indymac
affiliates. on november2,2009, the underwriters moved to dismiss the complaint. the motion was granted in part on february17,2010 to the extent of dismissing claims based on offerings in which no plaintiff purchased, and the
court reserved judgment as to the other aspects of the motion. by a decision dated june21,2010, the district court formally dismissed all claims relating to offerings in which no named plaintiff purchased certificates (including all
offerings underwritten by gs&co.), and both granted and denied the defendants motions to dismiss in various other respects. on november16,2012 the district court denied the plaintiffs motion seeking reinstatement of
claims relating to 42 offerings previously dismissed for lack of standing (one of which was co-underwritten by gs&co.) without prejudice to renewal depending on the outcome of the petition for a writ of certiorari to the u.s. supreme court with
respect to the second circuits decision described above. on may17,2010, four additional investors filed a motion seeking to intervene in order to assert claims based on additional offerings (including two underwritten by
gs&co.). the defendants opposed the motion on the ground that the putative intervenors claims were time-barred and, on june21,2011, the court denied the motion to intervene with respect to, among others, the claims based on the
offerings underwritten by gs&co. certain of the putative intervenors (including those seeking to assert claims based on two offerings underwritten by gs&co.) have appealed. gs&co. underwrote approximately $751million principal
amount of securities to all purchasers in the offerings at issue in the may2010 motion tointervene.  on
july11,2008, indymac bank was placed under an fdic receivership, and on july31,2008, indymac bancorp, inc. filed for chapter 7 bankruptcy in the u.s. bankruptcy court in los angeles, california.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
rali pass-through certificates
litigation. gs&co. is among numerous underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities class action initially filed in september2008 in new york supreme court, and
subsequently removed to the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york. as to the underwriters, plaintiffs allege that the offering documents in connection with various offerings of mortgage-backed pass-through certificates violated
the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws. in addition to the underwriters, the defendants include residential capital, llc (rescap), residential accredit loans, inc. (rali), residential funding corporation (rfc), residential
funding securities corporation (rfsc), and certain of their officers and directors. on march31,2010, the defendants motion to dismiss was granted in part and denied in part by the district court, resulting in dismissal on the basis
of standing of all claims relating to offerings in which no plaintiff purchased securities and, by an order dated january3,2013, the district court denied, without prejudice, plaintiffs motion for reconsideration. in juneand
july2010, the lead plaintiff and five additional investors moved to intervene in order to assert claims based on additional offerings (including two underwritten by gs&co.). on april28,2011, the court granted defendants
motion to dismiss as to certain of these claims (including those relating to one offering underwritten by gs&co. based on a release in an unrelated settlement), but otherwise permitted the intervenor case to proceed. by an order dated
january3,2013, the district court denied the defendants motions to dismiss certain of the intervenors remaining claims as time barred. class certification of the claims based on the pre-intervention offerings was initially
denied by the district court, and that denial was upheld on appeal; however, following remand, on october15,2012, the district court certified a class in connection with the pre-intervention offerings. on november5,2012, the
defendants filed a petition seeking leave from the u.s. court of appeals to appeal the certification order. by an order dated january3,2013, the district court granted the plaintiffs application to modify the class definition to
include initial purchasers who bought the securities directly from the underwriters or their agents no later than ten trading days after the offering date (rather than just on the offering date). on january18,2013, the defendants filed a
supplemental petition seeking leave from the u.s.court of appeals to appeal the order modifying the classdefinition.
gs&co. underwrote approximately $1.28billion principal amount of securities to
all purchasers in the offerings for which claims have not been dismissed. on may14,2012, rescap, rali and rfc filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in the u.s. bankruptcy court for the southern district of new york and the action has been
stayed with respect to them, rfsc and certain of their officers and directors.
mf global securities litigation. gs&co. is among numerous underwriters named as defendants in class action complaints filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york commencing november18,2011.
these complaints generally allege that the offering materials for two offerings of mf global holdings ltd. convertible notes (aggregating approximately $575million in principal amount) in february2011 and july2011, among other
things, failed to describe adequately the nature, scope and risks of mf globals exposure to european sovereign debt, in violation of the disclosure requirements of the federal securities laws. on august20,2012, the plaintiffs filed
a consolidated amended complaint and on october19,2012, the defendants filed motions to dismiss the amended complaint. gs&co. underwrote an aggregate principal amount of approximately $214million of the notes. on
october31,2011, mf global holdings ltd. filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in the u.s. bankruptcy court in manhattan, new york.  gs&co. has also received inquiries from various governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations concerning certain transactions with mf global prior to its bankruptcy filing.
goldman sachs is cooperating with all suchinquiries.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
employment-related matters. on september15,2010, a putative class action was filed in the u.s. district for the southern district of new york by three former female employees alleging that group inc. and gs&co. have
systematically discriminated against female employees in respect of compensation, promotion, assignments, mentoring and performance evaluations. the complaint alleges a class consisting of all female employees employed at specified levels by group
inc. and gs&co. since july2002, and asserts claims under federal and new york city discrimination laws. the complaint seeks class action status, injunctive relief and unspecified amounts of compensatory, punitive and other damages. group
inc. and gs&co. filed a motion to stay the claims of one of the named plaintiffs and to compel individual arbitration with that individual, based on an arbitration provision contained in an employment agreement between group inc. and the
individual. on april28,2011, the magistrate judge to whom the district judge assigned the motion denied the motion, and the district court affirmed the magistrate judges decision on november15,2011. group inc. and
gs&co. have appealed that decision to the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit. on june13,2011, group inc. and gs&co. moved to strike the class allegations of one of the three named plaintiffs based on her failure to
exhaust administrative remedies. on september29,2011, the magistrate judge recommended denial of the motion to strike and, on january10,2012, the district court denied the motion to strike. on july22,2011, group
inc. and gs&co. moved to strike all of the plaintiffs class allegations, and for partial summary judgment as to plaintiffs disparate impact claims. by a decision dated january19,2012, the magistrate judge recommended that
defendants motion be denied as premature. the defendants filed objections to that recommendation with the district judge and on july17,2012, the district court issued a decision granting in part group inc.s and
gs&co.s motion to strike plaintiffs class allegations on the ground that plaintiffs lacked standing to pursue certain equitable remedies and denying in part group inc.s and gs&co.s motion to strike plaintiffs
class allegations in their entirety aspremature.
investment management
services. group inc. and certain of its affiliates are parties to various civil litigation and arbitration proceedings and other disputes with clients relating to losses allegedly
sustained as a result of the firms investment management services. these claims generally seek, among other things, restitution or other compensatory damages and, in some cases, punitive damages. in addition, group inc. and its affiliates are
subject from time to time to investigations and reviews by various governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations in connection with the firms investment management services. goldman sachs is cooperating with all such
investigations andreviews.  goldman sachs asset management international (gsami) is the defendant in an action filed on
july9,2012 with the high court of justice in london by certain entities representing vervoer, a dutch pension fund, alleging that gsami was negligent in performing its duties as investment manager in connection with the allocation of the
plaintiffs funds among asset managers in accordance with asset allocations provided by plaintiffs and that gsami breached its contractual and common law duties to the plaintiffs. specifically, plaintiffs allege that gsami caused their assets
to be invested in unsuitable products for an extended period, thereby causing in excess of 67million in losses, and caused them to be under-exposed for a period of time to certain other investments that performed well, thereby resulting
in foregone potential gains. the plaintiffs are seeking unspecified monetary damages. on november2,2012, gsami served its defense to the allegations and on december21,2012, the plaintiffs served their reply to
thedefense.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
financial advisory services. group inc. and certain of its affiliates are parties to various civil litigation and arbitration proceedings and other disputes with clients and third parties relating to the firms financial
advisory activities. these claims generally seek, among other things, compensatory damages and, in some cases, punitive damages, and in certain cases allege that the firm did not appropriately disclose or deal with conflicts of interest. in
addition, group inc. and its affiliates are subject from time to time to investigations and reviews by various governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations in connection with conflicts of interest. goldman sachs is
cooperating with all such investigations andreviews.  group inc., gs&co. and the goldman, sachs& co. l.l.c.
are defendants in an action brought by the founders and former majority shareholders of dragon systems, inc. (dragon) on november18,2008, alleging that the plaintiffs incurred losses due to gs&co.s financial advisory services
provided in connection with the plaintiffs exchange of their purported $300million interest in dragon for stock of lernout& hauspie speech products, n.v. (l&h) in 2000. l&h filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in the u.s.
bankruptcy court in wilmington, delaware on november29,2000. the action is pending in the united states district court for the district of massachusetts. the complaint, which was amended in november2011 following the 2009 dismissal
of certain of the plaintiffs initial claims, seeks unspecified compensatory, punitive and other damages, and alleges breach of fiduciary duty, violation of massachusetts unfair trade practices laws, negligence, negligent and intentional
misrepresentation, gross negligence, willful misconduct and bad faith. former minority shareholders of dragon have brought a similar action against gs&co. with respect to their purported $49million interest in dragon, and this action has
been consolidated with the action described above. all parties moved for summary judgment. by an order dated october31,2012, the court granted summary judgment with respect to certain counterclaims and an indemnification claim brought by
the goldman sachs defendants against one of the shareholders, but denied summary judgment with respect to all other claims. on january23,2013, a jury found in favor of the goldman sachs defendants on the plaintiffs claims for
negligence, negligent and intentional misrepresentation, gross negligence, and breach of fiduciary duty. the plaintiffs claims for violation of massachusetts unfair trade practices laws will be addressed by the district court and have not yet
beendecided.
sales, trading and clearance
practices. group inc. and certain of its affiliates are subject to a number of investigations and reviews, certain of which are industry-wide, by various governmental and regulatory
bodies and self-regulatory organizations relating to the sales, trading and clearance of corporate and government securities and other financial products, including compliance with the secs short sale rule, algorithmic and quantitative
trading, futures trading, transaction reporting, securities lending practices, trading and clearance of credit derivative instruments, commodities trading, private placement practices and compliance with the u.s. foreign corrupt practicesact.
the european commission announced in april2011 that it was initiating proceedings to investigate further numerous
financial services companies, including group inc., in connection with the supply of data related to credit default swaps and in connection with profit sharing and fee arrangements for clearing of credit default swaps, including potential
anti-competitive practices. the proceedings in connection with the supply of data related to credit default swaps are ongoing. group inc.s current understanding is that the proceedings related to profit sharing and fee arrangements for
clearing of credit default swaps have been suspended indefinitely. the firm has received civil investigative demands from the u.s. department of justice (doj) for information on similar matters. goldman sachs is cooperating with the investigations
and reviews.  insider trading investigations. from time to time, the firm and its employees are the subject of or otherwise involved in regulatory investigations relating to insider trading, the potential misuse of material nonpublic information and
the effectiveness of the firms insider trading controls and information barriers. it is the firms practice to cooperate fully with any such investigations.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
research investigations. from time to time, the firm is the subject of or otherwise involved in regulatory investigations relating to research practices, including research independence and interactions between research analysts
and other firm personnel, including investment banking personnel. it is the firms practice to cooperate fully with any suchinvestigations.  eu price-fixing matter. on july5,2011, the european commission issued a
statement of objections to group inc. raising allegations of an industry-wide conspiracy to fix prices for power cables, including by an italian cable company in which certain goldman sachs-affiliated investment funds held ownership interests from
2005 to 2009. the statement of objections proposes to hold group inc. jointly and severally liable for some or all of any fine levied against the cable company under the concept of parental liability under eu competition law.
municipal securities matters. group inc. and certain of its affiliates are subject to a number of investigations and reviews by various governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations relating to transactions
involving municipal securities, including wall-cross procedures and conflict of interest disclosure with respect to state and municipal clients, the trading and structuring of municipal derivative instruments in connection with municipal offerings,
political contribution rules, underwriting of build america bonds and the possible impact of credit default swap transactions on municipal issuers. goldman sachs is cooperating with the investigations and reviews.
group inc., goldman sachs mitsui marine derivative products, l.p. (gsmmdp) and gs bank usa are among numerous financial services firms
that have been named as defendants in numerous substantially identical individual antitrust actions filed beginning on november12,2009 that have been coordinated with related antitrust class action litigation and individual actions, in
which no goldman sachs affiliate is named, for pre-trial proceedings in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york. the plaintiffs include individual california municipal entities and three new york non-profit entities. all of
these complaints against group inc., gsmmdp and gs bank usa generally allege that the goldman sachs defendants
participated in a conspiracy to arrange bids, fix prices and divide up the market for derivatives used by municipalities in refinancing and hedging transactions from 1992 to 2008. the complaints
assert claims under the federal antitrust laws and either californias cartwright act or new yorks donnelly act, and seek, among other things, treble damages under the antitrust laws in an unspecified amount and injunctive relief. on
april26,2010, the goldman sachs defendants motion to dismiss complaints filed by several individual california municipal plaintiffs was denied. on august19,2011, group inc., gsmmdp and gs bank usa were voluntarily
dismissed without prejudice from all actions except one brought by a california municipal entity.  on
august21,2008, gs&co. entered into a settlement in principle with the office of the attorney general of the state of new york and the illinois securities department (on behalf of the north american securities administrators
association) regarding auction rate securities. under the agreement, goldman sachs agreed, among other things, (i)to offer to repurchase at par the outstanding auction rate securities that its private wealth management clients purchased
through the firm prior to february11,2008, with the exception of those auction rate securities where auctions were clearing, (ii)to continue to work with issuers and other interested parties, including regulatory and governmental
entities, to expeditiously provide liquidity solutions for institutional investors, and (iii)to pay a $22.5million fine. the settlement is subject to approval by the various states. gs&co. has entered into consent orders with new
york, illinois and most other states and is in the process of doing so with the remaining states.  on
september4,2008, group inc. was named as a defendant, together with numerous other financial services firms, in two complaints filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york alleging that the defendants engaged in
a conspiracy to manipulate the auction securities market in violation of federal antitrust laws. the actions were filed, respectively, on behalf of putative classes of issuers of and investors in auction rate securities and seek, among other things,
treble damages in an unspecified amount. defendants motion to dismiss was granted on january26,2010. on march1,2010, the plaintiffs appealed from the dismissal of their complaints.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
beginning in february2012, gs&co. was named as respondent in four finra
arbitrations filed, respectively, by the cities of houston, texas and reno, nevada, a california school district and a north carolina municipal power authority, based on gs&co.s role as underwriter and broker-dealer of the claimants
issuances of an aggregate of over $1.8billion of auction rate securities from 2003 through 2007 (in the houston arbitration, two other financial services firms were named as respondents, and in the north carolina arbitration, one other
financial services firm was named). each claimant alleges that gs&co. failed to disclose that it had a practice of placing cover bids on auctions, and failed to offer the claimant the option of a formulaic maximum rate (rather than a fixed
maximum rate), and that, as a result, the claimant was forced to engage in a series of expensive refinancing and conversion transactions after the failure of the auction market (at an estimated cost, in the case of houston, of approximately
$90million). houston and reno also allege that gs&co. advised them to enter into interest rate swaps in connection with their auction rate securities issuances, causing them to incur additional losses (including, in the case of reno, a
swap termination obligation of over $8million). the claimants assert claims for breach of fiduciary duty, fraudulent concealment, negligent misrepresentation, breach of contract, violations of the exchange act and state securities laws, and
breach of duties under the rules of the municipal securities rulemaking board and the nasd, and seek unspecified damages. gs&co. has moved in federal court to enjoin the reno and california school district arbitrations pursuant to an exclusive
forum selection clause in the transaction documents. on november26,2012, this motion was denied with regard tothe reno arbitration and, on february8,2013, this motion was granted with regard to the california school
districtarbitration.
financial crisis-related
matters. group inc. and certain of its affiliates are subject to a number of investigations and reviews by various governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations and
litigation relating to the 2008 financial crisis. goldman sachs is cooperating with the investigations and reviews.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 28. employee benefit plans
note28.
employee benefit plans
the firm sponsors various pension plans and certain other postretirement benefit plans,
primarily healthcare and life insurance. the firm also provides certain benefits to former or inactive employees prior to retirement.  defined benefit
pension plans and postretirement plans  employees of certain non-u.s. subsidiaries participate in various defined benefit
pension plans. these plans generally provide benefits based on years of credited service and a percentage of the employees eligible compensation. the firm maintains a defined benefit pension plan for certain u.k. employees. as of
april2008, the u.k. defined benefit plan was closed to new participants, but will continue to accrue benefits for existing participants. these plans do not have a material impact on the firms consolidated results ofoperations.
the firm also maintains a defined benefit pension plan for substantially all u.s. employees hired prior to
november1,2003. as of november2004, this plan was closed to new participants and frozen such that existing participants would not accrue any additional benefits. in addition, the firm maintains unfunded postretirement benefit plans
that provide medical and life insurance for eligible retirees and their dependents covered under these programs. these plans do not have a material impact on the firms consolidated results of operations.
the firm recognizes the funded status of its defined benefit pension and postretirement
plans, measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the benefit obligation, in the consolidated statements of financial condition. as of december2012, other assets and other liabilities and accrued
expenses included $225million (related to an overfunded pension plan) and $645million, respectively, related to these plans. as of december2011, other assets and other liabilities and accrued expenses
included $135million (related to an overfunded pension plan) and $858million, respectively, related to these plans.  defined contribution
plans  the firm contributes to employer-sponsored u.s. and non-u.s. defined contribution plans. the firms
contribution to these plans was $221million, $225million and $193million for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 29. employee incentive plans
note29.
employee incentive plans
the cost of employee services received in exchange for a share-based award is generally
measured based on the grant-date fair value of the award. share-based awards that do not require future service (i.e., vested awards, including awards granted to retirement-eligible employees) are expensed immediately. share-based awards that
require future service are amortized over the relevant service period. expected forfeitures are included in determining share-based employee compensation expense.  the firm pays cash dividend equivalents on outstanding rsus. dividend equivalents paid on rsus are generally charged to retained earnings. dividend equivalents paid on rsus expected to be forfeited are
included in compensation expense. the firm accounts for the tax benefit related to dividend equivalents paid on rsus as an increase to additional paid-in capital.  in certain cases, primarily related to conflicted employment (as outlined in the applicable award agreements), the firm may cash settle share-based compensation awards accounted for as equity instruments.
for these awards, whose terms allow for cash settlement, additional paid-in capital is adjusted to the extent of the difference between the value of the award at the time of cash settlement and the grant-date value of the award.
stock incentive plan  the firm sponsors a stock incentive plan, the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (sip), which provides for grants of incentive stock options, nonqualified stock options, stock
appreciation rights, dividend equivalent rights, restricted stock, rsus, awards with performance conditions and other share-based awards. in the second quarter of 2003, the sip was approved by the firms shareholders, effective for grants after
april1,2003. the sip was amended and restated, effective december31,2008 and further amended on december20,2012 to extend its term until group inc.s 2013 annual meeting of shareholders, at which meeting
approval of a new equity compensation plan will be voted upon by shareholders.  the total number of shares of common stock that
may be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the sip through the end of the 2008 fiscal year could not exceed 250million shares. the total number of shares of common stock that may be delivered for awards granted under the sip in the 2009
fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter cannot exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock, determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year, increased by the number of shares available for awards in
previous years but not covered by awards granted in such years. as of december2012 and december2011, 188.3million and 161.0million shares, respectively, were available for grant under the sip.
restricted stock units  the firm
grants rsus to employees under the sip, primarily in connection with year-end compensation and acquisitions. rsus are valued based on the closing price of the underlying shares on the date of grant after taking into account a liquidity discount for
any applicable post-vesting transfer restrictions. year-end rsus generally vest and underlying shares of common stock deliver as outlined in the applicable rsu agreements. employee rsu agreements generally provide that vesting is accelerated in
certain circumstances, such as on retirement, death and extended absence. delivery of the underlying shares of common stock is conditioned on the grantees satisfying certain vesting and other requirements outlined in the award agreements. the table
below presents the activity related to rsus.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
restricted stock
units outstanding
weighted averagegrant-date fair value of
restricted stock units outstanding
future
servicerequired
no future
service required
future
service required
nofutureservicerequired
outstanding, december2011
14,302,189
30,840,580
$139.46
$124.33
granted1,2
6,967,886
4,246,015
84.59
84.92
forfeited
(1,228,200
)
(68,350
)
126.97
122.40
delivered3
(30,980,248
)
120.35
vested2
(11,352,354
)
11,352,354
125.03
125.03
outstanding, december2012
8,689,521
15,390,351
116.07
121.99
1.
the weighted average grant-date fair value of rsus granted during the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010 was $84.72,
$141.21 and $132.64, respectively. the fair value of the rsus granted during the year ended december2012, december2011 and december2010 includes a liquidity discount of 21.7%, 12.7% and 13.2%, respectively, to reflect post-vesting
transfer restrictions of up to 4years.
2.
the aggregate fair value of awards that vested during the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010 was $1.57billion,
$2.40billion and $4.07billion, respectively.
3.
includes rsus that were cash settled.
4.
includes restricted stock subject to future service requirements as of december2012 and december2011 of 276,317 and 754,482 shares, respectively.
in the first quarter of 2013, the firm granted to its employees 16.7million year-end
rsus, of which 5.7million rsus require future service as a condition of delivery. these awards are subject to additional conditions as outlined in the award agreements. generally, shares underlying these awards, net of required withholding
tax, deliver over a three-year period but are subject to post-vesting transfer restrictions through january2018. these grants are not included in the abovetable.
stock options  stock options generally vest as outlined in the applicable stock option agreement. options granted in february2010 generally became exercisable in one-third installments in january2011,
january2012 and january2013 and will expire in february2014. in general, options granted prior to february2010 expire on the tenth anniversary of the grant date, although they may be subject to earlier termination or
cancellation under certain circumstances in accordance with the terms of the sip and the applicable stock optionagreement.
the table below presents the activity related to stockoptions.
optionsoutstanding
weightedaverage
exercise price
aggregateintrinsicvalue (inmillions)
weightedaverageremaining life (years)
outstanding, december2011
47,256,938
$97.76
$444
6.08
exercised
(4,009,948
)
78.93
forfeited
(21,600
)
113.68
expired
(8,279
)
78.87
outstanding, december2012
43,217,111
99.51
1,672
5.55
exercisable, december2012
43,203,775
99.49
1,672
5.55
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
the total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended december2012,
december2011 and december2010 was $151million, $143million and
$510million, respectively. the table below presents optionsoutstanding.
exercise price
optionsoutstanding
weightedaverageexerciseprice
weightedaverageremaining
life(years)
$75.00 - $89.99
34,103,907
$78.78
6.00
90.00 - 104.99
275,580
96.08
0.92
105.00 - 119.99
120.00 - 134.99
2,791,500
131.64
2.92
135.00 - 149.99
150.00 - 164.99
65,000
154.16
1.17
165.00 - 194.99
195.00 - 209.99
5,981,124
202.27
4.48
outstanding, december2012
43,217,111
99.51
5.55
the weighted average grant-date fair value of options granted during the year ended
december2010 was $37.58.
the tables below present the primary weighted average assumptions used to estimate fair
value as of the grant datebased on a black-scholes option-pricing model, andshare-based compensation and the related excess tax benefit/(provision).
year ended december
risk-free interest rate
n/a
n/a
1.6
%
expected volatility
n/a
n/a
32.5
annual dividend per share
n/a
n/a
$1.40
expected life
n/a
n/a
3.75years
year ended december
inmillions
share-based compensation
$1,338
$2,843
$4,070
excess tax benefit related to options exercised
excess tax benefit/(provision) related to share-based awards1
(11)
1.
represents the tax benefit/(provision) recognized in additional paid-in capital on stock options exercised and the delivery of common stock underlying
share-basedawards.
as of december2012, there was $434million of total unrecognized compensation
cost related to non-vested share-based compensation arrangements. this cost is
expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 1.62years.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  notes to consolidated financial statements
note 30. parent company
note30.
parent company
group inc. condensed statements of earnings
year ended december
inmillions
revenues
dividends from bank subsidiaries
$
$1,000
$
dividends from nonbank subsidiaries
3,622
4,967
6,032
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
3,682
2,884
other revenues
1,567
(3,381
)
total non-interest revenues
8,871
3,067
9,880
interest income
4,751
4,547
4,153
interest expense
4,287
3,917
3,429
net interest income
netrevenues,includingnetinterestincome
9,335
3,697
10,604
operating
expenses
compensation and benefits
other expenses
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
8,435
3,145
9,943
provision/(benefit) for taxes
(1,297
)
1,589
net earnings
7,475
4,442
8,354
preferred stock dividends
1,932
net earnings applicable to commonshareholders
$7,292
$2,510
$7,713
group inc. condensed statements of financial condition
as of december
inmillions
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$14
$14
loans to and receivables from subsidiaries
bank subsidiaries
4,103
7,196
nonbank subsidiaries 1
174,609
180,397
investments in subsidiaries and other affiliates
bank subsidiaries
20,671
19,226
nonbank subsidiaries and other affiliates
52,646
48,473
financial instruments owned, at fair value
19,132
20,698
other assets
4,782
7,912
total assets
$275,957
$283,916
liabilities and
shareholders equity
payables to subsidiaries
$657
$693
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fairvalue
unsecured short-term borrowings
with third parties2
29,898
35,368
with subsidiaries
4,253
4,701
unsecured long-term borrowings
with third parties3
158,761
166,342
with subsidiaries4
3,574
1,536
other liabilities and accrued expenses
2,797
4,656
total liabilities
200,241
213,537
commitments, contingencies
andguarantees
shareholders
equity
preferred stock
6,200
3,100
common stock
restrictedstockunitsandemployeestockoptions
3,298
5,681
additional paid-in capital
48,030
45,553
retained earnings
65,223
58,834
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(193
)
(516
)
stock held in treasury, at cost
(46,850
)
(42,281
)
total shareholders equity
75,716
70,379
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$275,957
$283,916
group inc. condensed statements of cash flows
year ended december
inmillions
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$7,475
$4,442
$8,354
adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
(3,682
)
(481
)
(2,884
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
(1,258
)
share-based compensation
changesinoperatingassetsandliabilities
financial instruments owned, at fairvalue
1,464
3,557
(176
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fairvalue
(3
)
(536
)
(1,091
)
other, net
2,621
1,422
10,852
netcashprovidedbyoperatingactivities
6,713
9,471
15,680
cash flows from investing
activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements andequipment
(12
)
(42
)
(15
)
repayments of short-term loans by subsidiaries, net ofissuances
6,584
20,319
(9,923
)
issuance of term loans to subsidiaries
(17,414
)
(42,902
)
(5,532
)
repayments of term loans bysubsidiaries
18,715
21,850
1,992
capital distributions from/(contributions to) subsidiaries, net
(298
)
4,642
(1,038
)
net cash provided by/(used for) investingactivities
7,575
3,867
(14,516
)
cash flows from financing
activities
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
(2,647
)
(727
)
3,137
proceeds from issuance oflong-termborrowings
26,160
27,251
21,098
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the current portion
(35,608
)
(27,865
)
(21,838
)
preferred stock repurchased
(3,857
)
common stock repurchased
(4,640
)
(6,048
)
(4,183
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock, preferred stock and restricted stockunits
(1,086
)
(2,771
)
(1,443
)
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuancecosts
3,087
proceeds from issuance of common stock, including stock optionexercises
excess tax benefit related toshare-basedcompensation
cash settlement of share-basedcompensation
(1
)
(40
)
(1
)
net cash used for financing activities
(14,288
)
(13,331
)
(2,297
)
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cashequivalents
(1,133
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning ofyear
1,140
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$14
$14
$7
supplemental disclosures:  cash payments for third-party interest, net of capitalized interest, were $5.11billion, $3.83billion and $3.07billion for the years ended december2012, december2011 and
december2010, respectively.  cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $1.59billion, $1.39billion and
$2.05billion for the years ended december2012, december2011 and december2010, respectively.  non-cash
activity:  during the year ended december2011, $103million of common stock was issued in connection with the acquisition
of gs australia.
1.
primarily includes overnight loans, the proceeds of which can be used to satisfy the short-term obligations of group inc.
2.
includes $4.91billion and $6.25billion at fair value as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
3.
includes $8.19billion and $12.91billion at fair value as of december2012 and december2011, respectively.
4.
unsecured long-term borrowings with subsidiaries by maturity date are $434million in 2014, $191million in 2015, $2.08billion in 2016,
$107million in 2017, and $766million in 2018-thereafter.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
quarterly results (unaudited)
the following represents the firms unaudited quarterly results for the years ended
december2012 and december2011. these quarterly results were prepared in accordance with u.s. gaap and reflect all adjustments that
are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair statement of the results. these adjustments are of a normal, recurring nature.
three months ended
inmillions, except per share data
december2012
september2012
june2012
march2012
total non-interest revenues
$8,263
$7,515
$5,537
$8,968
interest income
2,864
2,629
3,055
2,833
interest expense
1,891
1,793
1,965
1,852
net interest income
1,090
net revenues, including net interest income
9,236
8,351
6,627
9,949
operating
expenses1
4,923
6,053
5,212
6,768
pre-tax earnings
4,313
2,298
1,415
3,181
provision for taxes
1,421
1,072
net earnings
2,892
1,512
2,109
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$2,833
$1,458
$927
$2,074
earnings per common share
basic
$5.87
$2.95
$1.83
$4.05
diluted
5.60
2.85
1.78
3.92
dividends declared per common share
0.50
0.46
0.46
0.35
three months ended
inmillions, except per share data
december2011
september2011
june2011
march2011
total non-interest revenues
$4,984
$2,231
$5,868
$10,536
interest income
3,032
3,354
3,681
3,107
interest expense
1,967
1,998
2,268
1,749
net interest income
1,065
1,356
1,413
1,358
net revenues, including net interest income
6,049
3,587
7,281
11,894
operating
expenses1
4,802
4,317
5,669
7,854
pre-tax earnings/(loss)
1,247
(730
)
1,612
4,040
provision/(benefit) for taxes
(337
)
1,305
net earnings/(loss)
1,013
(393
)
1,087
2,735
preferred stock dividends
1,827
net earnings/(loss) applicable to common shareholders
$978
$(428
)
$1,052
$908
earnings/(loss) per common share
basic
$1.91
$(0.84
)
$1.96
$1.66
diluted
1.84
(0.84
)
1.85
1.56
dividends declared per common share
0.35
0.35
0.35
0.35
1.
the timing and magnitude of changes in the firms discretionary compensation accruals can have a significant effect on results in a given quarter.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
common stock price range
the table below presents the high and low sales prices per share of the firms common stock.
year ended december
high
low
high
low
high
low
first quarter
$128.72
$92.42
$175.34
$153.26
$178.75
$147.81
second quarter
125.54
90.43
164.40
128.30
186.41
131.02
third quarter
122.60
91.15
139.25
91.40
157.25
129.50
fourth quarter
129.72
113.84
118.07
84.27
171.61
144.70
as of february15,2013, there were 13,297 holders of record of the
firms common stock.
on february15,2013, the last reported sales price for the firms common
stock on the new york stock exchange was $154.99 per share.
common stock
performance
the following graph compares the performance of an investment in the firms common
stock from november30,2007 through december31,2012, with the s&p 500 index and the s&p 500 financials index. the graph assumes $100 was invested on november30,2007 in each of the firms common stock,
the s&p 500 index and
the s&p 500 financials index, and the dividends were reinvested on the date of payment without payment of any commissions. the performance shown in the graph represents past performance and
should not be considered an indication of future performance.
the table below shows the cumulative total returns in dollars of the firms common
stock, the s&p 500 index and the s&p 500 financials index for goldman sachs last five fiscal year
ends1, assuming $100 was invested on
november30,2007 in each of the firms common stock,
the s&p 500 index and the s&p 500 financials index, and the dividends were reinvested on the date of payment without payment of any commissions. the performance shown in the table
represents past performance and should not be considered an indication of future performance.
11/30/07
11/28/08
12/31/09
12/31/10
12/31/11
12/31/12
the goldman sachs group, inc.
$100.00
$35.16
$76.08
$76.49
$41.61
$59.66
s&p 500 index
100.00
61.91
79.13
91.04
92.96
107.84
s&p 500 financials index
100.00
42.42
49.61
55.65
46.18
59.53
1.
as a result of the firms change in fiscal year-end during 2009, this table includes 61months beginning november30,2007 and ending
december31,2012.
goldmansachs2012form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
selected financial data
as of or for the
year ended
onemonthended
december
december
december
december
november
december 2008
income statement data (inmillions)
total non-interest revenues
$30,283
$23,619
$33,658
$37,766
$17,946
$(502
)
interest income
11,381
13,174
12,309
13,907
35,633
1,687
interest expense
7,501
7,982
6,806
6,500
31,357
1,002
net interest income
3,880
5,192
5,503
7,407
4,276
net revenues, including net interest income
34,163
28,811
39,161
45,173
22,222
compensation and benefits
12,944
12,223
15,376
16,193
10,934
u.k. bank payroll tax
other operating expenses
10,012
10,419
10,428
9,151
8,952
pre-tax earnings/(loss)
$11,207
$6,169
$12,892
$19,829
$2,336
$(1,258
)
balance sheet data
(inmillions)
total assets
$938,555
$923,225
$911,332
$848,942
$884,547
$1,112,225
other secured financings (long-term)
8,965
8,179
13,848
11,203
17,458
18,413
unsecured long-term borrowings
167,305
173,545
174,399
185,085
168,220
185,564
total liabilities
862,839
852,846
833,976
778,228
820,178
1,049,171
total shareholders equity
75,716
70,379
77,356
70,714
64,369
63,054
common share data (inmillions, except per share amounts)
earnings/(loss) per common share
basic
$14.63
$4.71
$14.15
$23.74
$4.67
$(2.15
)
diluted
14.13
4.51
13.18
22.13
4.47
(2.15
)
dividends declared per common share
1.77
1.40
1.40
1.05
1.40
0.47
book value per common
share2
144.67
130.31
128.72
117.48
98.68
95.84
average common shares outstanding
basic
496.2
524.6
542.0
512.3
437.0
485.5
diluted
516.1
556.9
585.3
550.9
456.2
485.5
selected data
(unaudited)
total staff
americas
16,400
17,200
19,900
18,900
19,700
19,200
non-americas
16,000
16,100
15,800
13,600
14,800
14,100
total staff
32,400
33,300
35,700
32,500
34,500
33,300
assets under management (inbillions)
asset class
alternative investments
$133
$142
$148
$146
$146
$145
equity
fixed income
total non-money market assets
money markets
total assets under management
$854
$828
$840
$871
$779
$798
1.
in connection with becoming a bank holding company, the firm was required to change its fiscal year-end from novemberto december. december2008
represents the period from november29,2008 to december26,2008.
2.
book value per common share is based on common shares outstanding, including rsus granted to employees with no future service requirements, of
480.5million, 516.3million, 546.9million, 542.7million, 485.4million and 485.9million as of december2012, december2011, december2010, december2009, november2008 and
december2008, respectively.
3.
rounded to the nearest penny. exact dividend amount was $0.4666666 per common share and was reflective of a four-month period (december2008 through
march2009), due to the change in the firms fiscal year-end.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
statistical disclosures  distribution of assets, liabilities and shareholders equity  the table below
presents a summary of consolidated average balances and interest rates.
for the year ended december
inmillions, except rates
average
balance
interest
average
rate
average
balance
interest
averagerate
average
balance
interest
average
rate
assets
deposits with banks
$52,500
$156
0.30
%
$38,039
$125
0.33
%
$29,371
$86
0.29
%
u.s.
49,123
0.27
32,770
0.29
24,988
0.27
non-u.s.
3,377
0.71
5,269
0.57
4,383
0.43
securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds sold
331,828
(77
)
(0.02
)
351,896
0.19
353,719
0.15
u.s.
191,166
(431
)
(0.23
)
219,240
(249
)
(0.11
)
243,907
0.03
non-u.s.
140,662
0.25
132,656
0.69
109,812
0.42
financial instruments owned, at fair value1,
310,982
9,817
3.16
287,322
10,718
3.73
273,801
10,346
3.78
u.s.
190,490
6,548
3.44
183,920
7,477
4.07
189,136
7,865
4.16
non-u.s.
120,492
3,269
2.71
103,402
3,241
3.13
84,665
2,481
2.93
other interest-earning assets3
136,427
1,485
1.09
143,270
1,665
1.16
118,364
1,337
1.13
u.s.
90,071
1.08
99,042
0.92
82,965
0.83
non-u.s.
46,356
1.10
44,228
1.70
35,399
1.83
total interest-earning assets
831,737
11,381
1.37
820,527
13,174
1.61
775,255
12,309
1.59
cash and due from banks
7,357
4,987
3,709
other non-interest-earning assets2
107,702
118,901
113,310
total assets
$946,796
$944,415
$892,274
liabilities
interest-bearing deposits
$56,399
0.71
$40,266
0.70
$38,011
0.80
u.s.
48,668
0.74
33,234
0.73
31,418
0.89
non-u.s.
7,731
0.48
7,032
0.53
6,593
0.38
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements torepurchase
177,550
0.46
171,753
0.53
160,280
0.44
u.s.
121,145
0.31
110,235
0.25
112,839
0.31
non-u.s.
56,405
0.78
61,518
1.02
47,441
0.74
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair
value1, 2
94,740
2,438
2.57
102,282
2,464
2.41
89,040
1,859
2.09
u.s.
41,436
2.06
52,065
1.89
44,713
1.83
non-u.s.
53,304
1,586
2.98
50,217
1,480
2.95
44,327
1,041
2.35
short-term borrowings4, 5
70,359
0.83
78,497
0.67
55,512
0.82
u.s.
47,614
1.01
50,659
0.85
33,306
1.18
non-u.s.
22,745
0.45
27,838
0.34
22,206
0.27
long-term borrowings5, 6
176,698
3,736
2.11
186,148
3,439
1.85
193,031
3,155
1.63
u.s.
170,163
3,582
2.11
179,004
3,235
1.81
183,338
2,910
1.59
non-u.s.
6,535
2.36
7,144
2.86
9,693
2.53
other interest-bearing liabilities7
206,790
(475
)
(0.23
)
203,940
0.18
189,008
0.17
u.s.
150,986
(988
)
(0.65
)
149,958
(535
)
(0.36
)
142,752
(221
)
(0.15
)
non-u.s.
55,804
0.92
53,982
1.67
46,256
1.18
total interest-bearing liabilities
782,536
7,501
0.96
782,886
7,982
1.02
724,882
6,806
0.94
non-interest-bearing deposits
other non-interest-bearing liabilities2
91,406
88,681
92,966
total liabilities
874,266
871,707
818,017
shareholders equity
preferred stock
4,392
3,990
6,957
common stock
68,138
68,718
67,300
total shareholders equity
72,530
72,708
74,257
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$946,796
$944,415
$892,274
interest rate spread
0.41
%
0.59
%
0.65
%
net interest income and net yield oninterest-earning assets
$3,880
0.47
$5,192
0.63
$5,503
0.71
u.s.
2,556
0.49
3,600
0.67
4,161
0.77
non-u.s.
1,324
0.43
1,592
0.56
1,342
0.57
percentage of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities attributable tonon-u.s. operations8
assets
37.38
%
34.80
%
30.22
%
liabilities
25.88
26.53
24.35
goldmansachs2012form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
1.
consists of cash financial instruments, including equity securities and convertible debentures.
2.
derivative instruments and commodities are included in other non-interest-earning assets and other non-interest-bearing liabilities.
3.
primarily consists of cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes and certain receivables from customers and counterparties.
4.
consists of short-term other secured financings and unsecured short-term borrowings.
5.
interest rates include the effects of interest rate swaps accounted for as hedges.
6.
consists of long-term secured financings and unsecured long-term borrowings.
7.
primarily consists of certain payables to customers and counterparties.
8.
assets, liabilities and interest are attributed to u.s. and non-u.s. based on the location of the legal entity in which the assets and liabilities are held.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
changes in net interest income, volume and rate analysis
the table below presents an analysis of the effect on net interest income of volume and
rate changes. in this analysis,
changes due to volume/rate variance have been allocated tovolume.
for the year ended
december2012versusdecember2011
december2011versusdecember2010
increase(decrease)due tochange in:
increase(decrease)due tochange in:
inmillions
volume
rate
net
change
volume
rate
net
change
interest-earning assets
deposits with banks
$32
$(1
)
$31
$28
$11
$39
u.s.
(8
)
non-u.s.
(13
)
(6
)
securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to reselland federal funds sold
(826
)
(743
)
(60
)
u.s.
(245
)
(182
)
(352
)
(324
)
non-u.s.
(581
)
(561
)
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(1,590
)
(901
)
(3
)
u.s.
(1,154
)
(929
)
(212
)
(176
)
(388
)
non-u.s.
(436
)
other interest-earning assets
(74
)
(106
)
(180
)
u.s.
(97
)
non-u.s.
(262
)
(239
)
(48
)
change in interest income
(2,523
)
(1,793
)
(23
)
interest-bearing liabilities
interest-bearing deposits
(39
)
(24
)
u.s.
(49
)
(36
)
non-u.s.
(3
)
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to repurchase
(6
)
(77
)
(83
)
u.s.
(7
)
(68
)
(75
)
non-u.s.
(40
)
(143
)
(183
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
(127
)
(26
)
u.s.
(219
)
(132
)
non-u.s.
short-term borrowings
(54
)
(94
)
u.s.
(31
)
(110
)
non-u.s.
(23
)
long-term borrowings
(200
)
(151
)
u.s.
(186
)
(78
)
non-u.s.
(14
)
(36
)
(50
)
(73
)
(41
)
other interest-bearing liabilities
(853
)
(843
)
(62
)
u.s.
(7
)
(446
)
(453
)
(26
)
(288
)
(314
)
non-u.s.
(407
)
(390
)
change in interest expense
(259
)
(222
)
(481
)
1,176
change in net interest income
$989
$(2,301
)
$(1,312
)
$305
$(616
)
$(311
)
goldmansachs2012form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
available-for-sale securities portfolio
the table below presents the fair value of available-for-sale securities. as of
december2012, such assets related to the firms reinsurance business were classified as held for sale
and were included in other assets. see note12 for further information about assets held for sale.
inmillions
amortizedcost
grossunrealizedgains
grossunrealizedlosses
fair
value
available-for-sale securities, december2012
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$467
$
$
$467
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
(5
)
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities
3,049
(8
)
3,382
corporate debt securities
3,409
(5
)
3,625
state and municipal obligations
(1
)
other debt obligations
(2
)
total available-for-sale securities
$8,392
$703
$(21
)
$9,074
available-for-sale securities, december2011
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$406
$
$
$406
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
mortgage and other asset-backed loans and securities
1,505
(119
)
1,416
corporate debt securities
1,696
(11
)
1,813
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
(3
)
total available-for-sale securities
$4,693
$301
$(133
)
$4,861
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
the table below presents the fair value, amortized cost and weighted average yields of
available-for-sale securities by
contractual maturity. yields are calculated on a weighted averagebasis.
as of december2012
due in
oneyearorless
due after
oneyearthrough
five years
due after
fiveyearsthroughten years
due after
ten years
total
$ inmillions
amount
yield
amount
yield
amount
yield
amount
yield
amount
yield
fair value of available-for-salesecurities
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, timedeposits and other money market instruments
$467
%
$
%
$
%
$
%
$467
%
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
mortgage and other asset-backed loans andsecurities
3,137
3,382
corporate debt securities
1,567
1,180
3,625
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
total available-for-sale securities
$620
$1,305
$1,683
$5,466
$9,074
amortized cost of available-for-sale securities
$617
$1,267
$1,593
$4,915
$8,392
as of december2011
due in
oneyearorless
due after
oneyearthrough five
years
due after
fiveyearsthroughten years
due after
ten years
total
$ inmillions
amount
yield
amount
yield
amount
yield
amount
yield
amount
yield
fair value of available-for-salesecurities
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, timedeposits and other money market instruments
$406
%
$
%
$
%
$
%
$406
%
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
mortgage and other asset-backed loans andsecurities
1,277
1,416
corporate debt securities
1,813
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
total available-for-sale securities
$512
$708
$945
$2,696
$4,861
amortized cost of available-for-salesecurities
$512
$696
$899
$2,586
$4,693
goldmansachs2012form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
deposits  the table below presents a summary of the firms interest-bearing deposits.
average balances
averageinterestrates
year ended december
yearendeddecember
$ inmillions
u.s.:
savings1
$32,235
$25,916
$23,260
0.42
%
0.42
%
0.44
%
time
16,433
7,318
8,158
1.38
1.84
2.16
total u.s. deposits
48,668
33,234
31,418
0.74
0.73
0.89
non-u.s.:
demand
5,318
5,378
5,559
0.30
0.46
0.34
time
2,413
1,654
1,034
0.87
0.73
0.58
total non-u.s. deposits
7,731
7,032
6,593
0.48
0.53
0.38
total deposits
$56,399
$40,266
$38,011
0.71
0.70
0.80
1.
amounts are available for withdrawal upon short notice, generally within seven days.
ratios  the table below presents
selected financial ratios.
yearendeddecember
net earnings to average assets
0.8
%
0.5
%
0.9
%
return on average common shareholders
equity1
10.7
3.7
11.5
return on average total shareholders
equity2
10.3
6.1
11.3
total average equity to average assets
7.7
7.7
8.3
dividend payout
ratio3
12.5
31.0
10.6
1.
based on net earnings applicable to common shareholders divided by average monthly common shareholders equity.
2.
based on net earnings divided by average monthly total shareholders equity.
3.
dividends declared per common share as a percentage of diluted earnings per common share.
short-term and other borrowed funds
the table below presents a summary of the firms securities loaned and securities sold
under agreements to repurchase and short-term borrowings. these borrowings generally
mature within one year of the financial statement date and include borrowings that are redeemable at the option of the holder within one year of the financial statement date.
securitiesloanedandsecuritiessold underagreements to repurchase
short-term
borrowings1,2
as of december
as of december
$ inmillions
amounts outstanding at year-end
$185,572
$171,684
$173,557
$67,349
$78,223
$72,371
average outstanding during the year
177,550
171,753
160,280
70,359
78,497
55,512
maximum month-end outstanding
198,456
190,453
173,557
75,280
87,281
72,371
weighted average interest rate
during the year
0.46
%
0.53
%
0.44
%
0.83
%
0.67
%
0.82
%
at year-end
0.44
0.39
0.44
0.79
0.92
0.63
1.
includes short-term secured financings of $23.05billion, $29.19billion and $24.53billion as of december2012, december2011 and
december2010, respectively.
2.
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings include the effect of hedging activities.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
cross-border outstandings
cross-border outstandings are based on the federal financial institutions examination
councils (ffiec) regulatory guidelines for reporting cross-border information and represent the amounts that the firm may not be able to obtain from a foreign country due to country-specific events, including unfavorable economic and political
conditions, economic and social instability, and changes in governmentpolicies.  credit exposure represents the potential
for loss due to the default or deterioration in credit quality of a counterparty or an issuer of securities or other instruments the firm holds and is measured based on the potential loss in an event of non-payment by a counterparty. credit exposure
is reduced through the effect of risk mitigants, such as netting agreements with counterparties that permit the firm to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties or obtaining collateral from counterparties. the tables below do not
include all the effects of such risk mitigants and do not represent the firms credit exposure.
claims in the tables below include cash, receivables, securities purchased under agreements
to resell, securities borrowed and cash financial instruments, but exclude derivative instruments and commitments. securities purchased under agreements to resell and securities borrowed are presented gross, without reduction for related securities
collateral held, based on the domicile of the counterparty. margin loans (included in receivables) are presented based on the amount of collateral advanced by thecounterparty.
the tables below present cross-border outstandings for each country in which cross-border outstandings exceed 0.75% of consolidated assets
in accordance with the ffiecguidelines.
as of december2012
inmillions
banks
governments
other
total
country
cayman islands
$
$
$39,283
$39,283
france
24,333
2,370
5,819
32,522
japan
16,679
8,908
25,606
germany
4,012
10,976
7,912
22,900
spain
3,790
4,237
1,816
9,843
ireland
7,057
7,563
united kingdom
1,422
5,874
7,533
china
2,564
1,265
3,564
7,393
brazil
1,383
3,704
2,280
7,367
switzerland
3,706
3,133
7,069
as of december2011
inmillions
banks
governments
other
total
country
france
$33,916
$2,859
$3,776
$40,551
cayman islands
33,742
33,742
japan
18,745
6,457
25,233
germany
5,458
16,089
3,162
24,709
united kingdom
2,111
3,349
5,243
10,703
italy
6,143
3,054
10,038
ireland
1,148
8,801
10,012
china
6,722
2,908
9,668
switzerland
3,836
5,112
8,988
canada
1,019
6,841
8,536
australia
1,597
5,209
7,276
1.
primarily comprised of secured lending transactions with a clearing house which are secured by collateral.
2.
primarily comprised of interests in and receivables from funds domiciled in ireland, but whose underlying investments are primarily located outside of
ireland, and secured lending transactions.
3.
primarily comprised of secured lending transactions which are primarily secured by german government obligations.
goldmansachs2012form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries  supplemental financial information
as of december2010
inmillions
banks
governments
other
total
country
france
$29,250
$7,373
$4,860
$41,483
cayman islands
35,850
35,857
japan
21,881
8,002
29,932
germany
3,767
16,572
2,782
23,121
china
10,849
2,931
14,481
united kingdom
2,829
2,401
6,800
12,030
switzerland
2,473
7,616
10,240
canada
6,741
7,367
1.
primarily comprised of secured lending transactions with a clearing house which are secured by collateral.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item9.changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure  there were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure during the last twoyears.
item9a.controls and procedures
as of the end of the period covered by this report, an evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs management, with the
participation of our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rule13a-15(e) under the exchange act). based upon that evaluation, our chief executive
officer and chief financial officer concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this report. in addition, no change in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in
rule13a-15(f) under the exchange act) occurred during the fourth quarter of our year ended december31,2012 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over
financialreporting.  managements report on internal control over financial reporting and the report of independent
registered public accounting firm are set forth in partii, item8 of this form10-k.
item9b.other information
effective february28,2013, the board approved an amendment to our amended and restated by-laws solely to change two references
to the corporate governance and nominating committee to the corporate governance, nominating and public responsibilities committee, reflecting a change in the name of that boardcommittee.
part iii
item10.directors, executive officers and corporate governance
information relating to our executive officers is included on page 39 of this form10-k. information relating to our directors,
including our audit committee and audit committee financial experts and the procedures by which shareholders can recommend director nominees, and our executive officers will be in our definitive proxy statement for our 2013 annual meeting of
shareholders, which will be filed within 120days of the end of 2012 (2013 proxy statement) and is incorporated herein by reference. information relating to our code of business conduct and ethics, which applies to our senior financial
officers, is included under available information in parti, item1 of this form
10-k.  item11.executive compensation
information relating to our executive officer and director compensation and the compensation committee of the board will be in the 2013
proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item12.security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
information relating to security ownership of certain beneficial owners of our common stock
and information relating to the security ownership of our management will be in the 2013 proxy statement and is incorporated herein byreference.
the following table provides information as of december31,2012, the last day of
2012, regarding securities to be issued on exercise of outstanding stock options or pursuant to outstanding restricted stock units and performance-based awards, and securities remaining available for issuance under our equity compensation plans that
were in effect during 2012.
plancategory
number ofsecuritiestobeissued uponexercise ofoutstandingoptions,warrantsand
rights
weighted-average exercise price ofoutstandingoptions,warrantsand rights
numberofsecuritiesremainingavailableforfuture issuance underequity compensationplans
(excludingsecurities reflected inthe second column)
equity compensation plansapproved by security holders
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan1
67,026,957
$99.51
188,268,143
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
none
total
67,026,957
188,268,143
1.
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (sip) was approved by the shareholders of group inc. at our 2003 annual meeting of shareholders
and is a successor plan to the goldman sachs 1999 stock incentive plan (1999 plan), which was approved by our shareholders immediately prior to our initial public offering in may1999 and under which no additional awards have been granted since
approval of the sip. the sip was amended and restated, effective december31,2008 and further amended on december20,2012 to extend its term until group inc.s 2013 annual meeting of shareholders, at which meeting approval
of a new equity compensation plan will be voted upon by shareholders.
2.
includes: (i)43,217,111 shares of common stock that may be issued upon exercise of outstanding options; (ii)23,803,555 shares that may be issued
pursuant to outstanding restricted stock units; and (iii)6,291 shares that may be issued pursuant to outstanding performance-based units granted under the sip. these awards are subject to vesting and other conditions to the extent set forth in
the respective award agreements, and the underlying shares will be delivered net of any required tax withholding.
3.
this weighted-average exercise price relates only to the options described in footnote 2. shares underlying restricted stock units and performance-based units
are deliverable without the payment of any consideration, and therefore these awards have not been taken into account in calculating the weighted-average exerciseprice.
4.
represents shares remaining to be issued under the sip, excluding shares reflected in the second column. the total number of shares of common stock that may
be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the sip through the end of our 2008 fiscal year could not exceed 250million shares. the total number of shares of common stock that may be delivered pursuant to awards granted under the sip in our
2009 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter cannot exceed 5% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock, determined as of the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year, increased by the number of shares available for awards in
previous years but not covered by awards granted in such years. there are no shares remaining to be issued under the 1999 plan other than those reflected in the second column.
item13.certain relationships and related
transactions, and director independence  information regarding certain relationships and related transactions and director
independence will be in the 2013 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
item14.principal accountant fees and
services  information regarding principal accountant fees and services will be in the 2013 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
part iv  item15.exhibits and financial statement schedules
(a) documents filed as part of this report:  1.
consolidated financial statements  the consolidated financial statements required to be filed in this form10-k are
included in partii, item8 hereof.  2. exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation (incorporated by reference to the corresponding exhibit to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-74449)).
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of the goldman sachs group, inc., amended as of november20,2012.
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs group, inc., amended as of february28,2013.
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19,1999, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 6
to the registrants registration statement on form8-a, filed june29,1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated as of february20,2004, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 4.2 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november28,2003).
4.3
warrant indenture, dated as of february14,2006, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 4.34 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.3 to forms-3, filed on march1,2006).
4.4
senior debt indenture, dated as of december4,2007, among gs finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as guarantor, and the bank of
new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.69 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.10 to forms-3, filed on december4,2007).
certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt securities of the registrant and its subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to item
601(b)(4)(iii) of regulation s-k. the registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon request, copies of any such instruments.
4.5
senior debt indenture, dated as of july16,2008, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york mellon, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 4.82 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.11 to forms-3 (no.333-130074), filed july17,2008).
4.6
senior debt indenture, dated as of october10,2008, among gs finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as guarantor, and the bank of
new york mellon, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.70 to the registrants registration statement on forms-3 (no.333-154173), filed october10,2008).
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november28,2008).
10.2
amendment to the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan, effective december20,2012.
10.3
the goldman sachs amended and restated restricted partner compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the registrants quarterly report
on form10-q for the period ended february24,2006).
10.4
formof employment agreement for participating managing directors (applicable to executive officers) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.19 to the
registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.5
formof agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.20 to the registrants registration statement
on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.6
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7,1999, by and among the goldman sachs group, inc. andvariousparties (incorporated by
reference to exhibit 10.25 to the registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
10.7
amended and restated shareholders agreement, effective as of january22,2010, among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.6 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2009).
10.8
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.27 to the registrants registration statement on forms-1
(no.333-75213)).
10.9
formof indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.28 tothe registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november26,1999).
10.10
formof indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.44 tothe registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended november26,1999).
10.11
formof indemnification agreement, dated as of july5,2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the registrants quarterly report
on form10-q for the period ended august25,2000).
10.12
amendment no.1, dated as of september5,2000, to the tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7,1999 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.3 tothe registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,2000).
10.13
letter, dated february6,2001, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.james a. johnson (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.65 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november24,2000).
10.14
letter, dated december18,2002, from the goldman sachs group, inc. tomr.william w. george (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.39 to
theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november29,2002).
10.15
letter, dated june20,2003, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr. claes dahlbck (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended
may30,2003).
10.16
letter, dated april6,2005, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr. stephen friedman (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to
theregistrants current report on form8-k, filed april8,2005).
10.17
letter, dated may12,2009, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.jamesj. schiro (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended
june26,2009).
10.18
formof amendment, dated november27,2004, to agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated may7,1999 (incorporated
by reference to exhibit 10.32 to theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november26,2004).
10.19
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation plan for u.s. participating managing directors (terminated as of december15,2008)
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.36 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november30,2007).
10.20
formof year-end option award agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.36 to theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended
november28,2008).
10.21
formof year-end rsu award agreement (french alternative award) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.32 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2009).
10.22
amendments to 2005 and 2006 year-end rsu and option award agreements (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.44 to theregistrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended november30,2007).
10.23
formof non-employee director option award agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.34 to theregistrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2009).
10.24
formof non-employee director rsu award agreement.
10.25
ground lease, dated august23,2005, between battery park city authority d/b/a/ hugh l. carey battery park city authority, as landlord, and goldman
sachs headquarters llc, as tenant (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to theregistrants current report on form8-k, filed august26,2005).
10.26
general guarantee agreement, dated january30,2006, made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to certain obligations of goldman, sachs & co.
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.45 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november25,2005).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
10.27
goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance policy and certificate with metropolitan life insurance company for participating managing directors
(incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,2006).
10.28
formof goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance policy with pacific life & annuity company for participating managing directors, including
policy specifications and form of restriction on policy owners rights (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,2006).
10.29
formof second amendment, dated november25,2006, to agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated may7,1999, as
amended effective november27,2004 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.51 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november24,2006).
10.30
description of pmd retiree medical program (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period
ended
february29,2008).
10.31
letter, dated june28,2008, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr. lakshmi n. mittal (incorporated by reference to exhibit 99.1 to the
registrants current report on form8-k, filed june30,2008).
10.32
securities purchase agreement, dated september29,2008, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and berkshire hathaway inc. (incorporated by reference
to exhibit 10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august29,2008).
10.33
general guarantee agreement, dated december1,2008, made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to certain obligations of goldman sachs bank usa
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.80 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.2 to forms-3, filed march19,2009).
10.34
guarantee agreement, dated november28,2008 and amended effective as of january1,2010, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and goldman
sachs bank usa (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.51 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2009).
10.35
collateral agreement, dated november28,2008, between the goldman sachs group, inc., goldman sachs bank usa and each other party that becomes a
pledgor pursuant thereto (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.61 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november28,2008).
10.36
formof one-time rsu award agreement.
10.37
amendments to certain equity award agreements (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.68 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the
fiscal year ended
november28,2008).
10.38
amendments to certain non-employee director equity award agreements (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.69 to the registrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended november28,2008).
10.39
formof signature card for equity awards.
10.40
formof year-end rsu award agreement (not fully vested).
10.41
formof year-end rsu award agreement (fully vested).
10.42
formof year-end rsu award agreement (base and/or supplemental).
10.43
formof year-end short-term rsu award agreement.
10.44
formof year-end restricted stock award agreement.
10.45
formof year-end restricted stock award agreement (fully vested).
10.46
formof year-end short-term restricted stock award agreement.
10.47
general guarantee agreement, dated march2,2010, made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to the obligations of goldman sachs execution &
clearing, l.p. (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended march31,2010).
10.48
formof deed of gift (incorporated by reference to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended
june30,2010).
10.49
the goldman sachs long-term performance incentive plan, dated december17,2010 (incorporated by reference to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed december23,2010).
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
10.50
formof performance-based restricted stock unit award agreement (incorporated by reference to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed
december23,2010).
10.51
formof performance-based option award agreement (incorporated by reference to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed
december23,2010).
10.52
formof performance-based cash compensation award agreement (incorporated by reference to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed
december23,2010).
10.53
amended and restated general guarantee agreement dated november21,2011 made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to certain obligations of
goldman sachs bank usa (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed november21,2011).
10.54
formof aircraft time sharing agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.61 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal
year ended
december31,2011).
10.55
description of compensation arrangements with executive officer (incorporated by reference to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the
period ended june30,2012).
12.1
statement re: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges and ratios of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock
dividends.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
rule13a-14(a) certifications.
32.1
section 1350 certifications.*
99.1
report of independent registered public accounting firm on selected financial data.
99.2
debt and trust securities registered under section 12(b) of the exchange act.
interactive data files pursuant to rule405 of regulation s-t: (i)the consolidated statements of earnings for the years ended
december31,2012, december31,2011 and december31,2010, (ii) the consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the years ended december31,2012, december31,2011 and
december31,2010, (iii)the consolidated statements of financial condition as of december31,2012 and december31,2011, (iv)the consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity for the years
ended december31,2012, december31,2011 and december31,2010, (v)the consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended december31,2012, december31,2011 and
december31,2010, and (vi)the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
this exhibit is a management contract or a compensatory plan or arrangement.
*this
information is furnished and not filed for purposes of sections11 and 12 of the securities act of 1933 and section18 of the securities exchange act of1934.
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
table of contents
signatures  pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/
harvey m. schwartz
name:
harvey m. schwartz
title:
chief financial officer
date: february28,2013
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf
of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
capacity
date
/s/lloyd c. blankfein
lloyd c. blankfein
director, chairman and chief executive officer (principal executive officer)
february28,2013
/s/m. michele
burns m. michele burns
director
february28,2013
/s/gary d.
cohn gary d. cohn
director
february28,2013
/s/claes
dahlbck claes dahlbck
director
february28,2013
/s/stephen
friedman stephen friedman
director
february28,2013
/s/william w.
george william w. george
director
february28,2013
/s/james a.
johnson james a. johnson
director
february28,2013
/s/lakshmi n.
mittal lakshmi n. mittal
director
february28,2013
/s/adebayo o.
ogunlesi adebayo o. ogunlesi
director
february28,2013
/s/james j.
schiro james j. schiro
director
february28,2013
/s/debora l.
spar debora l. spar
director
february28,2013
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
ii-1
table of contents
/s/mark edward
tucker mark edward tucker
director
february28,2013
/s/david a.
viniar david a. viniar
director
february28,2013
/s/harvey m. schwartz
harvey m. schwartz
chief financial officer(principal financial officer)
february28,2013
/s/sarah e.
smith sarah e. smith
principal accounting officer
february28,2013
ii-2
goldmansachs2012form 10-k
