10-k
d107036d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31,2015
commission file number: 001-14965
the goldman sachs group, inc.
(exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
13-4019460
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
200 west street
new york, n.y.
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
(212) 902-1000
(registrants telephone number, including area code)
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act:
title of each class:
nameofeachexchangeonwhichregistered:
common stock, par value $.01 per share
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesa
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of 6.20%
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesb
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesc
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesd
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of floating rate
non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesi
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of 5.50%
fixed-to-floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesj
new york stock exchange
depositary shares, each representing 1/1,000th interest in a share of 6.375%
fixed-to-floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesk
new york stock exchange
see exhibit99.2 for debt and trust securities registered under section 12(b) of the act
securities registered pursuant to section12(g) of the act: none
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities act.
x yes  no  indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the act.
yes x no  indicate by check mark
whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file
such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90days.  x yes  no
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every interactive
data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule405 of regulation s-t during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
x yes  no  indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to
item405 of regulation s-k is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of the annual report on
form10-k or any amendment to the annual report on form10-k.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller
reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting company in rule12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfilerx
acceleratedfiler
non-acceleratedfiler
smallerreportingcompany
(do not check if a smallerreportingcompany)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of
the exchange act). yes xno
as of june30,2015, the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant
was approximately $88.6billion.  as of february5,2016, there were 422,349,543 shares of the registrants common
stock outstanding.  documents incorporated by reference: portions of the goldman sachs group, inc.s proxy statement for
its 2016 annual meeting of shareholders are incorporated by reference in the annual report on form10-k in response to partiii, items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc.  annual
report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31,2015
index
form10-k item number
pageno.
part i
item1
business
introduction
our business segments and segment operating results
investment banking
institutional client services
investing & lending
investment management
business continuity and information security
employees
competition
regulation
available information
cautionary statement pursuant to the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of 1995
item1a
risk factors
item1b
unresolved staff comments
item2
properties
item3
legal proceedings
item4
mine safety disclosures
executive officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
part ii
item5
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
item6
selected financial data
item7
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item7a
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8
financial statements and supplementary data
item9
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
item9a
controls and procedures
item9b
other information
part iii
item10
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
item11
executive compensation
item12
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item13
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
item14
principal accounting fees and services
part iv
item15
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
ii-1
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
part i
item1.business
introduction
goldman sachs is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of financial
services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals.
when we use the terms goldman sachs, the firm, we, us and our, we mean the goldman
sachs group, inc. (group inc. or parent company), a delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.  references to the 2015
form10-k are to our annual report on form10-k for the year ended december31,2015. all references to 2015,2014 and 2013 refer to our years ended, or the dates, as the context requires, december31,2015,
december31,2014 and december31,2013, respectively.  group inc. is a bank holding company and a financial holding
company regulated by the board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal reserve board). our u.s. depository institution subsidiary, goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank usa), is a new york state-chartered bank.
as of december2015, we had offices in over 30 countries and 48% of our total staff was
based outside the americas. our clients are located worldwide, and we are an active participant in financial markets around the world. in 2015, we generated 44% of our net revenues outside the americas. for more information about our geographic
results, see note25 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k.
our business segments and segment operating results
we report our activities in four business segments: investment banking, institutional client services, investing& lending and
investment management. the chart below presents our four business segments.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the table below presents our segment operating results.
year ended december1
% of 2015
netrevenues
$ inmillions
investment banking
net revenues
$7,027
$6,464
$6,004
21%
operating expenses
3,713
3,688
3,479
pre-tax earnings
$3,314
$2,776
$2,525
institutional client
services
net revenues
$15,151
$15,197
$15,721
45%
operating expenses2
13,938
10,880
11,792
pre-tax earnings
$1,213
$4,317
$3,929
investing&
lending
net revenues
$5,436
$6,825
$7,018
16%
operating expenses
2,402
2,819
2,686
pre-tax earnings
$3,034
$4,006
$4,332
investment
management
net revenues
$6,206
$6,042
$5,463
18%
operating expenses
4,841
4,647
4,357
pre-tax earnings
$1,365
$1,395
$1,106
total net revenues
$33,820
$34,528
$34,206
totaloperatingexpenses3
25,042
22,171
22,469
total pre-tax earnings
$8,778
$12,357
$11,737
1.
financial information concerning our business segments for 2015,2014 and 2013 is included in managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations and the financial statements and supplementary data, which are in partii, items 7 and 8, respectively, of the 2015 form10-k. see note25 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k for a summary of our total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings by geographic region.
2.
includes provisions of $3.37billion recorded during 2015 for the agreement in principle with the residential mortgage-backed securities working group of
the u.s. financial fraud enforcement task force (rmbs working group). see note27 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k for further information
about this agreement in principle.
3.
includes charitable contributions that have not been allocated to our segments of $148million for 2015, $137million for 2014 and $155million
for 2013.  investment banking
investment banking serves public and private sector clients around the world. we provide financial advisory services and help companies raise
capital to strengthen and grow their businesses. we seek to develop and maintain long-term relationships with a diverse global group of institutional clients, including governments, states and municipalities. our goal is to deliver to our
institutional clients the entire resources of the firm in a seamless fashion, with investment banking serving as the main initial point of contact with goldman sachs.
financial advisory. financial advisory includes strategic advisory assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities, restructurings, spin-offs and risk management. in particular, we
help clients execute large, complex transactions for which we provide multiple services, including cross-border structuring expertise. financial advisory also includes revenues from derivative transactions directly related to these client advisory
assignments.  we also assist our clients in managing their asset and liability exposures and their capital.
underwriting. the other core activity of investment
banking is helping companies raise capital to fund their businesses. as a financial intermediary, our job is to match the capital of our investing clients who aim to grow the savings ofmillions of people with the needs
of our public and private sector clients who need financing to generate growth, create jobs and deliver products and services. our underwriting activities include public offerings and private placements, including local and cross-border
transactions and acquisition financing, of a wide range of securities and other financial instruments. underwriting also includes revenues from derivative transactions entered into with public and private sector clients in connection with our
underwriting activities.  equity underwriting. we underwrite common and preferred stock and convertible and exchangeable securities. we regularly receive mandates for large, complex transactions and have held a leading position in worldwide public common
stock offerings and worldwide initial public offerings for many years.  debt
underwriting. we underwrite and originate various types of debt instruments, including investment-grade and high-yield debt, bank loans and bridge loans, including in connection with
acquisition financing, and emerging- and growth-market debt, which may be issued by, among others, corporate, sovereign, municipal and agency issuers. in addition, we underwrite and originate structured securities, which include mortgage-related
securities and other asset-backed securities.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
institutional client services
institutional client services serves our clients who come to the firm to buy and sell financial
products, raise funding and manage risk. we do this by acting as a market maker and offering market expertise on a global basis. institutional client services makes markets and facilitates client transactions in fixed income, equity, currency and
commodity products. in addition, we make markets in and clear client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide. market makers provide liquidity and play a critical role in price discovery, which contributes to the overall
efficiency of the capital markets. our willingness to make markets, commit capital and take risk in a broad range of products is crucial to our client relationships.
our clients are primarily institutions that are professional market participants, including investment entities whose ultimate customers
include individual investors investing for their retirement, buying insurance or putting aside surplus cash in a deposit account.  through
our global sales force, we maintain relationships with our clients, receiving orders and distributing investment research, trading ideas, market information and analysis. as a market maker, we provide prices to clients globally acrossthousands
of products in all major asset classes and markets. at times we take the other side of transactions ourselves if a buyer or seller is not readily available and at other times we connect our clients to other parties who want to transact. much of this
connectivity between the firm and its clients is maintained on technology platforms and operates globally wherever and whenever markets are open for trading.
institutional client services and our other businesses are supported by our global investment research division, which, as of
december2015, provided fundamental research on more than 3,400 companies worldwide and more than 40 national economies, as well as on industries, currencies and commodities.
institutional client services generates revenues in four ways:
in large, highly liquid markets (such as markets for u.s. treasury bills, large capitalization s&p 500 stocks or certain mortgage pass-through
securities), we execute a high volume of transactions for our clients;
in less liquid markets (such as mid-cap corporate bonds, growth market currencies or certain non-agency mortgage-backed securities), we execute
transactions for our clients for spreads and fees that are generally somewhat larger than those charged in more liquid markets;
we also structure and execute transactions involving customized or tailor-made products that address our clients risk exposures, investment
objectives or other complex needs (such as a jet fuel hedge for an airline); and
we provide financing to our clients for their securities trading activities, as well as securities lending and other prime brokerage services.
institutional client services activities are organized by asset class and include both cash and
derivative instruments. cash refers to trading the underlying instrument (such as a stock, bond or barrel of oil). derivative refers to instruments that derive their value from underlying asset prices, indices,
reference rates and other inputs, or a combination of these factors (such as an option, which is the right or obligation to buy or sell a certain bond or stock index on a specified date in the future at a certain price, or an interest rate swap,
which is the agreement to convert a fixed rate of interest into a floating rate or vice versa).
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
fixed income, currency and commodities client
execution. includes interest rate products, credit products, mortgages, currencies and commodities.
interest rate products. government bonds, money market instruments, treasury bills, repurchase
agreements and other highly liquid securities and instruments, as well as interest rate swaps, options and other derivatives.
credit products. investment-grade corporate securities, high-yield securities, credit derivatives,
bank and bridge loans, municipal securities, emerging market and distressed debt, and trade claims.
mortgages. commercial mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives, residential
mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives (including u.s. government agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations, other prime, subprime and alt-a securities and loans), and other asset-backed securities, loans and derivatives.
currencies. most currencies, including growth-market currencies.
commodities. crude oil and petroleum products, natural gas, base, precious and other metals,
electricity, coal, agricultural and other commodity products.  equities. includes equities client execution, commissions and fees, and securities services.  equities client execution. we make markets in equity securities and equity-related products, including convertible securities, options,
futures and over-the-counter (otc) derivative instruments, on a global basis. as a principal, we facilitate client transactions by providing liquidity to our clients with large blocks of stocks or derivatives, requiring the commitment of our
capital.  we also structure and make markets in derivatives on indices, industry groups, financial measures and individual company
stocks. we develop strategies and provide information about portfolio hedging and restructuring and asset allocation transactions for our clients. we also work with our clients to create specially tailored instruments to enable sophisticated
investors to establish or liquidate investment positions or undertake hedging strategies. we are one of the leading participants in the trading and development of equity derivative instruments.
our exchange-based market-making activities include making markets in stocks and exchange-traded funds, futures and options on major exchanges
worldwide.
commissions and fees. we generate commissions and fees from executing and clearing institutional client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide, as well as otc transactions. we provide our clients with
access to a broad spectrum of equity execution services, including electronic low-touch access and more complex high-touch execution through both traditional and electronic platforms.
securities services. includes financing,
securities lending and other prime brokerage services.
financing services. we provide financing to our clients for their securities trading activities
through margin loans that are collateralized by securities, cash or other acceptable collateral. we earn a spread equal to the difference between the amount we pay for funds and the amount we receive from our client.
securities lending services. we provide services that principally involve borrowing and lending
securities to cover institutional clients short sales and borrowing securities to cover our short sales and otherwise to make deliveries into the market. in addition, we are an active participant in broker-to-broker securities lending and
third-party agency lending activities.
other prime brokerage services. we earn fees by providing clearing, settlement and custody services
globally. in addition, we provide our hedge fund and other clients with a technology platform and reporting which enables them to monitor their security portfolios and manage risk exposures.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
investing& lending
our investing and lending activities, which are typically longer-term, include the firms investing and relationship lending activities
across various asset classes, primarily debt securities and loans, public and private equity securities, and real estate. these activities include investing directly in publicly and privately traded securities and in loans, and also through certain
investment funds and separate accounts that we manage and through funds managed by external parties. we also provide financing to our clients.
equity securities. we make corporate, real estate and
infrastructure equity-related investments.  debt securities and loans. we make corporate, real estate, infrastructure and other debt investments. in addition, we provide credit to corporate clients through loan facilities and to individuals primarily through secured loans.
investment management
investment management provides investment and wealth advisory services to help clients preserve and grow their financial assets. our clients
include institutions and high-net-worth individuals, as well as retail investors who primarily access our products through a network of third-party distributors around the world.
we manage client assets across a broad range of asset classes and investment strategies, including equity, fixed income and alternative
investments. alternative investments primarily include hedge funds, credit funds, private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities, and asset allocation strategies. our investment offerings include those managed on a fiduciary basis by our
portfolio managers as well as strategies managed by third-party managers. we offer our investments in a variety of structures, including separately managed accounts, mutual funds, private partnerships, and other commingled vehicles.
we also provide customized investment advisory solutions designed to address our clients
investment needs. these solutions begin with identifying clients objectives and continue through portfolio construction, ongoing asset allocation and risk management and investment realization. we draw from a variety of third-party managers as
well as our proprietary offerings to implement solutions for clients.  we supplement our investment advisory solutions for high-net-worth
clients with wealth advisory services that include income and liability management, trust and estate planning, philanthropic giving and tax planning. we also use the firms global securities and derivatives market-making capabilities to address
clients specific investment needs.  management and other fees. the majority of revenues in management and other fees is comprised of asset-based fees on client assets. the fees that we charge vary by asset class and are affected by investment performance as well as asset
inflows and redemptions. other fees we receive include financial counseling fees generated through our wealth advisory services and fees related to the administration of real estate assets.
assets under supervision include assets under management and other client assets. assets under management include client assets where we earn a
fee for managing assets on a discretionary basis. this includes net assets in our mutual funds, hedge funds, credit funds and private equity funds (including real estate funds), and separately managed accounts for institutional and individual
investors. other client assets include client assets invested with third-party managers, bank deposits and advisory relationships where we earn a fee for advisory and other services, but do not have investment discretion. assets under supervision do
not include the self-directed brokerage assets of our clients. long-term assets under supervision represent assets under supervision excluding liquidity products. liquidity products represent money market and bank deposit assets.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
incentive fees. in certain circumstances, we are also entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of a funds or a separately managed accounts return, or when the return exceeds a specified benchmark or
other performance targets. such fees include overrides, which consist of the increased share of the income and gains derived primarily from our private equity funds when the return on a funds investments over the life of the fund exceeds
certain threshold returns. incentive fees are recognized only when all material contingencies are resolved.  transaction revenues. we receive commissions and net spreads for facilitating transactional activity in high-net-worth client accounts. in addition, we earn net
interest income primarily associated with client deposits and margin lending activity undertaken by such clients.  business
continuity and information security  business continuity and information security, including cyber security, are high priorities for
goldman sachs. their importance has been highlighted by numerous highly publicized cyber attacks against financial institutions and large consumer-based companies in recent years that resulted in the unauthorized disclosure of personal information
of clients and customers and the theft and destruction of corporate information, as well as extreme weather events, such as hurricane sandy.
our business continuity program has been developed to provide reasonable assurance of business continuity in the event of disruptions at the
firms critical facilities and to comply with regulatory requirements, including those of finra. because we are a bank holding company, our business continuity program is also subject to review by the federal reserve board. the key elements of
the program are crisis planning and management, people recovery, business recovery, systems and data recovery, and process improvement. in the area of information security, we have developed and implemented a framework of principles, policies and
technology to protect the information provided to us by our clients and that of the firm from cyber attacks and other misappropriation, corruption or loss. safeguards are applied to maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of
information.
employees
management believes that a major strength and principal reason for the success of goldman sachs is the quality and dedication of our people and
the shared sense of being part of a team. we strive to maintain a work environment that fosters professionalism, excellence, diversity, cooperation among our employees worldwide and high standards of business ethics.
instilling the goldman sachs culture in all employees is a continuous process, in which training plays an important part. all employees are
offered the opportunity to participate in education and periodic seminars that we sponsor at various locations throughout the world. another important part of instilling the goldman sachs culture is our employee review process. employees are
reviewed by supervisors, co-workers and employees they supervise in a 360-degree review process that is integral to our team approach, and includes an evaluation of an employees performance with respect to risk management, compliance and
diversity. as of december2015, we had 36,800 total staff.  competition
the financial services industry and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect them to remain so.
our competitors are other entities that provide investment banking, securities and investment management services, as well as those entities that make investments in securities, commodities, derivatives, real estate, loans and other financial
assets. these entities include brokers and dealers, investment banking firms, commercial banks, insurance companies, investment advisers, mutual funds, hedge funds, private equity funds and merchant banks. we compete with some entities globally and
with others on a regional, product or niche basis. our competition is based on a number of factors, including transaction execution, products and services, innovation, reputation and price.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
there has been substantial consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial
services industry. moreover, we have faced, and expect to continue to face, pressure to retain market share by committing capital to businesses or transactions on terms that offer returns that may not be commensurate with their risks. in particular,
corporate clients seek such commitments (such as agreements to participate in their loan facilities) from financial services firms in connection with investment banking and other assignments.
consolidation and convergence have significantly increased the capital base and geographic reach of some of our competitors, and have also
hastened the globalization of the securities and other financial services markets. as a result, we have had to commit capital to support our international operations and to execute large global transactions. to take advantage of some of our most
significant opportunities, we will have to compete successfully with financial institutions that are larger and have more capital and that may have a stronger local presence and longer operating history outside the united states. we also compete
with smaller institutions that offer more targeted services, such as independent advisory firms. some clients may perceive these firms to be less susceptible to potential conflicts of interest than we are, and, as described below, our ability to
effectively compete with them could be affected by regulations and limitations on activities that apply to us but may not apply to them.  a
number of our businesses are subject to intense price competition. efforts by our competitors to gain market share have resulted in pricing pressure in our investment banking and client execution businesses and could result in pricing pressure in
other of our businesses. for example, the increasing volume of trades executed electronically, through the internet and through alternative trading systems, has increased the pressure on trading commissions, in that commissions for electronic
trading are generally lower than for non-electronic trading. it appears that this trend toward low-commission trading will continue. in addition, we believe that we will continue to experience competitive pressures in these and other areas in the
future as some of our competitors seek to obtain market share by further reducing prices, and as we enter into or expand our presence in markets that may rely more heavily on electronic trading and execution, such as consumer-oriented deposit-taking
activities.
the provisions of the u.s. dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act (dodd-frank
act), the requirements promulgated by the basel committee on banking supervision (basel committee) and other financial regulation could affect our competitive position to the extent that limitations on activities, increased fees and compliance costs
or other regulatory requirements do not apply, or do not apply equally, to all of our competitors or are not implemented uniformly across different jurisdictions. for example, the provisions of the dodd-frank act that prohibit proprietary trading
and restrict investments in certain hedge and private equity funds differentiate between u.s.-based and non-u.s.-based banking organizations and give non-u.s.-based banking organizations greater flexibility to trade outside of the united states and
to form and invest in funds outside the united states. likewise, the obligations with respect to derivative transactions under title vii of the dodd-frank act depend, in part, on the location of the counterparties to the transaction. the impact of
the dodd-frank act and other regulatory developments on our competitive position will depend to a large extent on the manner in which the required rulemaking and regulatory guidance evolve, the extent of international convergence, and the
development of market practice and structures under the new regulatory regimes as described further under regulation below.  we
also face intense competition in attracting and retaining qualified employees. our ability to continue to compete effectively will depend upon our ability to attract new employees, retain and motivate our existing employees and to continue to
compensate employees competitively amid intense public and regulatory scrutiny on the compensation practices of large financial institutions. our pay practices and those of certain of our competitors are subject to review by, and the standards of,
the federal reserve board and other regulators inside and outside the united states, including the prudential regulation authority (pra) and the financial conduct authority (fca) in the united kingdom. we also compete for employees with institutions
whose pay practices are not subject to regulatory oversight. see regulation compensation practices below and risk factors our businesses may be adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain
qualified employees in parti, item1a of the 2015 form10-k for more information about the regulation of our compensation practices.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
regulation
as a participant in the financial services industry, we are subject to extensive regulation
worldwide. our businesses have been subject to increasing regulation and supervision in the united states and other countries, and we expect this trend to continue in the future.
in particular, the dodd-frank act, and the rules thereunder, significantly altered the financial regulatory regime within which we operate. the
capital, liquidity and leverage ratios based on the basel committees final capital framework for strengthening international capital standards (baseliii), as implemented by the federal reserve, the pra and fca and other national
regulators have also had a significant impact on our businesses. the implications of such regulations for our businesses continue to depend to a large extent on their implementation by the relevant regulators globally, as well as the development of
market practices and structures under the regime established by such regulations. other reforms have been adopted or are being considered by regulators and policy makers worldwide, as described further throughout this section.
banking supervision and regulation  group inc. is a
bank holding company under the bank holding company act of 1956 (bhc act), a financial holding company under amendments to the bhc act effected by the u.s. gramm-leach-bliley act of 1999 (glb act) and is subject to supervision and examination by the
federal reserve board.  under the system of functional regulation established under the bhc act, the federal reserve board
serves as the primary regulator of our consolidated organization. the primary regulators of our u.s. non-bank subsidiaries directly regulate the activities of those subsidiaries, with the federal reserve board exercising a supervisory role. such
functionally regulated u.s. non-bank subsidiaries include broker-dealers registered with the sec, such as our principal u.s. broker-dealer, goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.), entities registered with or regulated by the u.s.
commodity futures trading commission (cftc) with respect to futures-related and swaps-related activities and investment advisers registered with the sec with respect to their investment advisory activities.
various of our subsidiaries are regulated by the banking and securities regulatory authorities
of the countries in which they operate.  our principal u.s. bank subsidiary, gs bank usa, is supervised and regulated by the federal
reserve board, the fdic, the new york state department of financial services and the consumer financial protection bureau (cfpb). a number of our activities are conducted partially or entirely through gs bank usa and its subsidiaries, including:
origination of bank loans; interest rate, credit, currency and other derivatives; leveraged finance; mortgage origination; structured finance; deposit-taking; and agency lending.
in addition, group inc. has two limited purpose trust company subsidiaries that are not permitted to accept deposits or make loans (other than
as incidental to their trust activities) and are not insured by the fdic. the goldman sachs trust company, n.a., a national banking association that is limited to fiduciary activities, is regulated by the office of the comptroller of the currency
and is a member bank of the federal reserve system. the goldman sachs trust company of delaware, a delaware limited purpose trust company, is regulated by the office of the delaware state bank commissioner.
goldman sachs international bank (gsib), our regulated u.k. bank and principal non-u.s. bank subsidiary, is regulated by the pra and the fca.
gsib acts as a primary dealer for european government bonds and is involved in market making in european government bonds, lending (including securities lending) and deposit-taking activities.
in november2014, a new single supervisory mechanism became effective, under which the european central bank and national supervisors both
have certain regulatory responsibilities for banks in participating eu member states. while the u.k. does not participate in this new mechanism, it gives new powers to the european central bank to take regulatory action with regard to the
firms banks in germany and france.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
capital, leverage and liquidity requirements. we are subject to consolidated regulatory capital and leverage requirements set forth by the federal reserve board, and gs bank usa is subject to capital and leverage requirements that are calculated in
substantially the same manner as those applicable to group inc., also set forth by the federal reserve board.  under the federal
reserve boards capital adequacy requirements, group inc. must meet specific regulatory capital requirements that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items. the sufficiency of our capital levels is
also subject to qualitative judgments by regulators. we are also subject to liquidity requirements established by the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies.
capital ratios. we are subject to the federal
reserve boards revised risk-based capital and leverage ratio regulations, inclusive of certain transitional provisions (revised capital framework). these regulations are largely based on baseliii, and also implement certain provisions of
the dodd-frank act. under the revised capital framework, we are an advanced approach banking organization. the revised capital framework provides for capital buffers (including surcharges) that phase in over time, including a capital
conservation buffer, and a global systemically important bank (g-sib) surcharge described below, as well as a counter-cyclical capital buffer.
in july2015, the federal reserve board approved final rules establishing a capital surcharge for u.s. g-sibs. for these institutions, the
final rules implement the framework developed by the basel committee for assessing the global systemic importance of banking institutions and determining the range of additional common equity tier1 (cet1) that should be maintained by those
deemed to be g-sibs.  the federal reserve boards framework results in surcharges initially ranging from 1% to 4.5%. the final rules
treat the basel committees methodology as a floor (method one) and introduce an alternative calculation to determine the applicable surcharge (method two), which includes a significantly higher surcharge for systemic risk and, as part of the
calculation of the applicable surcharge, replaces the basel committees indicator for substitutability with a new indicator based on a u.s. g-sibs use of short-term wholesale funding. under the federal reserve boards final rules,
g-sibs are required to meet the capital surcharges on a phased-in basis beginning in 2016 through january1,2019.
the revised capital framework also provides a counter-cyclical capital buffer of up to 2.5% (and
also consisting entirely of cet1), to be imposed in the event that national supervisors deem it necessary in order to counteract excessive credit growth. the federal reserve board has proposed, but not yet finalized, its policy for setting the
counter-cyclical capital buffer, and several other national supervisors have started to implement this counter-cyclical buffer. the buffer applicable to us could change in the future and, as a result, the minimum ratios we are subject to could
increase.  gs bank usa computes its capital ratios in accordance with the revised capital framework as an advanced approach
banking organization.  the basel committee has published final guidelines for calculating incremental capital requirements for domestic
systemically important banking institutions (d-sibs). these guidelines are complementary to the framework outlined above for g-sibs, but are more principles-based in order to provide an appropriate degree of national discretion. the impact of these
guidelines on the regulatory capital requirements of gs bank usa and other subsidiaries will depend on how they are implemented by the banking and non-banking regulators in the united states and other jurisdictions.
in january2016, the basel committee finalized a revised framework for calculating minimum capital requirements for market risk, which is
expected to increase market risk capital requirements for most banking organizations. the revised framework, among other things: modifies the boundary between the trading book and banking book; replaces value at risk (var) and stressed var
measurements in the internal models approach with an expected shortfall measure that is intended to reflect tail and liquidity risks not captured by var; revises the model review and approval process; limits the capital-reducing effects of hedging
and portfolio diversification in the internal models approach; provides that securitization exposures will be measured using only the standardized approach; and makes significant revisions to the methodology for capital requirements under the
standardized approach. the effective date for first reporting under the revised framework is december31,2019. the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies have not yet proposed regulations implementing the revised requirements for u.s.
banking organizations.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the basel committee has issued a series of updates which propose other changes to capital
regulations. in particular, it has finalized a revised standard approach for calculating rwas for counterparty credit risk on derivatives exposures (standardized approach for measuring counterparty credit risk exposures, known as
sa-ccr). in addition, it has published guidelines for measuring and controlling large exposures (supervisory framework for measuring and controlling large exposures), and issued an updated framework for regulatory capital
treatment of banking book securitizations.  the basel committee has also issued consultation papers on, among other matters, a review
of interest rate risk in the banking book, a review of the credit valuation adjustment risk framework, revisions to the basel standardized approach for credit risk and operational risk capital, and the design of a capital floor
framework based on the revised standardized approach.  see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results of operations equity capital management and regulatory capital in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k and note20 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k for information about cet1, cet1 ratio, tier1 capital, tier1 capital ratio, total capital, total capital ratio, risk-weighted assets (rwas), and for information about minimum required
ratios, as well as applicable capital buffers and surcharges.  leverage ratios. under the revised capital framework, we and gs bank usa are subject to tier1 leverage requirements established by the federal reserve board. the revised capital framework also introduced a supplementary
leverage ratio for advanced approach banking organizations effective january1,2018.  see managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations equity capital management and regulatory capital in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k and note20 to the consolidated financial
statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k for information about our tier1 leverage ratio and supplementary leverage ratio.
liquidity ratios. the basel committees international framework for liquidity risk measurement, standards and monitoring requires banking organizations to measure their liquidity against two specific liquidity tests.
the liquidity coverage ratio (lcr) is designed to ensure that the entity maintains an adequate level of unencumbered high-quality
liquid assets based on expected net cash outflows under an acute short-term liquidity stress scenario. the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies rules implementing the lcr for advanced approach banking organizations are generally consistent
with the basel committees framework, but include accelerated transitional provisions and more stringent requirements related to both the range of assets that qualify as high-quality liquid assets and cash outflow assumptions for certain types
of funding and other liquidity risks.  under the accelerated transition timeline, the lcr became effective in the united states on
january1,2015, with a phase-in period whereby firms, including group inc. and gs bank usa, must have an 80% and 90% minimum ratio in 2015 and 2016, respectively, and a 100% minimum ratio commencing in 2017. in november2015, the
federal reserve board proposed a rule that would require bank holding companies to disclose their lcr on a quarterly basis beginning in the quarter ended september2016. these requirements include lcr averages over the prior quarter, detailed
information on certain components of the lcr calculation and projected net cash outflows. see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations risk management liquidity risk
management in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k for information about the lcr.  the lcr rule issued by the u.k.
regulatory authorities became effective in the united kingdom on october1,2015, with a phase-in period whereby certain financial institutions, including goldman sachs international (gsi), our regulated u.k. broker-dealer subsidiary, must
have an 80% minimum ratio initially, increasing to 90% on january1,2017 and 100% on january1,2018.  the net stable
funding ratio (nsfr) is designed to promote more medium- and long-term stable funding of the assets and off-balance-sheet activities of banking organizations over a one-year time horizon. under the basel committee framework, the nsfr will be
effective on january1,2018. the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies and the u.k. regulatory authorities have not yet proposed rules implementing the nsfr for u.s. banks and bank holding companies, and u.k. financial institutions,
respectively.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
since january1,2015, the enhanced prudential standards implemented by the federal
reserve board under the dodd-frank act have required bank holding companies with $50billion or more in total consolidated assets to comply with enhanced liquidity and overall risk management standards, including a buffer of highly liquid
assets based on projected funding needs for 30days, and increased involvement by boards of directors in liquidity and overall risk management. although the liquidity buffer under these rules has some similarities to the lcr (and is described
by the agencies as complementary to the lcr), it is a separate requirement that is in addition to the lcr. see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations risk management
overview and structure of risk management and  liquidity risk management in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k for information about our risk management practices and liquidity.
stress tests. bank holding companies with total
consolidated assets of $50billion or more are subject to dodd-frank act supervisory stress tests conducted by the federal reserve board and semi-annual company-run stress tests. the stress test rules require increased involvement by boards of
directors in stress testing and public disclosure of the results of both the federal reserve boards annual stress tests and a bank holding companys annual supervisory stress tests, and semi-annual internal stress tests.
we publish summaries of our annual and mid-cycle stress tests results on our web site as described under available information
below. our annual dodd-frank act stress test submission is incorporated into the annual capital plans that we are required to submit to the federal reserve board as part of the comprehensive capital analysis and review (ccar). the purpose of ccar is
to ensure that large bank holding companies have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes that account for each institutions unique risks and that permit continued operations during times of economic and financial stress. as part of
ccar, the federal reserve board evaluates an institutions plan to make capital distributions, such as repurchasing or redeeming stock or increasing dividend payments, across a range of macroeconomic and firm-specific assumptions.
similar to group inc., gs bank usa is required to conduct stress tests on an annual basis, to submit the results to the federal reserve board,
and to make a summary of those results public. the rules require that the board of directors of gs bank usa, among other things, consider the results of the stress tests in the normal course of the banks business including, but not limited to,
its capital planning, assessment of capital adequacy and risk management practices.
dividends and stock repurchases. federal and state laws impose limitations on the payment of dividends by our u.s. depository institution subsidiaries to group inc. in general, the amount of dividends that may be paid by gs bank usa or our
national bank trust company subsidiary is limited to the lesser of the amounts calculated under a recent earnings test and an undivided profits test. under the recent earnings test, a dividend may not be paid if the total of
all dividends declared by the entity in any calendar year is in excess of the current years net income combined with the retained net income of the two preceding years, unless the entity obtains prior regulatory approval. under the undivided
profits test, a dividend may not be paid in excess of the entitys undivided profits (generally, accumulated net profits that have not been paid out as dividends or transferred to surplus).
the banking regulators have authority to prohibit or limit the payment of dividends if, in the banking regulators opinion, payment of a
dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in light of the financial condition of the banking organization. the bhc act prohibits the federal reserve board from requiring a payment by a holding company subsidiary to a depository
institution if the functional regulator of that subsidiary objects to such payment. in such a case, the federal reserve board could instead require the divestiture of the depository institution and impose operating restrictions pending the
divestiture.  dividend payments by group inc. to its shareholders and stock repurchases by group inc. are subject to the oversight of the
federal reserve board. the dividend and share repurchase policies of large bank holding companies, such as group inc., are reviewed by the federal reserve board through the ccar process, based on capital plans and stress tests submitted by the bank
holding company, and are assessed against, among other things, the bank holding companys ability to meet and exceed minimum regulatory capital ratios under stressed scenarios, its expected sources and uses of capital over the planning horizon
under baseline and stressed scenarios, and any potential impact of changes to its business plan and activities on its capital adequacy and liquidity.
the federal reserve boards capital planning rule includes a limitation on capital distributions to the extent that actual capital
issuances are less than the amount indicated in the capital plan submission.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
source of strength. the dodd-frank act requires bank holding companies to act as a source of strength to their bank subsidiaries and to commit capital and financial resources to support those subsidiaries. this support may be
required by the federal reserve board at times when we might otherwise determine not to provide it. capital loans by a bank holding company to a subsidiary bank are subordinate in right of payment to deposits and to certain other indebtedness of the
subsidiary bank. in addition, if a bank holding company commits to a federal bank regulator that it will maintain the capital of its bank subsidiary, whether in response to the federal reserve boards invoking its source-of-strength authority
or in response to other regulatory measures, that commitment will be assumed by the bankruptcy trustee for the holding company and the bank will be entitled to priority payment in respect of that commitment, ahead of other creditors of the bank
holding company.  transactions between affiliates. transactions between gs bank usa or its subsidiaries, on the one hand, and group inc. or its other subsidiaries and affiliates, on the other hand, are regulated by the federal reserve board. these regulations
generally limit the types and amounts of transactions (including credit extensions from gs bank usa or its subsidiaries to group inc. or its other subsidiaries and affiliates) that may take place and generally require those transactions to be on
market terms or better to gs bank usa or its subsidiaries. these regulations generally do not apply to transactions between gs bank usa and its subsidiaries. the dodd-frank act expanded the coverage and scope of these regulations, including by
applying them to the credit exposure arising under derivative transactions, repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements, and securities borrowing and lending transactions.
total loss-absorbing capacity. in october2015, the federal reserve board issued a proposed rule that would establish loss-absorbency and related requirements for u.s. g-sibs. the proposed rule
would address u.s. implementation of the financial stability boards total loss-absorbing capacity (tlac) principles and term sheet described below. the proposed rule would require u.s. g-sibs, such as
group inc., to maintain minimum external tlac, consisting of tier1 capital and eligible senior and subordinated long-term debt (i.e., debt that is unsecured, has a maturity greater than one year from issuance and satisfies certain additional
criteria), equal to the greater of (i)16% of risk-weighted assets (rwas) and (ii)9.5% of total leverage exposure (the denominator of the supplementary leverage ratio) commencing january1,2019. the rwa component would increase
to 18% of rwas on january1,2022. the proposed rule would also require a buffer of cet1 in an amount equal to the sum of (i)the capital conservation buffer (2.5% of rwas), (ii)the g-sib
surcharge calculated in accordance with the method one calculation and (iii)any applicable counter-cyclical capital buffer.
in addition, beginning in 2019, u.s. g-sibs would also be required to maintain minimum eligible
long-term debt equal to the greater of (i)6% plus the g-sib surcharge of rwas and (ii)4.5% of total leverage exposure. the proposed rule would disqualify from eligible long-term debt, among other
instruments, debt securities that permit acceleration for reasons other than insolvency or payment default, as well as structured notes and debt securities not governed by u.s. law. the senior long-term debt of u.s.
g-sibs, including group inc., typically permits acceleration for reasons other than insolvency or payment default, and therefore would not qualify as eligible long-term debt under the proposed rule.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the proposed rule would also prohibit group inc., as a u.s.
g-sib, from (i)guaranteeing liabilities of subsidiaries that are subject to early termination provisions if the parent company of a u.s. g-sib enters into an
insolvency or receivership proceeding, (ii)incurring liabilities guaranteed by subsidiaries, (iii)issuing short-term debt, or (iv)entering into derivatives and certain other financial contracts with external counterparties.
additionally, the proposed rule would cap, at 5% of the value of the u.s. g-sibs eligible tlac, the amount of a u.s. g-sibs unsecured non-contingent third-party liabilities that are not eligible
long-term debt that could rank equally with or junior to eligible long-term debt. finally, the proposed rule would require u.s. g-sibs and other large banking entities to deduct from their own tier2
capital certain holdings in unsecured debt of other u.s. g-sibs, as well as holdings of their own unsecured debt securities. the federal reserve board has also indicated that it is considering imposing
subsidiary tlac requirements on material operating subsidiaries of u.s. g-sibs.  in
november2015, the financial stability board issued a set of final principles and a final term sheet on a new minimum standard for tlac of g-sibs. the financial stability boards final standard also requires certain material subsidiaries
of a g-sib organized outside of the g-sibs home country, such as gsi, to maintain amounts of tlac to facilitate the transfer of losses from operating subsidiaries to the parent company.
also, in november2015, the basel committee issued a proposal to implement internationally the capital deductions for g-sibs
holdings of the tlac of other g-sibs and their own, which will inform how the deductions are implemented by other national regulators.
in december2015, the bank of england published a consultation paper on its approach for setting a minimum requirement for own funds
and eligible liabilities (mrel) under which certain u.k. financial institutions, including gsi, would need to maintain equity and liabilities sufficient to credibly bear losses in resolution. mrel is generally consistent with the financial
stability boards tlac standard.
the proposed mrel is the sum of a loss absorption amount and a recapitalization amount. the loss
absorption amount is based on a firms minimum going-concern capital requirement, which currently consists of pillar1 (the minimum capital requirement under the fourth eu capital requirements directive and eu capital requirements
regulation, collectively known as crd iv), plus pillar2a (an additional amount to cover risks not adequately captured in pillar1). the recapitalization amount is based on a firms recapitalization needs post-resolution and any
additional requirements to be determined by the bank of england as necessary to maintain market confidence.
resolution and recovery. each bank holding company with
over $50billion in assets and each designated systemically important financial institution is required by the federal reserve board and the fdic to provide an annual plan for its rapid and orderly resolution in the event of material financial
distress or failure (resolution plan). our resolution plan must, among other things, demonstrate that gs bank usa is adequately protected from risks arising from our other entities. the regulators joint rule sets specific standards for the
resolution plans, including requiring a detailed resolution strategy and analyses of the companys material entities, organizational structure, interconnections and interdependencies, and management information systems, among other elements. if
the regulators jointly determine that an institution has failed to cure identified shortcomings in its resolution plan and that its resolution plan, after any permitted resubmission, is not credible, the regulators may jointly impose more stringent
capital, leverage or liquidity requirements or restrictions on growth, activities or operations or may jointly order the institutions to divest assets or operations in order to facilitate orderly resolution in the event of failure.
we are also required by the federal reserve board to submit, on an annual basis, a global recovery plan that outlines the steps that management
could take to reduce risk, maintain sufficient liquidity, and conserve capital in times of prolonged stress.  the fdic has issued a rule
requiring each insured depository institution with $50billion or more in assets, such as gs bank usa, to provide a resolution plan. similar to our resolution plan for group inc., our resolution plan for gs bank usa must, among other things,
demonstrate that it is adequately protected from risks arising from our other entities.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the eu bank recovery and resolution directive (the brrd) required eu member states to grant, by
january1,2016, bail-in powers to eu resolution authorities to recapitalize a failing entity by writing down its unsecured debt or converting its unsecured debt into equity. financial institutions in the eu (including gsi)
must provide that new contracts entered into after january1,2016 enable such actions and also amend pre-existing contracts governed by non-eu law to enable such actions, when the financial institutions could incur liabilities under such
pre-existing contracts after january1,2016.  separately, under the brrd, financial contracts not governed by eu law are
required to be amended so that the resolution authorities can impose a temporary stay of termination in resolution. these requirements must be implemented over 2016 and 2017, with the timing depending on the category of the counterparty of the
financial institution. the brrd also subjects investment firms to mrel so that they can be resolved without causing financial instability and without recourse to public funds in the event of a failure. in july2015, the european banking
authority published final draft regulatory technical standards on mrel, which specify the common criteria under the brrd. the bank of englands proposal on mrel is described above under total loss-absorbing capacity.
insolvency of an insured depository institution or a bank holding company. under the federal deposit insurance act of 1950, if the fdic is appointed as conservator or receiver for an insured depository institution such as gs bank usa, upon its insolvency or in certain other events, the
fdic has broad powers, including the power:
to transfer any of the depository institutions assets and liabilities to a new obligor, including a newly formed bridge bank,
without the approval of the depository institutions creditors;
to enforce the depository institutions contracts pursuant to their terms without regard to any provisions triggered by the appointment of the
fdic in that capacity; or
to repudiate or disaffirm any contract or lease to which the depository institution is a party, the performance of which is determined by the fdic
to be burdensome and the disaffirmance or repudiation of which is determined by the fdic to promote the orderly administration of the depository institution.
in addition, under federal law, the claims of holders of domestic deposit liabilities and
certain claims for administrative expenses against an insured depository institution would be afforded a priority over other general unsecured claims, including deposits at non-u.s. branches and claims of debt holders of the institution, in the
liquidation or other resolution of such an institution by any receiver. as a result, whether or not the fdic ever sought to repudiate any debt obligations of gs bank usa, the debt holders (other than depositors) would be treated
differently from, and could receive, if anything, substantially less than, the depositors of gs bank usa.  the dodd-frank act created a new
resolution regime (known as orderly liquidation authority) for bank holding companies and their affiliates that are systemically important and certain non-bank financial companies. under the orderly liquidation authority, the fdic may be
appointed as receiver for the systemically important institution and its failed non-bank subsidiaries if, upon the recommendation of applicable regulators, the secretary of the treasury determines, among other things, that the institution is in
default or in danger of default, that the institutions failure would have serious adverse effects on the u.s. financial system and that resolution under the orderly liquidation authority would avoid or mitigate those effects.
if the fdic is appointed as receiver under the orderly liquidation authority, then the powers of the receiver, and the rights and obligations
of creditors and other parties who have dealt with the institution, would be determined under the orderly liquidation authority, and not under the bankruptcy or insolvency law that would otherwise apply. the powers of the receiver under the orderly
liquidation authority were generally based on the powers of the fdic as receiver for depository institutions under the federal deposit insurance act. substantial differences in the rights of creditors exist between the orderly liquidation authority
and the u.s. bankruptcy code, including the right of the fdic under the orderly liquidation authority to disregard the strict priority of creditor claims in some circumstances, the use of an administrative claims procedure to determine
creditors claims (as opposed to the judicial procedure utilized in bankruptcy proceedings), and the right of the fdic to transfer claims to a bridge entity. in addition, the orderly liquidation authority limits the ability of
creditors to enforce certain contractual cross-defaults against affiliates of the institution in receivership.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the orderly liquidation authority provisions of the dodd-frank act became effective upon
enactment. the fdic has completed several rulemakings and taken other actions under the orderly liquidation authority, including the issuance of a notice describing some elements of its single point of entry or spoe strategy
pursuant to the orderly liquidation authority provisions of the dodd-frank act. under this strategy, the fdic would, among other things, resolve a failed financial holding company by transferring its assets to a bridge holding company.
in november2015, we, along with a number of other major global banking organizations, adhered to an updated version of the
international swaps and derivatives association resolution stay protocol (the isda protocol) that was developed in coordination with the financial stability board. the isda protocol imposes a stay on certain cross-default and early termination
rights within standard isda derivatives contracts and securities financing transactions between adhering parties in the event that one of them is subject to resolution in its home jurisdiction, including a resolution under the orderly liquidation
authority in the united states. the initial version, which addressed isda derivatives contracts, took effect in january2015, and the updated version, which was revised to also cover securities financing transactions, took effect in
january2016. the isda protocol is expected to be adopted more broadly in the future, following the adoption of regulations by banking regulators, and expanded to include instances where a u.s. financial holding company becomes subject to
proceedings under the u.s. bankruptcy code.  fdic insurance. gs bank usa accepts deposits, and those deposits have the benefit of fdic insurance up to the applicable limits. the fdics deposit insurance fund is funded by assessments on insured depository institutions,
such as gs bank usa. the amounts of these assessments for larger depository institutions (generally those that have $10billion in assets or more), such as gs bank usa, are currently based on the average total consolidated assets less the
average tangible equity of the insured depository institution during the assessment period, the supervisory ratings of the insured depository institution and specified forward-looking financial measures used to calculate the assessment rate. the
assessment rate is subject to adjustment by the fdic.
in october2015, the fdic issued a proposed rule that would increase the reserve ratio for
the deposit insurance fund to 1.35% of total insured deposits. the proposed rule would impose a surcharge on the assessments of larger depository institutions, beginning the quarter after the reserve ratio first reaches or exceeds 1.15% and
continuing through the earlier of the quarter that the reserve ratio first reaches or exceeds 1.35% and december31,2018. under the proposed rule, if the reserve ratio does not reach 1.35% by december31,2018, the fdic would
impose a shortfall assessment on larger depository institutions, including gs bank usa.  prompt
corrective action. the u.s. federal deposit insurance corporation improvement act of 1991 (fdicia), among other things, requires the federal bank regulatory agencies to take prompt
corrective action in respect of depository institutions that do not meet specified capital requirements. fdicia establishes five capital categories for fdic-insured banks: well-capitalized, adequately capitalized, undercapitalized,
significantly undercapitalized and critically undercapitalized.  an institution may be downgraded to, or deemed to be in, a capital
category that is lower than is indicated by its capital ratios if it is determined to be in an unsafe or unsound condition or if it receives an unsatisfactory examination rating with respect to certain matters. fdicia imposes progressively more
restrictive constraints on operations, management and capital distributions, as the capital category of an institution declines. failure to meet the capital requirements could also require a depository institution to raise capital. ultimately,
critically undercapitalized institutions are subject to the appointment of a receiver or conservator, as described under resolution and recovery, and insolvency insolvency of an insured depository institution or a bank holding
company above.  the prompt corrective action regulations apply only to depository institutions and not to bank holding companies such
as group inc. however, the federal reserve board is authorized to take appropriate action at the holding company level, based upon the undercapitalized status of the holding companys depository institution subsidiaries. in certain instances
relating to an undercapitalized depository institution subsidiary, the bank holding company would be required to guarantee the performance of the undercapitalized subsidiarys capital restoration plan and might be liable for civil money damages
for failure to fulfill its commitments on that guarantee. furthermore, in the event of the bankruptcy of the holding company, the guarantee would take priority over the holding companys general unsecured creditors, as described under
source of strength above.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
activities. the dodd-frank act and the bhc act
generally restrict bank holding companies from engaging in business activities other than the business of banking and certain closely related activities.
volcker rule. the provisions of the dodd-frank
act referred to as the volcker rule became effective in july2015. the volcker rule prohibits proprietary trading, but permits activities such as underwriting, market making and risk-mitigation hedging, requires an
extensive compliance program and includes additional reporting and record keeping requirements. the reporting requirements include calculating daily quantitative metrics on covered trading activities (as defined in the rule) and providing these
metrics to regulators on a monthly basis.  in addition, the volcker rule limits the sponsorship of, and investment in, covered
funds (as defined in the rule) by banking entities, including group inc. and its subsidiaries. it also limits certain types of transactions between us and our sponsored funds, similar to the limitations on transactions between depository
institutions and their affiliates. covered funds include our private equity funds, certain of our credit and real estate funds, our hedge funds and certain other investment structures. the limitation on investments in covered funds requires us to
reduce our investment in each such fund to 3% or less of the funds net asset value, and to reduce our aggregate investment in all such funds to 3% or less of our tier1 capital.
in december2014, the federal reserve board extended the conformance period through july2016 for investments in, and relationships
with, covered funds that were in place prior to december31,2013, and indicated that it intends to further extend the conformance period through july2017.
see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations regulatory
developments volcker rule in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k for information about our investments in covered funds.
other restrictions. financial holding companies generally can engage in a broader range of financial and related activities than are otherwise permissible for bank holding companies as long as they continue to meet the eligibility
requirements for financial holding companies. the broader range of permissible activities for financial holding companies includes underwriting, dealing and making markets in securities and making investments in non-financial companies. in addition,
financial holding companies are permitted under the glb act to engage in certain commodities activities in the united states that may otherwise be impermissible for bank holding companies, so long as the assets held pursuant to these activities do
not equal 5% or more of their consolidated assets.  the federal reserve board, however, has the authority to limit a financial
holding companys ability to conduct activities that would otherwise be permissible, and will likely do so if the financial holding company does not satisfactorily meet certain requirements of the federal reserve board. for example, if a
financial holding company or any of its u.s. depository institution subsidiaries ceases to maintain its status as well-capitalized or well-managed, the federal reserve board may impose corrective capital and/or managerial requirements, as well as
additional limitations or conditions. if the deficiencies persist, the financial holding company may be required to divest its u.s. depository institution subsidiaries or to cease engaging in activities other than the business of banking and certain
closely related activities.  in addition, we are required to obtain prior federal reserve board approval before engaging in certain banking
and other financial activities both within and outside the united states.  single-counterparty credit limits and early remediation
requirements have been proposed but are still under consideration by the federal reserve board. the proposed single-counterparty credit limits impose more stringent requirements for credit exposure among major financial institutions, which (together
with other provisions incorporated into the baseliii capital rules) may affect our ability to transact or hedge with other financial institutions. the proposed early remediation rules are modeled on the prompt corrective action regime,
described under u.s. deposit insurance and prompt corrective action, but are designed to require action to begin in earlier stages of a companys financial distress, based on a range of triggers, including capital and leverage,
stress test results, liquidity and risk management.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
if any insured depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company fails to
maintain at least a satisfactory rating under the community reinvestment act, the financial holding company would be subject to similar restrictions on activities.
in addition, new york state banking law imposes lending limits (which take into account credit exposure from derivative transactions) and other
requirements that could impact the manner and scope of gs bank usas activities.  during the past several years, the u.s. federal bank
regulatory agencies have raised concerns over origination and other practices in leveraged lending markets. the agencies have issued guidance that focuses on transaction structures and risk management frameworks and outlines high-level principles
for safe-and-sound leveraged lending, including underwriting standards, valuation and stress testing.  broker-dealer and securities regulation
our broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to regulations that cover all aspects of the securities business, including sales methods, trade
practices, use and safekeeping of clients funds and securities, capital structure, recordkeeping, the financing of clients purchases, and the conduct of directors, officers and employees. in the united states, the sec is the federal
agency responsible for the administration of the federal securities laws. gs&co. is registered as a broker-dealer, a municipal advisor and an investment adviser with the sec and as a broker-dealer in all 50 states and the district of columbia.
self-regulatory organizations, such as finra and the nyse, adopt rules that apply to, and examine, broker-dealers such as gs&co.  in
addition, state securities and other regulators also have regulatory or oversight authority over gs&co. similarly, our businesses are also subject to regulation by various non-u.s. governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory
authorities in virtually all countries where we have offices, as described further below, as well as under other regulation. gsec is a registered u.s. broker-dealer and is regulated by the sec, the nyse and finra. for a description of
net capital requirements applicable to gs&co. and gsec, see note20 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k.
in europe, we provide broker-dealer services that are subject to oversight by national
regulators as well as eu regulators. these services are regulated in accordance with national laws, many of which implement eu directives, and increasingly by directly applicable eu regulations. these national and eu laws require, among other
things, compliance with certain capital adequacy standards, customer protection requirements and market conduct and trade reporting rules.
we provide broker-dealer services in and from the united kingdom under the regulation of the pra and the fca. gsi, our regulated u.k.
broker-dealer subsidiary, is subject to capital requirements imposed by the pra. gsi also has its own capital planning and stress testing process, which incorporates internally designed stress tests and those required under the pras internal
capital adequacy assessment process. see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations equity capital management and regulatory capital subsidiary capital requirements
in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k for information about gsis capital ratios.  goldman sachs japan co., ltd.
(gsjcl), our regulated japanese broker-dealer, is subject to capital requirements imposed by japans financial services agency. gsjcl is also regulated by the tokyo stock exchange, the osaka exchange, the tokyo financial exchange, the japan
securities dealers association, the tokyo commodity exchange, securities and exchange surveillance commission, bank of japan, the ministry of finance and the ministry of economy, trade and industry, among others.
also, the securities and futures commission in hong kong, the monetary authority of singapore, the china securities regulatory commission, the
korean financial supervisory service, the reserve bank of india, the securities and exchange board of india, the australian securities and investments commission and the australian securities exchange, among others, regulate various of our
subsidiaries and also have capital standards and other requirements comparable to the rules of the sec. various of our other subsidiaries are regulated by the banking and regulatory authorities in jurisdictions in which we operate, including, among
others, brazil and dubai.  our exchange-based market-making activities are subject to extensive regulation by a number of securities
exchanges. as a market maker on exchanges, we are required to maintain orderly markets in the securities to which we are assigned.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the dodd-frank act will result in additional regulation by the sec, the cftc and other
regulators of our broker-dealer and regulated subsidiaries in a number of respects. the legislation calls for the imposition of expanded standards of care by market participants in dealing with clients and customers, including by providing the sec
with authority to adopt rules establishing fiduciary duties for broker-dealers and directing the sec to examine and improve sales practices and disclosure by broker-dealers and investment advisers. in addition, the u.s. department of labor has
issued proposed rules defining the circumstances in which a person would be treated as a fiduciary under the employee retirement income security act of 1974 by reason of providing investment advice to retirement plans and individual retirement
accounts, as well as proposed exemptions.  our broker-dealer and other subsidiaries are also subject to rules adopted by federal agencies
pursuant to the dodd-frank act that require any person who organizes or initiates an asset-backed security transaction to retain a portion (generally, at least five percent) of any credit risk that the person conveys to a third party.
securitizations would also be affected by rules proposed by the sec to implement the dodd-frank acts prohibition against securitization participants engaging in any transaction that would involve or result in any material conflict of interest
with an investor in a securitization transaction. the proposed rules would exempt bona fide market-making activities and risk-mitigating hedging activities in connection with securitization activities from the general prohibition.
the sec, finra and regulators in various non-u.s. jurisdictions have imposed both conduct-based and disclosure-based requirements with respect
to research reports and research analysts and may impose additional regulations.
swaps, derivatives and commodities regulation
the commodity futures, commodity options and swaps industry in the united states is subject to regulation under the u.s. commodity exchange
act. the cftc is the federal agency charged with the administration of the cea. in addition, the sec is the federal agency charged with the regulation of security-based swaps. several of our subsidiaries, including gs&co. and gsec, are
registered with the cftc and act as futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators, commodity trading advisors or (as described below) swap dealers, and are subject to cftc regulations. the rules and regulations of various self-regulatory
organizations, such as the chicago board of trade and the chicago mercantile exchange, other futures exchanges and the national futures association, also govern the commodity futures, commodity options and swaps activities of these entities. in
addition, goldman sachs financial markets, l.p. is registered with the sec as an otc derivatives dealer and conducts certain otc derivatives activities.
the dodd-frank act provides for significantly increased regulation of, and restrictions on, derivative markets and transactions. in particular,
the dodd-frank act imposes the following requirements relating to swaps and security-based swaps:
real-time public and regulatory reporting of trade information for swaps and security-based swaps and large trader reporting for swaps;
registration of swap dealers and major swap participants with the cftc and of security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap
participants with the sec;
position limits, aggregated generally across commonly controlled accounts and commonly controlled affiliates, that cap exposure to derivatives on
certain physical commodities;
mandated clearing through central counterparties and execution through regulated exchanges or electronic facilities for certain swaps and
security-based swaps;
new business conduct standards and other requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers and major
security-based swap participants, covering their relationships with counterparties, internal oversight and compliance structures, conflict of interest rules, internal information barriers, general and trade-specific record-keeping and risk
management;
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
margin requirements for trades that are not cleared through a central counterparty; and
entity-level capital requirements for swap dealers, major swap participants, security-based swap dealers, and major security-based swap
participants.  the terms swaps and security-based swaps are generally defined broadly for
purposes of these requirements, and can include a wide variety of derivative instruments in addition to those conventionally called swaps. the definition includes certain forward contracts, options, certain loan participations and guarantees of
swaps, subject to certain exceptions, and relates to a wide variety of underlying assets or obligations, including currencies, commodities, interest or other monetary rates, yields, indices, securities, credit events, loans and other financial
obligations.  the cftc is responsible for issuing rules relating to swaps, swap dealers and major swap participants, and the sec is
responsible for issuing rules relating to security-based swaps, security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies (acting jointly) adopted final rules in october2015 and the cftc
adopted final margin rules for uncleared swaps in december2015 that will phase in variation margin requirements from september1,2016 through march1,2017 and initial margin requirements from september1,2016
through september1,2020, depending on the level of swaps and foreign exchange forward transaction activity of the swap dealer and the relevant counterparty. the final rules of the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies would generally
apply to inter-affiliate transactions, with limited relief available from the initial margin requirements for affiliates that have registered with the cftc as swap dealers. under the cftc final rules, inter-affiliate transactions would be exempt
from initial margin requirements with certain exceptions, but variation margin requirements would still apply. we expect the sec to adopt margin regulations as well in 2016.
the cftc has not yet finalized its capital regulations for swap dealers. however, many of the
requirements, including registration of swap dealers, mandatory clearing and execution of certain swaps, business conduct standards and real-time public trade reporting, have taken effect already under cftc rules, and the sec and the cftc have
finalized the definitions of a number of key terms. finally, the cftc has begun to decide which swaps must be cleared through central counterparties and executed on swap execution facilities or exchanges. in particular, certain interest rate swaps
and credit default swaps are now subject to these clearing and trade-execution requirements. the cftc is expected to continue to make such determinations during 2016.
the sec has adopted rules relating to trade reporting and real-time reporting requirements for security-based swap dealers and major
security-based swap participants. the sec has also adopted final rules relating to the registration of security-based swap dealers, but such registration is not currently required. the sec has proposed, but not yet finalized, rules to impose margin,
capital, segregation and business conduct requirements for security-based swap dealers and major security-based swap participants. the sec has also proposed rules that would govern the design of new trading venues for security-based swaps and
establish the process for determining which products must be traded on these venues.  we have registered certain subsidiaries as swap
dealers under the cftc rules, including gs&co., gs bank usa, gsi and j. aron& company. we also expect to register certain subsidiaries as security-based swap dealers. we expect that these subsidiaries, and our businesses more
broadly, will continue to be subject to significant and developing regulation and regulatory oversight in connection with swap-related activities.
similar regulations have been proposed or adopted in jurisdictions outside the united states, including the adoption of standardized execution
and clearing, margining and reporting requirements for otc derivatives. for instance, the eu has established regulatory requirements for otc derivatives activities under the european market infrastructure regulation, including requirements relating
to portfolio reconciliation and reporting, which have already taken effect, as well as requirements relating to clearing and margining for uncleared derivatives, which are currently expected to be finalized during 2016.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the cftc and sec have issued guidance and rules relating to swap activities. the cftc has
provided guidance and timing on the cross-border regulation of swaps and announced that it had reached an understanding with the european commission regarding the cross-border regulation of derivatives and the common goals underlying their
respective regulations. the cftc also approved certain comparability determinations that would permit substituted compliance with non-u.s. regulatory regimes for certain swap regulations related to certain business conduct requirements, including
chief compliance officer duties, conflict of interest rules, monitoring of position limits, record-keeping and risk management. the sec issued rules and guidance on cross-border security-based swap activities and the cftc issued proposed rules that
would determine the circumstances under which registered swap dealers would be subject to the cftcs rules regarding margin in connection with uncleared swaps in cross-border transactions. in particular, under the proposal, certain non-u.s.
swap dealers would generally be required to comply with the cftcs rules but, with respect to the requirement to post margin, these non-u.s. swap dealers would be permitted to comply with comparable margin requirements in a foreign
jurisdiction, subject to the cftcs approval of the particular jurisdiction. substituted compliance would also be available with respect to the collection of margin in certain circumstances. the cftcs rules will only be applicable to
those swap dealers that are not subject to the margin requirements of a prudential regulator.  the application of new derivatives rules
across different national and regulatory jurisdictions has not yet been fully established and specific determinations of the extent to which regulators in each of the relevant jurisdictions will defer to regulations in other jurisdictions have not
yet been completed. the full impact of the various u.s. and non-u.s. regulatory developments in this area will not be known with certainty until all the rules are finalized and implemented and market practices and structures develop under the final
rules.  j. aron& company is authorized by the u.s. federal energy regulatory commission (ferc) to sell wholesale physical power
at market-based rates. as a ferc-authorized power marketer, j. aron& company is subject to regulation under the u.s. federal power act and ferc regulations and to the oversight of ferc. as a result of our investing activities, group inc.
is also an exempt holding company under the u.s. public utility holding company act of 2005 and applicable ferc rules.
in addition, as a result of our power-related and commodities activities, we are subject to
energy, environmental and other governmental laws and regulations, as described under risk factors our commodities activities, particularly our physical commodities activities, subject us to extensive regulation and involve certain
potential risks, including environmental, reputational and other risks that may expose us to significant liabilities and costs in parti, item1a of the 2015 form10-k.
investment management regulation  our investment
management business is subject to significant regulation in numerous jurisdictions around the world relating to, among other things, the safeguarding of client assets, offerings of funds, marketing activities, transactions among affiliates and our
management of client funds.  certain of our subsidiaries are registered with, and subject to oversight by, the sec as investment advisers.
the sec recently adopted amendments to the rules that govern sec-registered money market mutual funds. the new rules require institutional prime money market funds to value their portfolio securities using market-based factors and to sell and redeem
their shares based on a floating net asset value. in addition, the rules allow, in certain circumstances, for the board of directors of money market mutual funds to impose liquidity fees and redemption gates and also require additional disclosure,
reporting and stress testing. certain reporting requirements became effective during 2015, and the firms money market mutual funds will be required to comply with the amendments relating to floating net asset value, fees and redemption gates
and stress testing in 2016.  in september2015, the sec also proposed rules that would require registered funds to adopt and implement
liquidity risk management programs, including establishing a minimum percentage of net assets that could be invested only in assets offering three-day liquidity and classifying and reviewing the liquidity of fund portfolio assets; permit funds to
employ swing pricing, under which the net asset value of a funds shares may be adjusted in order to pass the cost of trading in such shares to purchasing or redeeming shareholders; and require related disclosures.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
in december2015, the sec also proposed a new rule regulating the use of derivatives by
registered funds. under the proposed rule, a registered fund would be required to, among other things, comply with one of two alternative portfolio limitations designed to impose a limit on the total amount of leverage the fund can obtain through
derivatives transactions; maintain a minimum amount of qualifying coverage assets (generally limited to cash and cash equivalents) to support payment obligations for each derivative transaction; establish a derivatives risk management
program if derivative use meets specified thresholds; and comply with new recordkeeping, disclosure and reporting requirements related to its use of derivatives.
certain of our european subsidiaries are subject to the alternative investment fund managers directive and related regulations, which govern
the approval, organizational, marketing and reporting requirements of eu-based alternative investment managers and the ability of alternative investment fund managers located outside the eu to access the eu market.
the european commission has published a proposal relating to money market funds, including provisions prescribing minimum levels of daily and
weekly liquidity, clear labeling of money market funds, a 3% capital buffer for constant net asset value funds and internal credit risk assessments.  compensation
practices  our compensation practices are subject to oversight by the federal reserve board and, with respect to some of our
subsidiaries and employees, by other financial regulatory bodies worldwide. the scope and content of compensation regulation in the financial industry are continuing to develop, and we expect that these regulations and resulting market practices
will evolve over a number of years.
the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies have provided guidance designed to ensure that
incentive compensation arrangements at banking organizations take into account risk and are consistent with safe and sound practices. the guidance sets forth the following three key principles with respect to incentive compensation arrangements:
(i)the arrangements should provide employees with incentives that appropriately balance risk and financial results in a manner that does not encourage employees to expose their organizations to imprudent risk; (ii)the arrangements should
be compatible with effective controls and risk management; and (iii)the arrangements should be supported by strong corporate governance. the guidance provides that supervisory findings with respect to incentive compensation will be
incorporated, as appropriate, into the organizations supervisory ratings, which can affect its ability to make acquisitions or perform other actions. the guidance also provides that enforcement actions may be taken against a banking
organization if its incentive compensation arrangements or related risk management, control or governance processes pose a risk to the organizations safety and soundness.
the financial stability board has released standards for implementing certain compensation principles for banks and other financial companies
designed to encourage sound compensation practices. these standards are to be implemented by local regulators. in the eu, crd iv includes compensation provisions designed to implement the financial stability boards compensation standards.
these rules have been implemented by eu member states and, among other things, limit the ratio of variable to fixed compensation of certain employees, including those identified as having a material impact on the risk profile of eu-regulated
entities, including gsi.  the eu has also introduced rules regulating compensation for certain persons providing services to certain
investment funds. these requirements are in addition to the guidance issued by u.s. financial regulators described above and the dodd-frank act provision described below.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the dodd-frank act requires the u.s. financial regulators, including the federal reserve board,
to establish joint regulations or guidelines prohibiting incentive-based payment arrangements at specified regulated entities having at least $1billion in total assets (which would include group inc. and some of its depository institution,
broker-dealer and investment adviser subsidiaries) that encourage inappropriate risks by providing an executive officer, employee, director or principal shareholder with excessive compensation, fees, or benefits or that could lead to material
financial loss to the entity. in addition, these regulators must establish regulations or guidelines requiring enhanced disclosure to regulators of incentive-based compensation arrangements. the initial version of these regulations was proposed by
the u.s. financial regulators in early 2011 but the regulations have not yet been finalized. the proposed regulations incorporate the three key principles from the regulatory guidance described above. if the regulations are adopted in the form
proposed, they may restrict our flexibility with respect to the manner in which we structure compensation.  anti-money laundering and anti-bribery
rules and regulations  the u.s. bank secrecy act (bsa), as amended by the usa patriot act of 2001 (patriot act), contains anti-money
laundering and financial transparency laws and mandated the implementation of various regulations applicable to all financial institutions, including standards for verifying client identification at account opening, and obligations to monitor client
transactions and report suspicious activities. through these and other provisions, the bsa and the patriot act seek to promote the identification of parties that may be involved in terrorism, money laundering or other suspicious activities.
anti-money laundering laws outside the united states contain some similar provisions.  in addition, we are subject to laws and regulations
worldwide, including the u.s. foreign corrupt practices act and the u.k. bribery act, relating to corrupt and illegal payments to, and hiring practices with regard to, government officials and others. the obligation of financial institutions,
including goldman sachs, to identify their clients, to monitor for and report suspicious transactions, to monitor direct and indirect payments to government officials, to respond to requests for information by regulatory authorities and law
enforcement agencies, and to share information with other financial institutions, has required the implementation and maintenance of internal practices, procedures and controls.
other regulation
the u.s. and non-u.s. government agencies, regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations, as well as state securities commissions and
other state regulators in the united states, are empowered to conduct administrative proceedings that can result in censure, fine, the issuance of cease-and-desist orders, or the suspension or expulsion of a regulated entity or its directors,
officers or employees. in addition, a number of our other activities require us to obtain licenses, adhere to applicable regulations and be subject to the oversight of various regulators in the jurisdictions in which we conduct these activities.
the eu finalized the markets in financial instruments regulation and a revision of the markets in financial instruments directive
(collectively, mifidii). these include new extensive market structure reforms, such as the establishment of new trading venue categories for the purposes of discharging the obligation to trade otc derivatives on a trading platform, enhanced
pre- and post-trade transparency covering a wider range of financial instruments and a reform of the equities markets. commodities trading firms will be required to calculate their positions and adhere to specific limits. other reforms introduce
enhanced transaction reporting, the publication of best execution data by investment firms and trading venues, investor protection-related and organizational requirements. other requirements may affect the way investment managers can pay for the
receipt of investment research. on february10,2016, the european commission proposed delaying the effectiveness of mifidii until january2018.
the eu and national financial legislators and regulators have proposed or adopted numerous further market reforms that may impact our
businesses, including heightened corporate governance standards for financial institutions and rules on indices that are used as benchmarks for financial instruments or funds. in addition, the european commission, the european securities market
authority and the european banking authority have announced or are formulating regulatory standards and other measures which will impact our european operations. certain of our subsidiaries are also regulated by the european securities, derivatives
and commodities exchanges of which they are members.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the european commission has published a proposal for a common system of financial transactions
tax which would be implemented in certain eu member states willing to engage in enhanced cooperation in this area. the proposed financial transactions tax is broad in scope and would apply to transactions in a wide variety of financial instruments
and derivatives. the european commission has also published a draft proposal for structural reform of eu banks, which would prohibit certain banks from proprietary trading and would require separating certain trading activities from deposit-taking
entities.  as described above, many of our subsidiaries are subject to regulatory capital requirements in jurisdictions throughout the
world. subsidiaries not subject to separate regulation may hold capital to satisfy local tax guidelines, rating agency requirements or internal policies, including policies concerning the minimum amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based upon
its underlying risk.  certain of our businesses are subject to laws and regulations enacted by u.s. federal and state governments, the eu
or other jurisdictions and/or enacted by various regulatory organizations or exchanges relating to the privacy of the information of clients, employees or others, including the glb act, the eu data protection directive, the japanese personal
information protection act, the hong kong personal data (privacy) ordinance, the australian privacy act and the brazilian bank secrecy law.
available information  our internet address is www.gs.com and the investor relations section of our web site is located at
www.gs.com/shareholders. we make available free of charge through the investor relations section of our web site, annual reports on form10-k, quarterly reports on form10-q and current reports on form8-k and amendments to
those reports filed or furnished pursuant to section13(a) or 15(d) of the u.s. securities exchange act of 1934 (exchange act), as well as proxy statements, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or
furnish it to, the sec.
also posted on our web site, and available in print upon request of any shareholder to our
investor relations department, are our certificate of incorporation and by-laws, charters for our audit committee, risk committee, compensation committee, corporate governance and nominating committee, and public responsibilities committee, our
policy regarding director independence determinations, our policy on reporting of concerns regarding accounting and other matters, our corporate governance guidelines and our code of business conduct and ethics governing our directors, officers and
employees. within the time period required by the sec, we will post on our web site any amendment to the code of business conduct and ethics and any waiver applicable to any executive officer, director or senior financial officer.
in addition, our web site includes information concerning:
purchases and sales of our equity securities by our executive officers and directors;
disclosure relating to certain non-gaap financial measures (as defined in the secs regulation g) that we may make public orally,
telephonically, by webcast, by broadcast or by similar means from time to time;
dodd-frank act stress test results; and
the firms risk management practices and regulatory capital ratios, as required under the disclosure-related provisions of the revised capital
framework, which are based on the third pillar of baseliii.  our investor relations department can be contacted at
the goldman sachs group, inc.,200 west street, 29thfloor, new york, new york 10282, attn: investor relations, telephone: 212-902-0300, e-mail: gs-investor-relations@gs.com.
from time to time, we use our website, our twitter account (twitter.com/goldmansachs) and other social media channels as additional means of
disclosing public information to investors, the media and others interested in goldman sachs. it is possible that certain information we post on our website and on social media could be deemed to be material information, and we encourage investors,
the media and others interested in goldman sachs to review the business and financial information we post on our website and on the social media channels identified above. the information on our website and the firms social media channels is
not incorporated by reference into the 2015 form10-k.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
cautionary statement pursuant to the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of 1995
we have included or incorporated by reference in the 2015 form10-k, and from time to time
our management may make, statements that may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are not
historical facts, but instead represent only our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. these statements include statements other than historical information or statements
of current condition and may relate to our future plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may also include statements about the effect of changes to the capital, leverage, liquidity, long-term debt and total loss-absorbing capacity
rules applicable to banks and bank holding companies, the impact of the dodd-frank act on our businesses and operations, and various legal proceedings or mortgage-related contingencies as set forth in notes27 and 18, respectively, to the
consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k, as well as statements about the results of our dodd-frank act and firm stress tests, statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our business
continuity plan, information security program, risk management and liquidity policies, statements about trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses, statements about our future status, activities or reporting under u.s. or non-u.s. banking
and financial regulation, and statements about our investment banking transaction backlog. by identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and financial condition may differ,
possibly materially, from the anticipated results and financial condition indicated in these forward-looking statements. important factors that could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ from those indicated in the
forward-looking statements include, among others, those described below and under risk factors in parti, item1a of the 2015 form10-k.
statements about the agreement in principle to resolve the rmbs working group investigation and its impact on the firms results of
operations, financial condition and cash flows are based on the firms current expectations regarding the ultimate terms of the definitive settlement documentation. the agreement in principle is subject to the negotiation of definitive
documentation, and there can be no assurance that the firm, the u.s. department of justice and the other applicable governmental authorities will agree on the definitive documentation. accordingly, the effects of the definitive settlement, as well
as the firms ability to negotiate definitive documentation for the settlement, may change materially from what is currently expected.
statements about our investment banking transaction backlog are subject to the risk that the
terms of these transactions may be modified or that they may not be completed at all; therefore, the net revenues, if any, that we actually earn from these transactions may differ, possibly materially, from those currently expected. important
factors that could result in a modification of the terms of a transaction or a transaction not being completed include, in the case of underwriting transactions, a decline or continued weakness in general economic conditions, outbreak of
hostilities, volatility in the securities markets generally or an adverse development with respect to the issuer of the securities and, in the case of financial advisory transactions, a decline in the securities markets, an inability to obtain
adequate financing, an adverse development with respect to a party to the transaction or a failure to obtain a required regulatory approval. for information about other important factors that could adversely affect our investment banking
transactions, see risk factors in parti, item1a of the 2015 form10-k.
we have provided in this filing information regarding the firms capital ratios, including the cet1 ratios under the advanced and
standardized approaches on a fully phased-in basis, as well as the lcr and the supplementary leverage ratios for the firm and gs bank usa. the statements with respect to these ratios are forward-looking statements, based on our current
interpretation, expectations and understandings of the relevant regulatory rules and guidance, and reflect significant assumptions concerning the treatment of various assets and liabilities and the manner in which the ratios are calculated. as a
result, the methods used to calculate these ratios may differ, possibly materially, from those used in calculating the firms capital, liquidity and leverage ratios for any future disclosures. the ultimate methods of calculating the ratios will
depend on, among other things, implementation guidance or further rulemaking from the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies and the development of market practices and standards.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item1a.risk factors
we face a variety of risks that are substantial and inherent in our businesses, including
market, liquidity, credit, operational, legal, regulatory and reputational risks. the following are some of the more important factors that could affect our businesses.
our businesses have been and may continue to be adversely affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic conditions generally.
our businesses, by their nature, do not produce predictable earnings, and all of our businesses are materially affected by
conditions in the global financial markets and economic conditions generally, both directly and through their impact on client activity levels. these conditions can change suddenly and negatively.
our financial performance is highly dependent on the environment in which our businesses operate. a favorable business environment is generally
characterized by, among other factors, high global gross domestic product growth, regulatory and market conditions which result in transparent, liquid and efficient capital markets, low inflation, high business and investor confidence, stable
geopolitical conditions, clear regulations and strong business earnings. unfavorable or uncertain economic and market conditions can be caused by: concerns about sovereign defaults; uncertainty in u.s. federal fiscal or monetary policy, the u.s.
federal debt ceiling and the continued funding of the u.s. government; the extent of and uncertainty about the timing and nature of regulatory reforms; declines in economic growth, business activity or investor or business confidence; limitations on
the availability or increases in the cost of credit and capital; illiquid markets; increases in inflation, interest rates, exchange rate or basic commodity price volatility or default rates; outbreaks of hostilities or other geopolitical
instability; corporate, political or other scandals that reduce investor confidence in capital markets; extreme weather events or other natural disasters or pandemics; or a combination of these or other factors.
in 2008 and through early 2009, the financial services industry and the securities markets
generally were materially and adversely affected by significant declines in the values of nearly all asset classes and by a serious lack of liquidity. since 2011, concerns about european sovereign debt risk and its impact on the european banking
system, and about changes in interest rates and other market conditions or actual changes in interest rates and other market conditions, including market conditions in china, have resulted, at times, in significant volatility while negatively
impacting the levels of client activity.  general uncertainty about economic, political and market activities, and the scope, timing and
final implementation of regulatory reform, as well as weak consumer, investor and ceo confidence resulting in large part from such uncertainty, continues to negatively impact client activity, which adversely affects many of our businesses. periods
of low volatility and periods of high volatility combined with a lack of liquidity, have at times had an unfavorable impact on our market-making businesses.
our revenues and profitability and those of our competitors have been and will continue to be impacted by requirements relating to capital,
additional loss-absorbing capacity, leverage, minimum liquidity and long-term funding levels, requirements related to resolution and recovery planning, derivatives clearing and margin rules and levels of regulatory oversight, as well as limitations
on whether and how certain business activities may be carried out by financial institutions. although interest rates are at or near historically low levels, financial institution returns have also been negatively impacted by increased funding costs
due in part to the withdrawal of perceived government support of such institutions in the event of future financial crises. in addition, liquidity in the financial markets has also been negatively impacted as market participants and market practices
and structures adjust to new regulations.  the degree to which these and other changes resulting from the financial crisis will have a
long-term impact on the profitability of financial institutions will depend on the final interpretation and implementation of new regulations, the manner in which markets, market participants and financial institutions adapt to the new landscape,
and the prevailing economic and financial market conditions. however, there is a significant risk that such changes will, at least in the near term, continue to negatively impact the absolute level of revenues, profitability and return on equity at
our firm and at other financial institutions.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our businesses and those of our clients are subject to extensive and pervasive regulation around the
world.  as a participant in the financial services industry and a systemically important financial institution, we are subject to
extensive regulation in jurisdictions around the world. we face the risk of significant intervention by regulatory and taxing authorities in all jurisdictions in which we conduct our businesses. in many cases, our activities may be subject to
overlapping and divergent regulation in different jurisdictions. among other things, as a result of regulators or private parties challenging our compliance with existing laws and regulations, we could be fined, prohibited from engaging in some of
our business activities, subject to limitations or conditions on our business activities or subjected to new or substantially higher taxes or other governmental charges in connection with the conduct of our businesses or with respect to our
employees. such limitations or conditions may negatively impact our profitability.  separate and apart from the impact on the scope and
profitability of our business activities, day-to-day compliance with existing laws and regulations, in particular those laws and regulations adopted since 2008, has involved and will continue to involve significant amounts of time, including that of
our senior leaders and that of an increasing number of dedicated compliance and other reporting and operational personnel, all of which may negatively impact our profitability.
if there are new laws or regulations or changes in the enforcement of existing laws or regulations applicable to our businesses or those of our
clients, including capital, liquidity, leverage, long-term debt, total loss-absorbing capacity and margin requirements, restrictions on leveraged lending or other business practices, reporting requirements, requirements relating to recovery and
resolution planning, tax burdens and compensation restrictions, that are imposed on a limited subset of financial institutions (either based on size, activities, geography or other criteria), compliance with these new laws or regulations, or changes
in the enforcement of existing laws or regulations, could adversely affect our ability to compete effectively with other institutions that are not affected in the same way. in addition, regulation imposed on financial institutions or market
participants generally, such as taxes on financial transactions, could adversely impact levels of market activity more broadly, and thus impact our businesses.
these developments could impact our profitability in the affected jurisdictions, or even make it
uneconomic for us to continue to conduct all or certain of our businesses in such jurisdictions, or could cause us to incur significant costs associated with changing our business practices, restructuring our businesses, moving all or certain of our
businesses and our employees to other locations or complying with applicable capital requirements, including liquidating assets or raising capital in a manner that adversely increases our funding costs or otherwise adversely affects our shareholders
and creditors.  u.s. and non-u.s. regulatory developments, in particular the dodd-frank act and baseliii, have significantly altered
the regulatory framework within which we operate and may adversely affect our competitive position and profitability.  among the aspects of
the dodd-frank act that have affected or may in the future affect our businesses are: increased capital, liquidity and reporting requirements; limitations on activities in which we may engage; increased regulation of and restrictions on otc
derivatives markets and transactions; limitations on incentive compensation; limitations on affiliate transactions; requirements to reorganize or limit activities in connection with recovery and resolution planning; increased deposit insurance
assessments; and increased standards of care for broker-dealers and investment advisers in dealing with clients. the implementation of higher capital requirements, the liquidity coverage ratio, the net stable funding ratio, requirements relating to
long-term debt and total loss-absorbing capacity and the prohibition on proprietary trading and the sponsorship of, or investment in, covered funds by the volcker rule may adversely affect our profitability and competitive position, particularly if
these requirements do not apply, or do not apply equally, to our competitors or are not implemented uniformly across jurisdictions.  as
described under business regulation capital and liquidity requirements payment of dividends and stock repurchases in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k, group inc.s proposed
capital actions and capital plan are reviewed by the federal reserve board as part of the ccar process. if the federal reserve board objects to our proposed capital actions in our capital plan, group inc. could be prohibited from taking some or all
of the proposed capital actions, including increasing or paying dividends on common or preferred stock or repurchasing common stock or other capital securities. our inability to carry out our proposed capital actions could, among other things,
prevent us from returning capital to our shareholders and impact our return on equity.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
we are also subject to laws and regulations relating to the privacy of the information of
clients, employees or others, and any failure to comply with these regulations could expose us to liability and/or reputational damage. in addition, our businesses are increasingly subject to laws and regulations relating to surveillance, encryption
and data on-shoring in the jurisdictions in which we operate. compliance with these laws and regulations may require us to change our policies, procedures and technology for information security, which could, among other things, make us more
vulnerable to cyber attacks and misappropriation, corruption or loss of information or technology.  increasingly, regulators and courts
have sought to hold financial institutions liable for the misconduct of their clients where such regulators and courts have determined that the financial institution should have detected that the client was engaged in wrongdoing, even though the
financial institution had no direct knowledge of the activities engaged in by its client. regulators and courts have also increasingly found liability as a control person for activities of entities in which financial institutions or
funds controlled by financial institutions have an investment, but which they do not actively manage. in addition, regulators and courts continue to seek to establish fiduciary obligations to counterparties to which no such duty had been
assumed to exist. to the extent that such efforts are successful, the cost of, and liabilities associated with, engaging in brokerage, clearing, market-making, prime brokerage, investing and other similar activities could increase significantly. to
the extent that we have fiduciary obligations in connection with acting as a financial adviser, investment adviser or in other roles for individual, institutional, sovereign or investment fund clients, any breach, or even an alleged breach, of such
obligations could have materially negative legal, regulatory and reputational consequences.  for information about the extensive regulation
to which our businesses are subject, see business regulation in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k.
our businesses have been and may be adversely affected by declining asset values. this is
particularly true for those businesses in which we have net long positions, receive fees based on the value of assets managed, or receive or post collateral.
many of our businesses have net long positions in debt securities, loans, derivatives, mortgages, equities (including private
equity and real estate) and most other asset classes. these include positions we take when we act as a principal to facilitate our clients activities, including our exchange-based market-making activities, or commit large amounts of capital to
maintain positions in interest rate and credit products, as well as through our currencies, commodities, equities and mortgage-related activities. because substantially all of these investing, lending and market-making positions are marked-to-market
on a daily basis, declines in asset values directly and immediately impact our earnings, unless we have effectively hedged our exposures to such declines.
in certain circumstances (particularly in the case of credit products, including leveraged loans, and private equities or other securities that
are not freely tradable or lack established and liquid trading markets), it may not be possible or economic to hedge such exposures and to the extent that we do so the hedge may be ineffective or may greatly reduce our ability to profit from
increases in the values of the assets. sudden declines and significant volatility in the prices of assets may substantially curtail or eliminate the trading markets for certain assets, which may make it difficult to sell, hedge or value such assets.
the inability to sell or effectively hedge assets reduces our ability to limit losses in such positions and the difficulty in valuing assets may negatively affect our capital, liquidity or leverage ratios, increase our funding costs and generally
require us to maintain additional capital.  in our exchange-based market-making activities, we are obligated by stock exchange rules to
maintain an orderly market, including by purchasing securities in a declining market. in markets where asset values are declining and in volatile markets, this results in losses and an increased need for liquidity.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
we receive asset-based management fees based on the value of our clients portfolios or
investment in funds managed by us and, in some cases, we also receive incentive fees based on increases in the value of such investments. declines in asset values reduce the value of our clients portfolios or fund assets, which in turn reduce
the fees we earn for managing such assets.  we post collateral to support our obligations and receive collateral to support the obligations
of our clients and counterparties in connection with our client execution businesses. when the value of the assets posted as collateral or the credit ratings of the party posting collateral decline, the party posting the collateral may need to
provide additional collateral or, if possible, reduce its trading position. a classic example of such a situation is a margin call in connection with a brokerage account. therefore, declines in the value of asset classes used as
collateral mean that either the cost of funding positions is increased or the size of positions is decreased. if we are the party providing collateral, this can increase our costs and reduce our profitability and if we are the party receiving
collateral, this can also reduce our profitability by reducing the level of business done with our clients and counterparties. in addition, volatile or less liquid markets increase the difficulty of valuing assets which can lead to costly and
time-consuming disputes over asset values and the level of required collateral, as well as increased credit risk to the recipient of the collateral due to delays in receiving adequate collateral.
our businesses have been and may be adversely affected by disruptions in the credit markets, including reduced access to credit and higher costs of
obtaining credit.  widening credit spreads, as well as significant declines in the availability of credit, have in the past
adversely affected our ability to borrow on a secured and unsecured basis and may do so in the future. we fund ourselves on an unsecured basis by issuing long-term debt, by accepting deposits at our bank subsidiaries, by issuing hybrid financial
instruments, or by obtaining bank loans or lines of credit. we seek to finance many of our assets on a secured basis. any disruptions in the credit markets may make it harder and more expensive to obtain funding for our businesses. if our available
funding is limited or we are forced to fund our operations at a higher cost, these conditions may require us to curtail our business activities and increase our cost of funding, both of which could reduce our profitability, particularly in our
businesses that involve investing, lending and market making.
our clients engaging in mergers and acquisitions often rely on access to the secured and
unsecured credit markets to finance their transactions. a lack of available credit or an increased cost of credit can adversely affect the size, volume and timing of our clients merger and acquisition transactions particularly
large transactions and adversely affect our financial advisory and underwriting businesses.  our credit businesses have been
and may in the future be negatively affected by a lack of liquidity in credit markets. a lack of liquidity reduces price transparency, increases price volatility and decreases transaction volumes and size, all of which can increase transaction risk
or decrease the profitability of such businesses.  to the extent that the final rules related to tlac require us to issue material amounts
of additional qualified loss-absorbing debt or to refinance material amounts of our existing debt, such requirements, at least in the near term, could increase our borrowing costs, perhaps materially, and negatively impact the debt capital markets.
see business regulation banking supervision and regulation total loss-absorbing capacity in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k for more information about the federal reserve
boards proposed rules on loss-absorbency requirements.  our market-making activities have been and may be affected by changes in the
levels of market volatility.  certain of our market-making activities depend on market volatility to provide trading and arbitrage
opportunities to our clients, and decreases in volatility may reduce these opportunities and adversely affect the results of these activities. on the other hand, increased volatility, while it can increase trading volumes and spreads, also increases
risk as measured by value-at-risk (var) and may expose us to increased risks in connection with our market-making activities or cause us to reduce our market-making positions in order to avoid increasing our var. limiting the size of our
market-making positions can adversely affect our profitability. in periods when volatility is increasing, but asset values are declining significantly, it may not be possible to sell assets at all or it may only be possible to do so at steep
discounts. in such circumstances we may be forced to either take on additional risk or to realize losses in order to decrease our var. in addition, increases in volatility increase the level of our rwas, which increases our capital requirements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our investment banking, client execution and investment management businesses have been adversely
affected and may in the future be adversely affected by market uncertainty or lack of confidence among investors and ceos due to general declines in economic activity and other unfavorable economic, geopolitical or market conditions.
our investment banking business has been and may continue to be adversely affected by market conditions. poor economic conditions and other
adverse geopolitical conditions can adversely affect and have in the past adversely affected investor and ceo confidence, resulting in significant industry-wide declines in the size and number of underwritings and of financial advisory transactions,
which could have an adverse effect on our revenues and our profit margins. in particular, because a significant portion of our investment banking revenues is derived from our participation in large transactions, a decline in the number of large
transactions would adversely affect our investment banking business.  in certain circumstances, market uncertainty or general declines in
market or economic activity may affect our client execution businesses by decreasing levels of overall activity or by decreasing volatility, but at other times market uncertainty and even declining economic activity may result in higher trading
volumes or higher spreads or both.  market uncertainty, volatility and adverse economic conditions, as well as declines in asset values,
may cause our clients to transfer their assets out of our funds or other products or their brokerage accounts and result in reduced net revenues, principally in our investment management business. to the extent that clients do not withdraw their
funds, they may invest them in products that generate less fee income.  our investment management business may be affected by the poor
investment performance of our investment products.  poor investment returns in our investment management business, due to either
general market conditions or underperformance (relative to our competitors or to benchmarks) by funds or accounts that we manage or investment products that we design or sell, affects our ability to retain existing assets and to attract new clients
or additional assets from existing clients. this could affect the management and incentive fees that we earn on assets under supervision or the commissions and net spreads that we earn for selling other investment products, such as structured notes
or derivatives.
we may incur losses as a result of ineffective risk management processes and strategies.
we seek to monitor and control our risk exposure through a risk and control framework encompassing a variety of separate but
complementary financial, credit, operational, compliance and legal reporting systems, internal controls, management review processes and other mechanisms. our risk management process seeks to balance our ability to profit from market-making,
investing or lending positions with our exposure to potential losses. while we employ a broad and diversified set of risk monitoring and risk mitigation techniques, those techniques and the judgments that accompany their application cannot
anticipate every economic and financial outcome or the specifics and timing of such outcomes. thus, we may, in the course of our activities, incur losses. market conditions in recent years have involved unprecedented dislocations and highlight the
limitations inherent in using historical data to manage risk.  the models that we use to assess and control our risk exposures reflect
assumptions about the degrees of correlation or lack thereof among prices of various asset classes or other market indicators. in times of market stress or other unforeseen circumstances, such as occurred during 2008 and early 2009, and to some
extent since 2011, previously uncorrelated indicators may become correlated, or conversely previously correlated indicators may move in different directions. these types of market movements have at times limited the effectiveness of our hedging
strategies and have caused us to incur significant losses, and they may do so in the future. these changes in correlation can be exacerbated where other market participants are using risk or trading models with assumptions or algorithms that are
similar to ours. in these and other cases, it may be difficult to reduce our risk positions due to the activity of other market participants or widespread market dislocations, including circumstances where asset values are declining significantly or
no market exists for certain assets.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
to the extent that we have positions through our market-making or origination activities or we
make investments directly through our investing activities, including private equity, that do not have an established liquid trading market or are otherwise subject to restrictions on sale or hedging, we may not be able to reduce our positions and
therefore reduce our risk associated with such positions. in addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law and regulation, we invest our own capital in private equity, credit, real estate and hedge funds that we manage and limitations on our
ability to withdraw some or all of our investments in these funds, whether for legal, reputational or other reasons, may make it more difficult for us to control the risk exposures relating to these investments. see managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations regulatory developments volcker rule in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k for information about our plans to reduce our
interests in covered funds in order to comply with the volcker rule.  prudent risk management, as well as regulatory restrictions, may
cause us to limit our exposure to counterparties, geographic areas or markets, which may limit our business opportunities and increase the cost of our funding or hedging activities.
for further information about our risk management policies and procedures, see managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations risk management in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k.  our liquidity,
profitability and businesses may be adversely affected by an inability to access the debt capital markets or to sell assets or by a reduction in our credit ratings or by an increase in our credit spreads.
liquidity is essential to our businesses. our liquidity may be impaired by an inability to access secured and/or unsecured debt markets, an
inability to access funds from our subsidiaries or otherwise allocate liquidity optimally across our firm, an inability to sell assets or redeem our investments, or unforeseen outflows of cash or collateral. this situation may arise due to
circumstances that we may be unable to control, such as a general market disruption or an operational problem that affects third parties or us, or even by the perception among market participants that we, or other market participants, are
experiencing greater liquidity risk.
we employ structured products to benefit our clients and hedge our own risks. the financial
instruments that we hold and the contracts to which we are a party are often complex, and these complex structured products often do not have readily available markets to access in times of liquidity stress. our investing and lending activities may
lead to situations where the holdings from these activities represent a significant portion of specific markets, which could restrict liquidity for our positions.
further, our ability to sell assets may be impaired if other market participants are seeking to sell similar assets at the same time, as is
likely to occur in a liquidity or other market crisis or in response to changes to rules or regulations. in addition, financial institutions with which we interact may exercise set-off rights or the right to require additional collateral, including
in difficult market conditions, which could further impair our access to liquidity.  our credit ratings are important to our liquidity. a
reduction in our credit ratings could adversely affect our liquidity and competitive position, increase our borrowing costs, limit our access to the capital markets or trigger our obligations under certain provisions in some of our trading and
collateralized financing contracts. under these provisions, counterparties could be permitted to terminate contracts with us or require us to post additional collateral. termination of our trading and collateralized financing contracts could cause
us to sustain losses and impair our liquidity by requiring us to find other sources of financing or to make significant cash payments or securities movements. as of december2015, in the event of a one-notch and two-notch downgrade of our
credit ratings our counterparties could have called for additional collateral or termination payments related to our net derivative liabilities under bilateral agreements in an aggregate amount of $1.06billion and $2.69billion,
respectively. adowngrade by any one rating agency, depending on the agencys relative ratings of the firm at the time of the downgrade, may have an impact which is comparable to the impact of a downgrade by all rating agencies. for
further information about our credit ratings, see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations risk management liquidity risk management credit ratings in
partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
our cost of obtaining long-term unsecured funding is directly related to our credit spreads (the
amount in excess of the interest rate of u.s. treasury securities (or other benchmark securities) of the same maturity that we need to pay to our debt investors). increases in our credit spreads can significantly increase our cost of this funding.
changes in credit spreads are continuous, market-driven, and subject at times to unpredictable and highly volatile movements. our credit spreads are also influenced by market perceptions of our creditworthiness. in addition, our credit spreads may
be influenced by movements in the costs to purchasers of credit default swaps referenced to our long-term debt. the market for credit default swaps has proven to be extremely volatile and at times has lacked a high degree of transparency or
liquidity.  regulatory changes relating to liquidity may also negatively impact our results of operations and competitive position.
recently, numerous regulations have been adopted or proposed, and additional regulations are under consideration, to introduce more stringent liquidity requirements for large financial institutions. these regulations and others being considered
address, among other matters, liquidity stress testing, minimum liquidity requirements, wholesale funding, limitations on the issuance of short-term debt and structured notes and prohibitions on parent guarantees that are subject to cross-defaults.
these may overlap with, and be impacted by, other regulatory changes, including new guidance on the treatment of brokered deposits and the capital, leverage and resolution and recovery frameworks applicable to large financial institutions, as well
as proposals relating to minimum long-term debt requirements and tlac, including limitations on the terms of eligible debt securities qualifying as tlac or as eligible long-term debt  limiting events of default, excluding structured notes and
restrictions on non-u.s. governing law. given the overlap and complex interactions among these new and prospective regulations, they may have unintended cumulative effects, and their full impact will remain uncertain until implementation of
post-financial crisis regulatory reform is complete.
a failure to appropriately identify and address potential conflicts of interest could adversely
affect our businesses.  due to the broad scope of our businesses and our client base, we regularly address potential conflicts of
interest, including situations where our services to a particular client or our own investments or other interests conflict, or are perceived to conflict, with the interests of another client, as well as situations where one or more of our
businesses have access to material non-public information that may not be shared with other businesses within the firm and situations where we may be a creditor of an entity with which we also have an advisory or other relationship.
in addition, our status as a bank holding company subjects us to heightened regulation and increased regulatory scrutiny by the federal reserve
board with respect to transactions between gs bank usa and entities that are or could be viewed as affiliates of ours and, under the volcker rule, transactions between goldman sachs and certain covered funds.
we have extensive procedures and controls that are designed to identify and address conflicts of interest, including those designed to prevent
the improper sharing of information among our businesses. however, appropriately identifying and dealing with conflicts of interest is complex and difficult, and our reputation, which is one of our most important assets, could be damaged and the
willingness of clients to enter into transactions with us may be affected if we fail, or appear to fail, to identify, disclose and deal appropriately with conflicts of interest. in addition, potential or perceived conflicts could give rise to
litigation or regulatory enforcement actions.  a failure in our operational systems or infrastructure, or those of third parties, as well as
human error, could impair our liquidity, disrupt our businesses, result in the disclosure of confidential information, damage our reputation and cause losses.
our businesses are highly dependent on our ability to process and monitor, on a daily basis, a large number of transactions, many of which are
highly complex and occur at high volumes and frequencies, across numerous and diverse markets in many currencies. these transactions, as well as the information technology services we provide to clients, often must adhere to client-specific
guidelines, as well as legal and regulatory standards.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
many rules and regulations worldwide govern our obligations to report transactions to
regulators, exchanges and investors. compliance with these legal and reporting requirements can be challenging, and the firm and other financial institutions have been subject to regulatory fines and penalties for failing to report timely, accurate
and complete information. as reporting requirements expand, compliance with these rules and regulations has become more challenging.  as
our client base, and our geographical reach expands, and the volume, speed, frequency and complexity of transactions, especially electronic transactions (as well as the requirements to report such transactions on a real-time basis to clients,
regulators and exchanges) increases, developing and maintaining our operational systems and infrastructure becomes more challenging, and the risk of systems or human error in connection with such transactions increases, as well as the potential
consequences of such errors due to the speed and volume of transactions involved and the potential difficulty associated with discovering such errors quickly enough to limit the resulting consequences.
our financial, accounting, data processing or other operational systems and facilities may fail to operate properly or become disabled as a
result of events that are wholly or partially beyond our control, such as a spike in transaction volume, adversely affecting our ability to process these transactions or provide these services. we must continuously update these systems to support
our operations and growth and to respond to changes in regulations and markets, and invest heavily in systemic controls and training to ensure that such transactions do not violate applicable rules and regulations or, due to errors in processing
such transactions, adversely affect markets, our clients and counterparties or the firm.  systems enhancements and updates, as well as the
requisite training, including in connection with the integration of new businesses, entail significant costs and create risks associated with implementing new systems and integrating them with existing ones.
notwithstanding the proliferation of technology and technology-based risk and control systems,
our businesses ultimately rely on human beings as our greatest resource, and, from time-to-time, they make mistakes that are not always caught immediately by our technological processes or by our other procedures which are intended to prevent and
detect such errors. these can include calculation errors, mistakes in addressing emails, errors in software development or implementation, or simple errors in judgment. we strive to eliminate such human errors through training, supervision,
technology and by redundant processes and controls. human errors, even if promptly discovered and remediated, can result in material losses and liabilities for the firm.
in addition, we face the risk of operational failure, termination or capacity constraints of any of the clearing agents, exchanges, clearing
houses or other financial intermediaries we use to facilitate our securities and derivatives transactions, and as our interconnectivity with our clients grows, we increasingly face the risk of operational failure with respect to our clients
systems.  in recent years, there has been significant consolidation among clearing agents, exchanges and clearing houses and an increasing
number of derivative transactions are now or in the near future will be cleared on exchanges, which has increased our exposure to operational failure, termination or capacity constraints of the particular financial intermediaries that we use and
could affect our ability to find adequate and cost-effective alternatives in the event of any such failure, termination or constraint. industry consolidation, whether among market participants or financial intermediaries, increases the risk of
operational failure as disparate complex systems need to be integrated, often on an accelerated basis.  furthermore, the interconnectivity
of multiple financial institutions with central agents, exchanges and clearing houses, and the increased centrality of these entities, increases the risk that an operational failure at one institution or entity may cause an industry-wide operational
failure that could materially impact our ability to conduct business. any such failure, termination or constraint could adversely affect our ability to effect transactions, service our clients, manage our exposure to risk or expand our businesses or
result in financial loss or liability to our clients, impairment of our liquidity, disruption of our businesses, regulatory intervention or reputational damage.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
despite the resiliency plans and facilities we have in place, our ability to conduct business
may be adversely impacted by a disruption in the infrastructure that supports our businesses and the communities in which we are located. this may include a disruption involving electrical, satellite, undersea cable or other communications,
internet, transportation or other services facilities used by us or third parties with which we conduct business, including cloud service providers. these disruptions may occur as a result of events that affect only our buildings or systems or those
of such third parties, or as a result of events with a broader impact globally, regionally or in the cities where those buildings or systems are located, including, but not limited to, natural disasters, war, civil unrest, terrorism, economic or
political developments, pandemics and weather events.  nearly all of our employees in our primary locations, including the new york
metropolitan area, london, bengaluru, hong kong, tokyo and salt lake city, work in close proximity to one another, in one or more buildings. notwithstanding our efforts to maintain business continuity, given that our headquarters and the largest
concentration of our employees are in the new york metropolitan area, and our two principal office buildings in the new york area both are located on the waterfront of the hudson river, depending on the intensity and longevity of the event, a
catastrophic event impacting our new york metropolitan area offices, including a terrorist attack, extreme weather event or other hostile or catastrophic event, could negatively affect our business. if a disruption occurs in one location and our
employees in that location are unable to occupy our offices or communicate with or travel to other locations, our ability to service and interact with our clients may suffer, and we may not be able to successfully implement contingency plans that
depend on communication or travel.
a failure to protect our computer systems, networks and information, and our clients
information, against cyber attacks and similar threats could impair our ability to conduct our businesses, result in the disclosure, theft or destruction of confidential information, damage our reputation and cause losses.
our operations rely on the secure processing, storage and transmission of confidential and other information in our computer systems and
networks. there have been several highly publicized cases involving financial services and consumer-based companies reporting the unauthorized disclosure of client or customer information in recent years, as well as cyber attacks involving the
dissemination, theft and destruction of corporate information or other assets, as a result of failure to follow procedures by employees or contractors or as a result of actions by third parties, including actions by foreign governments.
we are regularly the target of attempted cyber attacks, including denial-of-service attacks, and must continuously monitor and develop our
systems to protect our technology infrastructure and data from misappropriation or corruption. in addition, due to our interconnectivity with third-party vendors, central agents, exchanges, clearing houses and other financial institutions, we could
be adversely impacted if any of them is subject to a successful cyber attack or other information security event.  despite our efforts to
ensure the integrity of our systems and information, we may not be able to anticipate, detect or implement effective preventive measures against all cyber threats, especially because the techniques used are increasingly sophisticated, change
frequently and are often not recognized until launched. cyber attacks can originate from a variety of sources, including third parties who are affiliated with foreign governments or are involved with organized crime or terrorist organizations. third
parties may also attempt to place individuals within the firm or induce employees, clients or other users of our systems to disclose sensitive information or provide access to our data or that of our clients, and these types of risks may be
difficult to detect or prevent.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
although we take protective measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances warrant, our
computer systems, software and networks may be vulnerable to unauthorized access, misuse, computer viruses or other malicious code and other events that could have a security impact. if one or more of such events occur, this potentially could
jeopardize our or our clients or counterparties confidential and other information processed and stored in, and transmitted through, our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause interruptions or malfunctions in our, our
clients, our counterparties or third parties operations, which could impact their ability to transact with us or otherwise result in significant losses or reputational damage.
the increased use of mobile and cloud technologies can heighten these and other operational risks. we expect to expend significant additional
resources on an ongoing basis to modify our protective measures and to investigate and remediate vulnerabilities or other exposures, but these measures may be ineffective and we may be subject to litigation and financial losses that are either not
insured against or not fully covered through any insurance maintained by us. certain aspects of the security of such technologies are unpredictable or beyond our control, and the failure by mobile technology and cloud service providers to adequately
safeguard their systems and prevent cyber attacks could disrupt our operations and result in misappropriation, corruption or loss of confidential and other information. in addition, there is a risk that encryption and other protective measures,
despite their sophistication, may be defeated, particularly to the extent that new computing technologies vastly increase the speed and computing power available.
we routinely transmit and receive personal, confidential and proprietary information by email and other electronic means. we have discussed and
worked with clients, vendors, service providers, counterparties and other third parties to develop secure transmission capabilities and protect against cyber attacks, but we do not have, and may be unable to put in place, secure capabilities with
all of our clients, vendors, service providers, counterparties and other third parties and we may not be able to ensure that these third parties have appropriate controls in place to protect the confidentiality of the information. an interception,
misuse or mishandling of personal, confidential or proprietary information being sent to or received from a client, vendor, service provider, counterparty or other third party could result in legal liability, regulatory action and reputational harm.
group inc. is a holding company and is dependent for liquidity on payments from its subsidiaries,
many of which are subject to restrictions.  group inc. is a holding company and, therefore, depends on dividends, distributions and
other payments from its subsidiaries to fund dividend payments and to fund all payments on its obligations, including debt obligations. many of our subsidiaries, including our broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries, are subject to laws that restrict
dividend payments or authorize regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to group inc.  in addition,
our broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries are subject to restrictions on their ability to lend or transact with affiliates and to minimum regulatory capital and other requirements, as well as restrictions on their ability to use funds deposited with
them in brokerage or bank accounts to fund their businesses. additional restrictions on related-party transactions, increased capital and liquidity requirements and additional limitations on the use of funds on deposit in bank or brokerage accounts,
as well as lower earnings, can reduce the amount of funds available to meet the obligations of group inc., including under the federal reserve boards source of strength policy, and even require group inc. to provide additional funding to such
subsidiaries. restrictions or regulatory action of that kind could impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on its obligations, including debt obligations, or dividend payments. in addition, group inc.s right to
participate in a distribution of assets upon a subsidiarys liquidation or reorganization is subject to the prior claims of the subsidiarys creditors.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
there has been a trend towards increased regulation and supervision of our subsidiaries by the
governments and regulators in the countries in which those subsidiaries are located or do business. concerns about protecting clients and creditors of financial institutions that are controlled by persons or entities located outside of the country
in which such entities are located or do business have caused or may cause a number of governments and regulators to take additional steps to ring fence or maintain internal total loss-absorbing capacity at such entities in order to
protect clients and creditors of such entities in the event of financial difficulties involving such entities. the result has been and may continue to be additional limitations on our ability to efficiently move capital and liquidity among our
affiliated entities, thereby increasing the overall level of capital and liquidity required by the firm on a consolidated basis.
furthermore, group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of certain of its subsidiaries, including gs&co., gs bank usa and gsec
subject to certain exceptions. in addition, group inc. guarantees many of the obligations of its other consolidated subsidiaries on a transaction-by-transaction basis, as negotiated with counterparties. these guarantees may require group inc. to
provide substantial funds or assets to its subsidiaries or their creditors or counterparties at a time when group inc. is in need of liquidity to fund its own obligations.
the requirements for group inc. and gs bank usa to develop and submit recovery and resolution
plans to regulators, and the incorporation of feedback received from regulators, may require us to increase capital or liquidity levels or issue additional long-term debt at group inc. or particular subsidiaries or otherwise incur additional or
duplicative operational or other costs at multiple entities, and may reduce our ability to provide group inc. guarantees of the obligations of our subsidiaries or raise debt at group inc. resolution planning may also impair our ability to structure
our intercompany and external activities in a manner that we may otherwise deem most operationally efficient. furthermore, we may incur additional taxes. any such limitations or requirements would be in addition to the legal and regulatory
restrictions described above on our ability to engage in capital actions or make intercompany dividends or payments.  see
business regulation in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k for further information about regulatory restrictions.
the application of regulatory strategies and requirements in the united states and non-u.s. jurisdictions to facilitate the orderly resolution of
large financial institutions could create greater risk of loss for group inc.s security holders.  as described under
business regulation insolvency of an insured depository institution or a bank holding company, if the fdic is appointed as receiver under the orderly liquidation authority, the rights of group inc.s
creditors would be determined under the orderly liquidation authority, and substantial differences exist in the rights of creditors between the orderly liquidation authority and the u.s. bankruptcy code, including the right of the fdic under the
orderly liquidation authority to disregard the strict priority of creditor claims in some circumstances, which could have a material adverse effect on debt holders.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the fdic has announced that a single point of entry strategy may be a desirable strategy under
the orderly liquidation authority to resolve a large financial institution such as group inc. in a manner that would, among other things, impose losses on shareholders, debt holders (including, in our case, holders of our debt securities) and other
creditors of the top-tier holding company (in our case, group inc.), while the holding companys subsidiaries may continue to operate. it is possible that the application of the single point of entry strategy, in which group inc. would be the
only legal entity to enter resolution proceedings, could result in greater losses to group inc.s security holders (including holders of our fixed rate, floating rate and indexed debt securities), than the losses that could result from the
application of a bankruptcy proceeding or a different resolution strategy for group inc. assuming group inc. entered resolution proceedings and that support from group inc. to its subsidiaries was sufficient to enable the subsidiaries to remain
solvent, losses at the subsidiary level would be transferred to group inc. and ultimately borne by group inc.s security holders, third-party creditors of group inc.s subsidiaries would receive full recoveries on their claims, and group
inc.s security holders (including our shareholders, holders of our debt securities and other unsecured creditors) could face significant losses.
the orderly liquidation authority also provides the fdic with authority to cause creditors and shareholders of the financial company such as
group inc. in receivership to bear losses before taxpayers are exposed to such losses, and amounts owed to the u.s. government would generally receive a statutory payment priority over the claims of private creditors, including senior creditors. in
addition, under the orderly liquidation authority, claims of creditors (including holders of our debt securities) could be satisfied through the issuance of equity or other securities in a bridge entity to which group inc.s assets are
transferred. if such a securities-for-claims exchange were implemented, there can be no assurance that the value of the securities of the bridge entity would be sufficient to repay or satisfy all or any part of the creditor claims for which the
securities were exchanged. while the fdic has issued regulations to implement the orderly liquidation authority, not all aspects of how the fdic might exercise this authority are known and additional rulemaking is likely.
the ultimate impact of the recently proposed rules requiring u.s. g-sibs to maintain minimum amounts
of long-term debt meeting specified eligibility requirements is uncertain.  on october30,2015, the federal reserve
board released for comment proposed rules (the tlac rules) that would require the eight u.s. g-sibs, including group inc., among other things, to maintain minimum amounts of long-term debt(i.e., debt having a maturity greater than one year
from issuance (ltd)) satisfying certain eligibility criteria commencing january1,2019. as proposed, the tlac rules would disqualify from eligible ltd, among other instruments, senior debt securities that permit acceleration for reasons
other than insolvency or payment default, as well as debt securities defined as structured notes in the tlac rules (e.g., many of our indexed debt securities) and debt securities not governed by u.s. law. the currently outstanding senior ltd of u.s.
g-sibs, including group inc., typically permits acceleration for reasons other than insolvency or payment default and, as a result, neither such outstanding senior ltd nor any subsequently issued senior ltd
with similar terms, would qualify as eligible ltd under the proposed rules. the federal reserve board has requested comment on whether currently outstanding instruments should be allowed to count as eligible ltd despite containing features
that would be prohibited under the proposal. the u.s. g-sibs, including group inc., may need to take steps to come into compliance with the final tlac rules depending in substantial part on the ultimate eligibility requirements for senior ltd
and any grandfathering provisions. non-u.s. regulators are considering similar requirements. see business regulation banking supervision and regulation total loss-absorbing capacity in parti,
item1 of the 2015 form10-k for more information about the federal reserve boards proposed rules on loss-absorbency requirements.
in addition, certain jurisdictions, including the united kingdom and the eu, have implemented, or are considering, changes to resolution
regimes to provide resolution authorities with the ability to recapitalize a failing entity by writing down its unsecured debt or converting its unsecured debt into equity. such bail-in powers are intended to enable the recapitalization
of a failing institution by allocating losses to its shareholders and unsecured debt holders. u.s. and non-u.s. regulators are also considering requirements that certain subsidiaries of large financial institutions maintain minimum amounts of total
loss-absorbing capacity that would pass losses up from the subsidiaries to the top-tier holding company and, ultimately, to security holders of the top-tier holding company in the event of failure.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the application of group inc.s proposed resolution strategy could result in greater losses for
group inc.s security holders, and failure to address shortcomings in our resolution plan could subject us to increased regulatory requirements.
in our resolution plan, group inc. would be resolved under the u.s. bankruptcy code. the strategy described in our resolution plan is a variant
of the single point of entry strategy: group inc. would recapitalize and provide liquidity to certain major subsidiaries, including through the forgiveness of intercompany indebtedness, the extension of the maturities of intercompany indebtedness
and the extension of additional intercompany loans. if this strategy were successful, creditors of some or all of group inc.s major subsidiaries would receive full recoveries on their claims, while group inc.s security holders could face
significant losses. if this strategy were not successful, group inc.s financial condition would be adversely impacted and group inc.s security holders, including debt holders, may as a consequence be in a worse position than if the
strategy had not been implemented. in all cases, any payments to debt holders are dependent on our ability to make such payments and are therefore subject to our credit risk.
in august2014, the federal reserve board and the fdic indicated that group inc., along with other large industry participants, had
certain shortcomings in the 2013 resolution plans that were required to have been addressed in the 2015 resolution plans. if it is determined that group inc. did not effectively address these shortcomings, the federal reserve board and the fdic
could, after any permitted resubmission, find our resolution plan not credible and require us to hold more capital, change our business structure or dispose of businesses, which could have a negative impact on our ability to return capital to
shareholders, financial condition, results of operations or competitive position.
our businesses, profitability and liquidity may be adversely affected by deterioration in the credit
quality of, or defaults by, third parties who owe us money, securities or other assets or whose securities or obligations we hold.
we are exposed to the risk that third parties that owe us money, securities or other assets will not perform their obligations. these parties
may default on their obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational failure or other reasons. a failure of a significant market participant, or even concerns about a default by such an institution, could lead to significant
liquidity problems, losses or defaults by other institutions, which in turn could adversely affect us.  we are also subject to the risk
that our rights against third parties may not be enforceable in all circumstances. in addition, deterioration in the credit quality of third parties whose securities or obligations we hold, including a deterioration in the value of collateral posted
by third parties to secure their obligations to us under derivatives contracts and loan agreements, could result in losses and/or adversely affect our ability to rehypothecate or otherwise use those securities or obligations for liquidity purposes.
a significant downgrade in the credit ratings of our counterparties could also have a negative impact on our results. while in many cases
we are permitted to require additional collateral from counterparties that experience financial difficulty, disputes may arise as to the amount of collateral we are entitled to receive and the value of pledged assets. the termination of contracts
and the foreclosure on collateral may subject us to claims for the improper exercise of our rights. default rates, downgrades and disputes with counterparties as to the valuation of collateral increase significantly in times of market stress and
illiquidity.  as part of our clearing and prime brokerage activities, we finance our clients positions, and we could be held
responsible for the defaults or misconduct of our clients. although we regularly review credit exposures to specific clients and counterparties and to specific industries, countries and regions that we believe may present credit concerns, default
risk may arise from events or circumstances that are difficult to detect or foresee.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our market-making,
underwriting, investing and lending activities.  concentration of risk increases the potential for significant losses in our
market-making, underwriting, investing and lending activities. the number and size of such transactions may affect our results of operations in a given period. moreover, because of concentration of risk, we may suffer losses even when economic and
market conditions are generally favorable for our competitors. disruptions in the credit markets can make it difficult to hedge these credit exposures effectively or economically. in addition, we extend large commitments as part of our credit
origination activities.  rules adopted under the dodd-frank act require issuers of asset-backed securities and any person who organizes and
initiates an asset-backed securities transaction to retain economic exposure to the asset, which is likely to significantly increase the cost to us of engaging in securitization activities. our inability to reduce our credit risk by selling,
syndicating or securitizing these positions, including during periods of market stress, could negatively affect our results of operations due to a decrease in the fair value of the positions, including due to the insolvency or bankruptcy of the
borrower, as well as the loss of revenues associated with selling such securities or loans.  in the ordinary course of business, we may be
subject to a concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty, borrower, issuer, including sovereign issuers, or geographic area or group of related countries, such as the eu, and a failure or downgrade of, or default by, such entity could
negatively impact our businesses, perhaps materially, and the systems by which we set limits and monitor the level of our credit exposure to individual entities, industries and countries may not function as we have anticipated. while our activities
expose us to many different industries, counterparties and countries, we routinely execute a high volume of transactions with counterparties engaged in financial services activities, including brokers and dealers, commercial banks, clearing houses,
exchanges and investment funds. this has resulted in significant credit concentration with respect to these counterparties. provisions of the dodd-frank act have led to increased centralization of trading activity through particular clearing houses,
central agents or exchanges, which has significantly increased our concentration of risk with respect to these entities.
the financial services industry is both highly competitive and interrelated.
the financial services industry and all of our businesses are intensely competitive, and we expect them to remain so. we compete on the basis
of a number of factors, including transaction execution, our products and services, innovation, reputation, creditworthiness and price. there has been substantial consolidation and convergence among companies in the financial services industry. this
consolidation and convergence has hastened the globalization of the securities and other financial services markets.  as a result, we have
had to commit capital to support our international operations and to execute large global transactions. to the extent we expand into new business areas and new geographic regions, we will face competitors with more experience and more established
relationships with clients, regulators and industry participants in the relevant market, which could adversely affect our ability to expand. governments and regulators have recently adopted regulations, imposed taxes, adopted compensation
restrictions or otherwise put forward various proposals that have or may impact our ability to conduct certain of our businesses in a cost-effective manner or at all in certain or all jurisdictions, including proposals relating to restrictions on
the type of activities in which financial institutions are permitted to engage. these or other similar rules, many of which do not apply to all our u.s. or non-u.s. competitors, could impact our ability to compete effectively.
pricing and other competitive pressures in our businesses have continued to increase, particularly in situations where some of our competitors
may seek to increase market share by reducing prices. for example, in connection with investment banking and other assignments, we have experienced pressure to extend and price credit at levels that may not always fully compensate us for the risks
we take.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the financial services industry is highly interrelated in that a significant volume of
transactions occur among a limited number of members of that industry. many transactions are syndicated to other financial institutions and financial institutions are often counterparties in transactions. this has led to claims by other market
participants and regulators that such institutions have colluded in order to manipulate markets or market prices, including allegations that antitrust laws have been violated. while we have extensive procedures and controls that are designed to
identify and prevent such activities, allegations of such activities, particularly by regulators, can have a negative reputational impact and can subject us to large fines and settlements, and potentially significant penalties, including treble
damages.  we face enhanced risks as new business initiatives lead us to transact with a broader array of clients and counterparties and expose
us to new asset classes and new markets.  a number of our recent and planned business initiatives and expansions of existing
businesses may bring us into contact, directly or indirectly, with individuals and entities that are not within our traditional client and counterparty base and expose us to new asset classes and new markets. for example, we continue to transact
business and invest in new regions, including a wide range of emerging and growth markets. furthermore, in a number of our businesses, including where we make markets, invest and lend, we directly or indirectly own interests in, or otherwise become
affiliated with the ownership and operation of public services, such as airports, toll roads and shipping ports, as well as physical commodities and commodities infrastructure components, both within and outside the united states.
we have announced our intention to increase our consumer-oriented deposit-taking activities. to the extent we engage in such activities or
similar consumer-oriented activities, we could face additional compliance, legal and regulatory risk, increased reputational risk and increased operational risk due to, among other things, higher transaction volumes and significantly increased
retention and transmission of customer and client information.
new business initiatives expose us to new and enhanced risks, including risks associated with
dealing with governmental entities, reputational concerns arising from dealing with less sophisticated counterparties and investors, greater regulatory scrutiny of these activities, increased credit-related, market, sovereign and operational risks,
risks arising from accidents or acts of terrorism, and reputational concerns with the manner in which these assets are being operated or held or in which we interact with these counterparties.
derivative transactions and delayed settlements may expose us to unexpected risk and potential losses.
we are party to a large number of derivative transactions, including credit derivatives. many of these derivative instruments are individually
negotiated and non-standardized, which can make exiting, transferring or settling positions difficult. many credit derivatives require that we deliver to the counterparty the underlying security, loan or other obligation in order to receive payment.
in a number of cases, we do not hold the underlying security, loan or other obligation and may not be able to obtain the underlying security, loan or other obligation. this could cause us to forfeit the payments due to us under these contracts or
result in settlement delays with the attendant credit and operational risk as well as increased costs to the firm.  derivative transactions
may also involve the risk that documentation has not been properly executed, that executed agreements may not be enforceable against the counterparty, or that obligations under such agreements may not be able to be netted against other
obligations with such counterparty. in addition, counterparties may claim that such transactions were not appropriate or authorized.  as a
signatory to the isda protocol, we may not be able to exercise remedies against counterparties and, as this new regime has not yet been tested, we may suffer risks or losses that we would not have expected to suffer if we could immediately close out
transactions upon a termination event. the isda protocol contemplates adoption of implementing regulations by various u.s. and non-u.s. regulators, and the isda protocols impact will depend on, among other things, how it is implemented.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
derivative contracts and other transactions, including secondary bank loan purchases and sales,
entered into with third parties are not always confirmed by the counterparties or settled on a timely basis. while the transaction remains unconfirmed or during any delay in settlement, we are subject to heightened credit and operational risk and in
the event of a default may find it more difficult to enforce our rights. in addition, as new complex derivative products are created, covering a wider array of underlying credit and other instruments, disputes about the terms of the underlying
contracts could arise, which could impair our ability to effectively manage our risk exposures from these products and subject us to increased costs. the provisions of the dodd-frank act requiring central clearing of credit derivatives and other otc
derivatives, or a market shift toward standardized derivatives, could reduce the risk associated with such transactions, but under certain circumstances could also limit our ability to develop derivatives that best suit the needs of our clients and
to hedge our own risks, and could adversely affect our profitability and increase our credit exposure to such platform.  our businesses may be
adversely affected if we are unable to hire and retain qualified employees.  our performance is largely dependent on the talents
and efforts of highly skilled individuals; therefore, our continued ability to compete effectively in our businesses, to manage our businesses effectively and to expand into new businesses and geographic areas depends on our ability to attract new
talented and diverse employees and to retain and motivate our existing employees. factors that affect our ability to attract and retain such employees include our compensation and benefits, and our reputation as a successful business with a culture
of fairly hiring, training and promoting qualified employees. as a significant portion of the compensation that we pay to our employees is paid in the form of year-end discretionary compensation, a significant portion of which is in the form of
deferred equity-related awards, declines in our profitability, or in the outlook for our future profitability, as well as regulatory limitations on compensation levels and terms, can negatively impact our ability to hire and retain highly qualified
employees.
competition from within the financial services industry and from businesses outside the
financial services industry for qualified employees has often been intense. recently, we have experienced increased competition in hiring and retaining employees to address the demands of new regulatory requirements. this is also the case in
emerging and growth markets, where we are often competing for qualified employees with entities that have a significantly greater presence or more extensive experience in the region.
changes in law or regulation in jurisdictions in which our operations are located that affect taxes on our employees income, or the
amount or composition of compensation, may also adversely affect our ability to hire and retain qualified employees in those jurisdictions.
as described further in business regulation compensation practices in parti, item1 of the 2015
form10-k, our compensation practices are subject to review by, and the standards of, the federal reserve board. as a large global financial and banking institution, we are subject to limitations on compensation practices (which may or may not
affect our competitors) by the federal reserve board, the pra, the fca, the fdic and other regulators worldwide. these limitations, including any imposed by or as a result of future legislation or regulation, may require us to alter our compensation
practices in ways that could adversely affect our ability to attract and retain talented employees.  we may be adversely affected by increased
governmental and regulatory scrutiny or negative publicity.  governmental scrutiny from regulators, legislative bodies and law
enforcement agencies with respect to matters relating to compensation, our business practices, our past actions and other matters has increased dramatically in the past several years. the financial crisis and the current political and public
sentiment regarding financial institutions has resulted in a significant amount of adverse press coverage, as well as adverse statements or charges by regulators or other government officials. press coverage and other public statements that assert
some form of wrongdoing often result in some type of investigation by regulators, legislators and law enforcement officials or in lawsuits.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
responding to these investigations and lawsuits, regardless of the ultimate outcome of the
proceeding, is time-consuming and expensive and can divert the time and effort of our senior management from our business. penalties and fines sought by regulatory authorities have increased substantially over the last several years, and certain
regulators have been more likely in recent years to commence enforcement actions or to advance or support legislation targeted at the financial services industry. adverse publicity, governmental scrutiny and legal and enforcement proceedings can
also have a negative impact on our reputation and on the morale and performance of our employees, which could adversely affect our businesses and results of operations.
substantial legal liability or significant regulatory action against us could have material adverse financial effects or cause us significant
reputational harm, which in turn could seriously harm our business prospects.  we face significant legal risks in our businesses,
and the volume of claims and amount of damages and penalties claimed in litigation and regulatory proceedings against financial institutions remain high. see note27 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the
2015 form10-k for information about certain legal proceedings in which we are involved and note18 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k for information regarding certain
mortgage-related contingencies. our experience has been that legal claims by customers and clients increase in a market downturn and that employment-related claims increase following periods in which we have reduced our staff. additionally,
governmental entities are plaintiffs in certain of the legal proceedings in which we are involved, and we may face future actions or claims by the same or other governmental entities, as well as follow-on civil litigation that is often commenced
after regulatory settlements.
recently, significant settlements by several large financial institutions with governmental
entities have been publicly announced. the trend of large settlements with governmental entities may adversely affect the outcomes for other financial institutions in similar actions, especially where governmental officials have announced that the
large settlements will be used as the basis or a template for other settlements. the uncertain regulatory enforcement environment makes it difficult to estimate probable losses, which can lead to substantial disparities between legal reserves and
subsequent actual settlements or penalties.  certain regulators, including the sec, have announced policies that make it more likely that
they will seek an admission of wrongdoing as part of any settlement of a matter brought by them against a regulated entity or individual, which could lead to increased exposure to civil litigation, could adversely affect our reputation, could result
in penalties or limitations on our ability to do business in certain jurisdictions with so-called bad actor laws and could have other negative effects.
in addition, the u.s. department of justice has announced a policy of requiring companies to provide investigators with all relevant facts
relating to the individuals responsible for the alleged misconduct in order to qualify for any cooperation credit in civil and criminal investigations of corporate wrongdoing, which may result in our incurring increased fines and penalties if the
department of justice determines that we have not provided sufficient information about applicable individuals in connection with an investigation, as well as increased costs in responding to department of justice investigations. it is possible that
other governmental authorities will adopt similar policies.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
the growth of electronic trading and the introduction of new trading technology may adversely affect
our business and may increase competition.  technology is fundamental to our business and our industry. the growth of electronic
trading and the introduction of new technologies is changing our businesses and presenting us with new challenges. securities, futures and options transactions are increasingly occurring electronically, both on our own systems and through other
alternative trading systems, and it appears that the trend toward alternative trading systems will continue. some of these alternative trading systems compete with us, particularly our exchange-based market-making activities, and we may experience
continued competitive pressures in these and other areas. in addition, the increased use by our clients of low-cost electronic trading systems and direct electronic access to trading markets could cause a reduction in commissions and spreads. as our
clients increasingly use our systems to trade directly in the markets, we may incur liabilities as a result of their use of our order routing and execution infrastructure. we have invested significant resources into the development of electronic
trading systems and expect to continue to do so, but there is no assurance that the revenues generated by these systems will yield an adequate return on our investment, particularly given the generally lower commissions arising from electronic
trades.  our commodities activities, particularly our physical commodities activities, subject us to extensive regulation and involve certain
potential risks, including environmental, reputational and other risks that may expose us to significant liabilities and costs.  as
part of our commodities business, we purchase and sell certain physical commodities, arrange for their storage and transport, and engage in market making of commodities. the commodities involved in these activities may include crude oil, oil refined
products, natural gas, liquefied natural gas, electric power, agricultural products, metals (base and precious), minerals (including unenriched uranium), emission credits, coal, freight and related products and indices.
in our investing and lending businesses, we make investments in and finance entities that engage in the production, storage and transportation
of numerous commodities, including many of the commodities referenced above.
these activities subject us and/or the entities in which we invest to extensive and evolving
federal, state and local energy, environmental, antitrust and other governmental laws and regulations worldwide, including environmental laws and regulations relating to, among others, air quality, water quality, waste management, transportation of
hazardous substances, natural resources, site remediation and health and safety. additionally, rising climate change concerns may lead to additional regulation that could increase the operating costs and profitability of our investments.
there may be substantial costs in complying with current or future laws and regulations relating to our commodities-related activities and
investments. compliance with these laws and regulations could require significant commitments of capital toward environmental monitoring, renovation of storage facilities or transport vessels, payment of emission fees and carbon or other taxes, and
application for, and holding of, permits and licenses.  commodities involved in our intermediation activities and investments are also
subject to the risk of unforeseen or catastrophic events, which are likely to be outside of our control, including those arising from the breakdown or failure of transport vessels, storage facilities or other equipment or processes or other
mechanical malfunctions, fires, leaks, spills or release of hazardous substances, performance below expected levels of output or efficiency, terrorist attacks, extreme weather events or other natural disasters or other hostile or catastrophic
events. in addition, we rely on third-party suppliers or service providers to perform their contractual obligations and any failure on their part, including the failure to obtain raw materials at reasonable prices or to safely transport or store
commodities, could expose us to costs or losses. also, while we seek to insure against potential risks, we may not be able to obtain insurance to cover some of these risks and the insurance that we have may be inadequate to cover our losses.
the occurrence of any of such events may prevent us from performing under our agreements with clients, may impair our operations or financial
results and may result in litigation, regulatory action, negative publicity or other reputational harm.  we may also be required to divest
or discontinue certain of these activities for regulatory or legal reasons. if that occurs, the firm may receive a value that is less than the then carrying value, as the firm may be unable to exit these activities in an orderly transaction.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
in conducting our businesses around the world, we are subject to political, economic, legal,
operational and other risks that are inherent in operating in many countries.  in conducting our businesses and maintaining and
supporting our global operations, we are subject to risks of possible nationalization, expropriation, price controls, capital controls, exchange controls and other restrictive governmental actions, as well as the outbreak of hostilities or acts of
terrorism. for example, there has been significant conflict between russia and ukraine in recent years, and sanctions have been imposed by the u.s. and eu on certain individuals and companies in russia. in many countries, the laws and regulations
applicable to the securities and financial services industries and many of the transactions in which we are involved are uncertain and evolving, and it may be difficult for us to determine the exact requirements of local laws in every market. any
determination by local regulators that we have not acted in compliance with the application of local laws in a particular market or our failure to develop effective working relationships with local regulators could have a significant and negative
effect not only on our businesses in that market but also on our reputation generally. we are also subject to the enhanced risk that transactions we structure might not be legally enforceable in all cases.
a determination by the united kingdom to exit or otherwise significantly change its relationship with the european union could affect the
manner in which we conduct our businesses.  our businesses and operations are increasingly expanding throughout the world, including in
emerging and growth markets, and we expect this trend to continue. various emerging and growth market countries have experienced severe economic and financial disruptions, including significant devaluations of their currencies, defaults or
threatened defaults on sovereign debt, capital and currency exchange controls, and low or negative growth rates in their economies, as well as military activity, civil unrest or acts of terrorism. the possible effects of any of these conditions
include an adverse impact on our businesses and increased volatility in financial markets generally.
while business and other practices throughout the world differ, our principal legal entities are
subject in their operations worldwide to rules and regulations relating to corrupt and illegal payments, hiring practices and money laundering, as well as laws relating to doing business with certain individuals, groups and countries, such as the
u.s. foreign corrupt practices act, the usa patriot act and u.k. bribery act. while we have invested and continue to invest significant resources in training and in compliance monitoring, the geographical diversity of our operations, employees,
clients and customers, as well as the vendors and other third parties that we deal with, greatly increases the risk that we may be found in violation of such rules or regulations and any such violation could subject us to significant penalties or
adversely affect our reputation.  in addition, there have been a number of highly publicized cases around the world, involving actual or
alleged fraud or other misconduct by employees in the financial services industry in recent years, and we run the risk that employee misconduct could occur. this misconduct has included and may include in the future the theft of proprietary
information, including proprietary software. it is not always possible to deter or prevent employee misconduct and the precautions we take to prevent and detect this activity have not been and may not be effective in all cases.
we may incur losses as a result of unforeseen or catastrophic events, including the emergence of a pandemic, terrorist attacks, extreme weather
events or other natural disasters.  the occurrence of unforeseen or catastrophic events, including the emergence of a pandemic,
such as the ebola or zika viruses, or other widespread health emergency (or concerns over the possibility of such an emergency), terrorist attacks, extreme terrestrial or solar weather events or other natural disasters, could create economic and
financial disruptions, and could lead to operational difficulties (including travel limitations) that could impair our ability to manage our businesses.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item1b.unresolved staff comments
there are no material unresolved written comments that were received from the sec staff 180days or more before the end of our fiscal year
relating to our periodic or current reports under the exchange act.  item2.properties
our principal executive offices are located at 200 west street, new york, new york and comprise approximately 2.1million gross square
feet. the building is located on a parcel leased from battery park city authority pursuant to a ground lease. under the lease, battery park city authority holds title to all improvements, including the office building, subject to goldman sachs
right of exclusive possession and use until june2069, the expiration date of the lease. under the terms of the ground lease, we made a lump sum ground rent payment in june2007 of $161million for rent through the term of the lease.
we have offices at 30 hudson street in jersey city, new jersey, which we own and which include approximately 1.6million gross square
feet of office space.  we have additional offices and commercial space in the united states and elsewhere in the americas, which together
comprise approximately 2.5million square feet of leased and owned space.  in europe, the middle east and africa, we have offices that
total approximately 1.5million square feet of leased and owned space. our european headquarters is located in london at peterborough court, pursuant to a lease expiring in 2026. in total, we have offices with approximately 1.2million
square feet in london, relating to various properties.  in asia (including india), australia and new zealand, we have offices with
approximately 1.9million square feet. our headquarters in this region are in tokyo, at the roppongi hills mori tower, and in hong kong, at the cheung kong center. in japan, we currently have offices with approximately 219,000 square feet, the
majority of which have leases that will expire in 2018. in hong kong, we currently have offices with approximately 315,000 square feet, the majority of which have leases that will expire in 2017.
in the preceding paragraphs, square footage figures are provided only for properties that are
used in the operation of our businesses.  see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations off-balance-sheet arrangements and contractual obligations contractual obligations in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k for information about exit costs we may incur in the future to the
extent we reduce our space capacity or commit to, or occupy, new properties in the locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of existing space that had been held for potential growth.
item3.legal proceedings
we are involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of
our businesses. many of these proceedings are in early stages, and many of these cases seek an indeterminate amount of damages. however, we believe, based on currently available information, that the results of such proceedings, in the aggregate,
will not have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, but may be material to our operating results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such period. given the range of litigation and
investigations presently under way, our litigation expenses can be expected to remain high. see managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations use of estimates in partii,
item7 of the 2015 form10-k. see note27 to the consolidated financial statements in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k for information about certain judicial, regulatory and legal proceedings.
item4. mine safety disclosures
not applicable.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
executive officers of the goldman sachs group, inc.
set forth below are the name, age, present title, principal occupation and certain biographical
information for our executive officers. all of our executive officers have been appointed by and serve at the pleasure of our board of directors.  lloyd c.
blankfein, 61  mr.blankfein has been our chairman and chief executive officer since june2006, and a director since
april2003.  alan m. cohen, 65
mr.cohen has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs and our global head of compliance since february2004.
gary d. cohn, 55  mr.cohn has been our
president and chief operating officer (or co-chief operating officer) and a director since june2006.  edith w. cooper, 54
ms.cooper has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs since april2011 and our global head of human capital management
since march2008. from 2002 to 2008, she served in various positions at the firm, including sales management within the securities division.  gregory k.
palm, 67  mr.palm has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs since may1999, and our general counsel and head or
co-head of the legal department since may1992.
john f.w. rogers, 59
mr.rogers has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs since april2011 and chief of staff and secretary to the board of
directors of goldman sachs since december2001.  harvey m. schwartz, 51
mr.schwartz has been an executive vice president of goldman sachs and our chief financial officer since january2013. from
february2008 to january2013, mr.schwartz was global co-head of the securities division.  mark schwartz, 61
mr.schwartz has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs and chairman of goldman sachs asia pacific since rejoining the firm in
june2012. from 2006 to june2012, he was chairman of missionpoint capital partners, an investment firm he co-founded.  michael s. sherwood, 50
mr.sherwood has been a vice chairman of goldman sachs since february2008 and co-chief executive officer of goldman sachs
international since 2005. he assumed responsibility for coordinating the firms business and activities around growth markets in november2013.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
part ii
item5.market for registrants common
equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities  the principal market on which our common stock is traded
is the nyse. information relating to the high and low sales prices per share of our common stock, as reported by the consolidated tape association, for each full quarterly period during 2013,2014 and 2015 is set forth under the heading
supplemental financial information common stock price range in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k. as of february5,2016, there were 9,307holders of
record of our common stock.  the table below presents dividends declared by group inc. during 2014 and 2015.
dateofdeclaration
dividenddeclaredpercommonshare
first quarter
january15,2014
$0.55
second quarter
april16,2014
0.55
third quarter
july14,2014
0.55
fourth quarter
october15,2014
0.60
first quarter
january15,2015
0.60
second quarter
april15,2015
0.65
third quarter
july15,2015
0.65
fourth quarter
october14,2015
0.65
the declaration of dividends by group inc. is subject to the discretion of our board. our board will take into
account such matters as general business conditions, our financial results, capital requirements, contractual, legal and regulatory restrictions on the payment of dividends by us to our shareholders or by our subsidiaries to us, the effect on our
debt ratings and such other factors as our board may deem relevant. the holders of our common stock share proportionately on a per share basis in all dividends and other distributions on common stock declared by the board of directors of group inc.
(board). see business regulation in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k for information about potential regulatory limitations on our receipt of funds from our regulated subsidiaries and our payment of
dividends to shareholders of group inc.
the table below presents purchases made by or on behalf of group inc. or any affiliated
purchaser (as defined in rule10b-18(a)(3) under the exchange act), of our common stock during the fourth quarter of 2015. information relating to compensation plans under which our equity securities are authorized for issuance is
presented in partiii, item12 of the 2015 form10-k.
totalnumberof sharespurchased
average price paid per share
totalnumberofsharespurchasedas part ofpubliclyannouncedplans orprograms
maximumnumberof sharesthat mayyet bepurchasedunder theplans orprograms
month #1 (october1,2015to
october31,2015)
2,901,624
$183.27
2,901,624
69,164,345
month #2 (november1,2015to
november30,2015)
2,915,027
192.22
2,915,027
66,249,318
month #3 (december1,2015to
december31,2015)
3,047,435
183.07
3,047,435
63,201,883
total
8,864,086
8,864,086
on march21,2000, we announced that our board had approved a repurchase program authorizing
repurchases of up to 15million shares of our common stock, which was increased by an aggregate of 490million shares by resolutions ofourboard adopted from june2001 through october2015. the repurchase program is
effected primarily through regular open-market purchases (which may include repurchase plans designed to comply with rule10b5-1), the amounts and timing of which are determined primarily by the firms current and projected capital
position, but which may also be influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of our common stock. the repurchase program has no set expiration or termination date. prior to repurchasing common stock, we must
receive confirmation that the board of governors of the federal reserve system does not object to such capital actions.
item6.selected financial data
the selected financial data table is set forth under partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
item7.managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations  index
pageno.
introduction
executive overview
business environment
critical accounting policies
recent accounting developments
use of estimates
results of operations
balance sheet and funding sources
equity capital management and regulatory capital
regulatory developments
off-balance-sheet arrangements and contractual obligations
risk management
overview and structure of risk management
liquidity risk management
market risk management
credit risk management
operational risk management
model risk management
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
introduction
the goldman sachs group, inc. (group inc. or parent company), a delaware corporation, together
with its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the firm), is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of financial services to a substantial and diversified client base that
includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals. founded in 1869, the firm is headquartered in new york and maintains offices in all major financial centers around the world.
we report our activities in four business segments: investment banking, institutional client services, investing& lending and
investment management. see results of operations below for further information about our business segments.  when we use the
terms goldman sachs, the firm, we, us and our, we mean group inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
references to the 2015 form10-k are to our annual report on form10-k for the year ended december31,2015.
all references to the consolidated financial statements or supplemental financial information are to partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k. all references to 2015,2014 and 2013 refer to our years ended,
or the dates, as the context requires, december31,2015, december31,2014 and december31,2013, respectively. any reference to a future year refers to a year ending on december31 of that year. certain
reclassifications have been made to previously reported amounts to conform to the current presentation.
in this discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, we have
included information that may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the u.s. private securities litigation reform act of 1995. forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but
instead represent only our beliefs regarding future events, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and outside our control. this information includes statements other than historical information or statements of current condition
and may relate to our future plans and objectives and results, among other things, and may also include statements about the effect of changes to the capital, leverage, liquidity, long-term debt and total loss-absorbing capacity rules applicable to
banks and bank holding companies, the impact of the u.s. dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act (dodd-frank act) on our businesses and operations, and various legal proceedings or mortgage-related contingencies as set forth under
legal proceedings and certain mortgage-related contingencies in notes27 and 18, respectively, to the consolidated financial statements, as well as statements about the results of our dodd-frank act and firm stress
tests, statements about the objectives and effectiveness of our business continuity plan, information security program, risk management and liquidity policies, statements about trends in or growth opportunities for our businesses, statements about
our future status, activities or reporting under u.s. or non-u.s. banking and financial regulation, and statements about our investment banking transaction backlog.
by identifying these statements for you in this manner, we are alerting you to the possibility that our actual results and financial condition
may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results and financial condition indicated in these forward-looking statements. important factors that could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ from those indicated in
these forward-looking statements include, among others, those described in risk factors in parti, item1a of the 2015 form10-k and cautionary statement pursuant to the u.s. private securities litigation reform act
of 1995 in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
executive overview
2015 versus 2014. the firm generated net earnings of $6.08billion and diluted earnings per common share of $12.14 for 2015, a decrease of 28% and 29%, respectively, compared with $8.48billion and $17.07 per share for
2014. return on average common shareholders equity (roe) was 7.4% for 2015, compared with 11.2% for 2014. during 2015, the firm recorded provisions for the agreement in principle with the rmbs working group 1 of $3.37billion ($2.99billion after-tax), which reduced diluted earnings per common share by $6.53 and roe by 3.8 percentage points.
book value per common share was $171.03 as of december2015, 5% higher compared with the end of 2014. during the year, the firm
repurchased 22.1million shares of its common stock for a total cost of $4.20billion.  net revenues were $33.82billion for
2015, 2% lower than 2014, as significantly lower net revenues in investing& lending were largely offset by higher net revenues in investment banking and slightly higher net revenues in investment management. net revenues in institutional
client services were essentially unchanged compared with 2014.  operating expenses were $25.04billion for 2015, 13% higher than 2014,
due to significantly higher non-compensation expenses, primarily reflecting significantly higher net provisions for mortgage-related litigation and regulatory matters. compensation and benefits expenses were essentially unchanged compared with the
prior year.  we continued to maintain strong capital ratios and liquidity. as of december2015, our common equity tier1
ratio2 as computed in accordance with the standardized approach and the baseliii advanced approach, in each case reflecting the applicable transitional provisions, was 13.6% and 12.4%,
respectively. in addition, our global core liquid assets3 were $199billion as of december2015.
2014 versus 2013. the firm generated net earnings of $8.48billion and diluted earnings per common share of $17.07 for 2014, an increase of 5% and 10%, respectively, compared with $8.04billion and $15.46 per share for
2013. roe was 11.2% for 2014, compared with 11.0% for 2013. book value per common share was $163.01 as of december2014, 7% higher compared with the end of 2013.
net revenues were $34.53billion for 2014, essentially unchanged compared with 2013, as higher net revenues in both investment management
and investment banking, reflecting strong performances in these businesses, were largely offset by slightly lower net revenues in both institutional client services and investing& lending.
operating expenses were $22.17billion for 2014, essentially unchanged compared with 2013. non-compensation expenses were slightly lower
compared with the prior year, primarily reflecting lower net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings, while compensation and benefits expenses were essentially unchanged.
during 2014, as part of a firmwide initiative to reduce activities with lower returns, total assets were reduced by $55billion to
$856billion as of december2014, while pre-tax margin improved approximately 150 basis points to 35.8%.  we also maintained
strong capital ratios and liquidity, while returning $6.52billion of capital to shareholders during 2014. during 2014, the firm repurchased 31.8million shares of its common stock for a total cost of $5.47billion and paid common
dividends of $1.05billion. our common equity tier1 ratio2 was 12.2% as of december2014, under the baseliii advanced approach reflecting the applicable transitional
provisions. in addition, our global core liquid assets3 were $183billion as of december2014.
see results of operations segment operating results below for information about net revenues and pre-tax earnings for
each of our business segments.
1.
on january14,2016, the firm announced an agreement in principle, subject to the negotiation of definitive documentation, to resolve the ongoing
investigation of the residential mortgage-backed securities working group of the u.s. financial fraud enforcement task force (rmbs working group). see note27 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about this agreement
in principle.
2.
see note20 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our capital ratios.
3.
see risk management liquidity risk management below for further information about our global core liquid assets.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
our businesses, by their nature, do not produce predictable earnings. our results in any given
period can be materially affected by conditions in global financial markets, economic conditions generally and other factors. for further information about the factors that may affect our future operating results, see risk factors in
parti, item1a of the 2015 form10-k.  business environment
global  during 2015, real gross domestic product
(gdp) growth appeared stable but subdued in most advanced economies and weaker in emerging market economies compared with 2014. in developed markets, growth was higher in the euro area and japan, while growth in the united kingdom was lower and
growth in the united states remained stable. in emerging markets, many economies suffered from lower commodity prices, and latin america was particularly weak with negative aggregate growth in 2015. monetary policy diverged in 2015, as the u.s.
federal reserve increased its target interest rate, while policy remained accommodative in the euro area and japan. in addition, oil prices declined by 30%, and there were concerns about the debt situation in greece earlier in the year and
chinas growth outlook later in the year. in investment banking, industry-wide mergers and acquisitions activity remained strong, while industry-wide activity in both debt and equity underwriting declined compared with 2014.
united states  in the united states, real gdp
increased by 2.4% in both 2015 and 2014. residential fixed investment growth and consumer expenditures growth both improved, while business fixed investment growth declined. measures of consumer confidence improved on average compared with the prior
year, while the unemployment rate declined. housing starts and house sales increased in 2015, but house prices declined compared with the end of 2014. measures of inflation were mixed, with headline measures lower alongside declining commodity
prices, and core inflation metrics stable during 2015. the u.s. federal reserve raised its target rate for the federal funds rate at the decembermeeting to a range of 0.25% to 0.50%, ending a seven-year period at a range of zero to 0.25%. the
yield on the 10-year u.s. treasury note increased by 10 basis points during 2015 to 2.27%. in equity markets, the nasdaq composite index increased by 6%, while the dow jones industrial average and the s&p 500 index declined by 2% and 1%,
respectively, during 2015.
europe
in the euro area, real gdp increased by 1.5% in 2015, compared to an increase of 0.9% in 2014, as fixed investment, consumer spending and
government consumption all grew. measures of inflation remained subdued, prompting the european central bank (ecb) to announce quantitative easing in the form of an expanded asset purchase program in january2015. the central bank continued its
asset purchase program through the second and third quarters and announced further easing measures in the fourth quarter, cutting the deposit rate by 10 basis points to (0.30)% and extending purchases to march2017. the ecb maintained its main
refinancing operations rate at 0.05% during 2015. the euro depreciated by 10% against the u.s. dollar. in the united kingdom, real gdp increased by 2.2% in 2015, compared with an increase of 2.9% in 2014. the bank of england maintained its official
bank rate at 0.50% and the british pound depreciated by 5% against the u.s. dollar. yields on 10-year government bonds in the region generally increased slightly during the year. in equity markets, the dax index, cac 40 index and the euro stoxx 50
index increased by 10%, 9%, and 4%, respectively, while the ftse 100 index decreased by 5% during 2015.  asia
in japan, real gdp increased by 0.4% in 2015, compared with no growth in 2014. measures of inflation were lower compared with 2014 and remained
well below the bank of japans (boj) 2% inflation target. in 2015, the boj extended the timing to achieve 2% inflation, continued its program of monetary easing and introduced measures to supplement and facilitate the quantitative and
qualitative easing program. during the year, the yield on 10-year japanese government bonds declined, the u.s. dollar was essentially unchanged against the japanese yen and, in equity markets, the nikkei 225 index increased by 9%. in china, real gdp
increased by 6.9% in 2015 compared with 7.3% in 2014. during 2015, the peoples bank of china announced multiple cuts in the reserve requirement ratio and took policy actions that led to a depreciation of the chinese yuan. measures of inflation
were slightly lower and the u.s. dollar appreciated by 5% against the chinese yuan. in equity markets, the shanghai composite index increased by 9% after large mid-year swings, while the hang seng index decreased by 7%. in india, real gdp increased
by 7.5% in 2015 compared with 7.3% in 2014, and the rate of inflation declined compared with 2014. the u.s. dollar appreciated by 5% against the indian rupee and, in equity markets, the bse sensex index declined by 5% during 2015.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
other markets
in brazil, real gdp appeared to contract by 3.8% in 2015 compared with an increase of 0.1% in 2014, reflecting sharp contractions in fixed
investment and private consumption. the u.s. dollar appreciated by 49% against the brazilian real and, in equity markets, the bovespa index decreased by 13%. in russia, real gdp contracted by 3.7% in 2015 compared with an increase of 0.6% in 2014,
reflecting contractions in private consumption and investment. the u.s. dollar appreciated by 26% against the russian ruble and, in equity markets, the micex index increased by 26% during 2015.
critical accounting policies  fair value
fair value hierarchy. financial instruments owned, at
fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value (i.e., inventory), as well as certain other financial assets and financial liabilities, are reflected in our consolidated statements of financial condition at fair value
(i.e., marked-to-market), with related gains or losses generally recognized in our consolidated statements of earnings. the use of fair value to measure financial instruments is fundamental to our risk management practices and is our most critical
accounting policy.  the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to
transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. we measure certain financial assets and financial liabilities as a portfolio (i.e., based on its net exposure to market and/or credit risks).in
determining fair value, the hierarchy under u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (u.s. gaap) gives (i)the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities (level1
inputs), (ii)the next priority to inputs other than level1 inputs that are observable, either directly or indirectly (level2 inputs), and (iii)the lowest priority to inputs that cannot be observed in market activity
(level3 inputs). assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to their fair value measurement.
the fair values for substantially all of our financial assets and financial liabilities are
based on observable prices and inputs and are classified in levels1 and 2 of the fair value hierarchy. certain level2 and level3 financial assets and financial liabilities may require appropriate valuation adjustments that a market
participant would require to arrive at fair value for factors such as counterparty and the firms credit quality, funding risk, transfer restrictions, liquidity and bid/offer spreads.
instruments categorized within level3 of the fair value hierarchy are those which require one or more significant inputs that are not
observable. as of december2015 and december2014, level3 financial assets represented 2.8% and 4.2%, respectively, of our total assets. see notes5 through 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about level3 financial assets, including changes in level3 financial assets and related fair value measurements. absent evidence to the contrary, instruments classified within level3 of the fair value hierarchy are initially valued
at transaction price, which is considered to be the best initial estimate of fair value. subsequent to the transaction date, we use other methodologies to determine fair value, which vary based on the type of instrument. estimating the fair value of
level3 financial instruments requires judgments to be made. these judgments include:
determining the appropriate valuation methodology and/or model for each type of level3 financial instrument;
determining model inputs based on an evaluation of all relevant empirical market data, including prices evidenced by market transactions, interest
rates, credit spreads, volatilities and correlations; and
determining appropriate valuation adjustments, including those related to illiquidity or counterparty credit quality.
regardless of the methodology, valuation inputs and assumptions are only changed when corroborated by substantive evidence.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
controls over valuation of financial instruments. market makers and investment professionals in our revenue-producing units are responsible for pricing our financial instruments. our control infrastructure is independent of the revenue-producing units and is
fundamental to ensuring that all of our financial instruments are appropriately valued at market-clearing levels. in the event that there is a difference of opinion in situations where estimating the fair value of financial instruments requires
judgment (e.g., calibration to market comparables or trade comparison, as described below), the final valuation decision is made by senior managers in control and support functions. this independent price verification is critical to ensuring that
our financial instruments are properly valued.  price verification. all financial instruments at fair value in levels1, 2 and 3 of the fair value hierarchy are subject to our independent price verification process. the objective of price verification is to have an informed
and independent opinion with regard to the valuation of financial instruments under review. instruments that have one or more significant inputs which cannot be corroborated by external market data are classified within level3 of the fair
value hierarchy. price verification strategies utilized by our independent control and support functions include:
trade comparison. analysis of trade data (both internal and external where available) is used to
determine the most relevant pricing inputs and valuations.
external price comparison. valuations and prices are compared to pricing data obtained from third
parties (e.g., brokers or dealers, markit, bloomberg, idc, trace). data obtained from various sources is compared to ensure consistency and validity. when broker or dealer quotations or third-party pricing vendors are used for valuation or price
verification, greater priority is generally given to executable quotations.
calibration to market comparables. market-based transactions are used to corroborate the valuation of
positions with similar characteristics, risks and components.
relative value analyses. market-based transactions are analyzed to determine the similarity, measured
in terms of risk, liquidity and return, of one instrument relative to another or, for a given instrument, of one maturity relative to another.
collateral analyses. margin calls on derivatives are analyzed to determine implied values which are
used to corroborate our valuations.
execution of trades. where appropriate, trading desks are instructed to execute trades in order to
provide evidence of market-clearing levels.
backtesting. valuations are corroborated by comparison to values realized upon sales.
see notes5 through 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about fair value
measurements.  review of net revenues. independent
control and support functions ensure adherence to our pricing policy through a combination of daily procedures, including the explanation and attribution of net revenues based on the underlying factors. through this process we independently validate
net revenues, identify and resolve potential fair value or trade booking issues on a timely basis and seek to ensure that risks are being properly categorized and quantified.
review of valuation models. our independent model risk
management group (model risk management), consisting of quantitative professionals who are separate from model developers, performs an independent model review and validation process of our valuation models. new or changed models are reviewed and
approved prior to being put into use. models are evaluated and re-approved annually to assess the impact of any changes in the product or market and any market developments in pricing theories. see risk management model risk
management for further information about the review and validation of our valuation models.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
goodwill. goodwill is the cost of acquired companies in
excess of the fair value of net assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the acquisition date. goodwill is assessed for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an
impairment may exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. if the results of the qualitative assessment are not conclusive, a
quantitative goodwill test is performed by comparing the estimated fair value of each reporting unit with its estimated net book value.
estimating the fair value of our reporting units requires management to make judgments. critical inputs to the fair value estimates include
projected earnings and attributed equity. there is inherent uncertainty in the projected earnings. the net book value of each reporting unit reflects an allocation of total shareholders equity and represents the estimated amount of total
shareholders equity required to support the activities of the reporting unit under currently applicable regulatory capital requirements. see equity capital management and regulatory capital for further information about our capital
requirements.
we last performed a quantitative goodwill test in 2012 and, as we believe it is appropriate to
periodically update it, we performed another quantitative goodwill test during the fourth quarter of 2015. we determined that goodwill was not impaired. the estimated fair value of our reporting units in which we hold substantially all of our
goodwill significantly exceeded their estimated carrying values. however, the estimated fair value of the fixed income, currency and commodities client execution reporting unit, which represents approximately 7% of our goodwill, was not
substantially in excess of its carrying value. this reporting unit and the industry more broadly have been adversely impacted by the currently challenging operating environment and increased capital requirements. we will continue to closely monitor
it to determine whether an impairment is required in the future. as of december2015, the goodwill related to the fixed income, currency and commodities client execution reporting unit was $269million, substantially all of which
originated from the acquisition of goldman sachs australia pty ltd in 2011.  if we experience a prolonged or severe period of weakness in
the business environment or financial markets, or additional increases in capital requirements, our goodwill could be impaired in the future. in addition, significant changes to other inputs of the quantitative goodwill test could cause the
estimated fair value of our reporting units to decline, which could result in an impairment of goodwill in the future.  see note13 to
the consolidated financial statements for further information about our goodwill and our quantitative goodwill test.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
identifiable intangible assets. we amortize our identifiable intangible assets over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method or based on economic usage for certain commodities-related intangibles. identifiable intangible
assets are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying value may not be fully recoverable. see note13 to the consolidated financial statements for the carrying
value and estimated remaining useful lives of our identifiable intangible assets by major asset class.  a prolonged or severe period
of market weakness, or significant changes in regulation could adversely impact our businesses and impair the value of our identifiable intangible assets. in addition, certain events could indicate a potential impairment of our identifiable
intangible assets, including weaker business performance resulting in a decrease in our customer base and decreases in revenues from commodities-related transportation rights, customer contracts and relationships. management judgment is required to
evaluate whether indications of potential impairment have occurred, and to test intangible assets for impairment if required.  an
impairment, generally calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of an asset or asset group, is recognized if the total of the estimated undiscounted cash flows relating to the asset or asset group is less
than the corresponding carrying value.  see note13 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our
identifiable intangible assets.  recent accounting developments
see note3 to the consolidated financial statements for information about recent accounting developments.
use of estimates
the use of generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions. in addition to the estimates
we make in connection with fair value measurements and the accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, the use of estimates and assumptions is also important in determining provisions for losses that may arise from litigation,
regulatory proceedings and tax audits, and the allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments held for investment.  we estimate and
provide for potential losses that may arise out of litigation and regulatory proceedings to the extent that such losses are probable and can be reasonably estimated. in addition, we estimate the upper end of the range of reasonably possible
aggregate loss in excess of the related reserves for litigation proceedings where the firm believes the risk of loss is more than slight. see notes18 and 27 to the consolidated financial statements for information about certain judicial,
regulatory and legal proceedings.  significant judgment is required in making these estimates and our final liabilities may ultimately be
materially different. our total estimated liability in respect of litigation and regulatory proceedings is determined on a case-by-case basis and represents an estimate of probable losses after considering, among other factors, the progress of each
case or proceeding, our experience and the experience of others in similar cases or proceedings, and the opinions and views of legal counsel.
in accounting for income taxes, we recognize tax positions in the financial statements only when it is more likely than not that the position
will be sustained on examination by the relevant taxing authority based on the technical merits of the position. see note24 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about accounting for income taxes.
we also estimate and record an allowance for credit losses related to our loans receivable and lending commitments held for investment.
managements estimate of loan losses entails judgment about loan collectability at the reporting dates, and there are uncertainties inherent in those judgments. see note9 to the consolidated financial statements for further information
about the allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments held for investment.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
results of operations
the composition of our net revenues has varied over time as financial markets and the scope of
our operations have changed. the composition of net revenues can also vary over the shorter term due to fluctuations in u.s. and global economic and market conditions. see risk factors in parti, item1a of the 2015
form10-k for further information about the impact of economic and market conditions on our results of operations.  financial overview
the table below presents an overview of our financial results.
$ inmillions, except
per share amounts
year ended december
net revenues
$33,820
$34,528
$34,206
pre-tax earnings
8,778
12,357
11,737
net earnings
6,083
8,477
8,040
netearningsapplicable tocommon shareholders
5,568
8,077
7,726
diluted earnings per common share
12.14
17.07
15.46
return on average common shareholders
equity1
7.4%
11.2%
11.0%
1.
roe is computed by dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by average monthly common shareholders equity. the table below presents our
average common shareholders equity.
average for the
year ended december
$ inmillions
total shareholders equity
$86,314
$80,839
$77,353
preferred stock
(10,585
)
(8,585
)
(6,892
)
common shareholders equity
$75,729
$72,254
$70,461
the table below presents selected financial ratios.
year ended december
net earnings to average assets
0.7%
0.9%
0.9%
return on average total shareholders equity1
7.0%
10.5%
10.4%
total average equity to average assets
9.9%
9.0%
8.2%
dividend payout ratio2
21.0%
13.2%
13.3%
1.
return on average total shareholders equity is computed by dividing net earnings by average monthly total shareholders equity.
2.
dividend payout ratio is computed by dividing dividends declared per common share by diluted earnings per common share.
net revenues
the table below presents our net revenues by line item on the consolidated statements of earnings.
year ended december
$ inmillions
investment banking
$7,027
$6,464
$6,004
investment management
5,868
5,748
5,194
commissions and fees
3,320
3,316
3,255
market making
9,523
8,365
9,368
other principal transactions
5,018
6,588
6,993
total non-interest revenues
30,756
30,481
30,814
interest income
8,452
9,604
10,060
interest expense
5,388
5,557
6,668
net interest income
3,064
4,047
3,392
total net revenues
$33,820
$34,528
$34,206
in the table above:
investment banking is comprised of revenues (excluding net interest) from financial advisory and underwriting assignments, as well as
derivative transactions directly related to these assignments. these activities are included in our investment banking segment.
investment management is comprised of revenues (excluding net interest) from providing investment management services to a diverse set
of clients, as well as wealth advisory services and certain transaction services to high-net-worth individuals and families. these activities are included in our investment management segment.
commissions and fees is comprised of revenues from executing and clearing client transactions on major stock, options and futures
exchanges worldwide, as well as over-the-counter (otc) transactions. these activities are included in our institutional client services and investment management segments.
market making is comprised of revenues (excluding net interest) from client execution activities related to making markets in interest
rate products, credit products, mortgages, currencies, commodities and equity products. these activities are included in our institutional client services segment.
other principal transactions is comprised of revenues (excluding net interest) from our investing activities and the origination of
loans to provide financing to clients. in addition, other principal transactions includes revenues related to our consolidated investments. these activities are included in our investing& lending segment.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
2015 versus 2014
net revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $33.82billion for 2015, 2%
lower than 2014, reflecting significantly lower other principal transactions revenues and net interest income, largely offset by higher market-making revenues and investment banking revenues, as well as slightly higher investment management
revenues. commissions and fees were essentially unchanged compared with 2014.  during 2015, the operating environment for market-making
activities was positively impacted by diverging central bank monetary policies in the united states and the euro area in the first quarter, as increased volatility levels contributed to strong client activity levels in currencies, interest rate
products and equity products. however, during the remainder of the year, concerns about global growth and uncertainty about the u.s. federal reserves interest rate policy, along with lower global equity prices, widening high-yield credit
spreads and declining commodity prices, contributed to lower levels of client activity, particularly in mortgages and credit, and more difficult market-making conditions. the operating environment for investment banking activities for 2015 reflected
strong industry-wide mergers and acquisitions activity. in addition, investment management reflected an environment generally characterized by strong client net inflows, which more than offset the declines in equity and fixed income asset prices.
although other principal transactions for 2015 benefited from favorable company-specific events, including sales, initial public offerings and financings, a decline in global equity prices and widening high-yield credit spreads during the second
half of the year impacted results. if macroeconomic concerns continue over the long term, and market-making activity levels, investment banking activity levels or assets under supervision decline, or if asset prices continue to decline, net revenues
would likely be negatively impacted. see segment operating results below for further information about material trends and uncertainties that may impact our results of operations.
non-interest revenues. investment banking revenues on
the consolidated statements of earnings were $7.03billion for 2015, 9% higher than 2014, due to significantly higher revenues in financial advisory, reflecting strong client activity, particularly in the united states. industry-wide completed
mergers and acquisitions increased significantly compared with the prior year. revenues in underwriting were lower compared with a strong 2014. revenues in debt underwriting were lower compared with 2014, reflecting significantly lower leveraged
finance activity. revenues in equity underwriting were also lower, reflecting significantly lower revenues from initial public offerings and convertible offerings, partially offset by significantly higher revenues from secondary offerings.
investment management revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were
$5.87billion for 2015, 2% higher than 2014, due to slightly higher management and other fees, primarily reflecting higher average assets under supervision, and higher transaction revenues.
commissions and fees on the consolidated statements of earnings were $3.32billion for 2015, essentially unchanged compared with 2014.
market-making revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $9.52billion for 2015, 14% higher than 2014. excluding a gain
of $289million in 2014 related to the extinguishment of certain of our junior subordinated debt, market-making revenues were 18% higher than 2014, reflecting significantly higher revenues in interest rate products, currencies, equity cash
products and equity derivatives. these increases were partially offset by significantly lower revenues in mortgages, commodities and credit products.
other principal transactions revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $5.02billion for 2015, 24% lower than 2014. this
decrease was primarily due to lower revenues from investments in equities, principally reflecting the sale of metro international trade services (metro) in the fourth quarter of 2014 and lower net gains from investments in private equities, driven
by corporate performance. in addition, revenues in debt securities and loans were significantly lower, reflecting lower net gains from investments.
net interest income. net interest income on the
consolidated statements of earnings was $3.06billion for 2015, 24% lower than 2014. the decrease compared with 2014 was due to lower interest income resulting from a reduction in interest income related to financial instruments owned, at fair
value, partially offset by the impact of an increase in total average loans receivable. the decrease in interest income was partially offset by a decrease in interest expense, which primarily reflected lower interest expense related to financial
instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value and other interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by higher interest expense related to long-term borrowings. see supplemental financial information statistical
disclosures distribution of assets, liabilities and shareholders equity for further information about our sources of net interest income.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
2014 versus 2013
net revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $34.53billion for 2014,
essentially unchanged compared with 2013, reflecting higher net interest income, investment management revenues and investment banking revenues, as well as slightly higher commissions and fees, largely offset by lower market-making revenues and
other principal transactions revenues.  during 2014, the operating environment was favorable for investment banking activities, as
industry-wide underwriting activity was strong and industry-wide mergers and acquisitions activity increased. improved asset prices resulted in appreciation in the value of client assets in investment management. in addition, other principal
transactions were impacted by favorable company-specific events and strong corporate performance. however, the operating environment remained challenging for market-making activities as economic uncertainty and low volatility levels contributed to
generally low levels of activity, particularly in fixed income products. see segment operating results below for further information about material trends and uncertainties that may impact our results of operations.
non-interest revenues. investment banking revenues on
the consolidated statements of earnings were $6.46billion for 2014, 8% higher than 2013, due to significantly higher revenues in financial advisory, reflecting an increase in industry-wide completed mergers and acquisitions, primarily in the
united states. revenues in underwriting were essentially unchanged compared with a strong 2013, as industry-wide activity levels remained high. revenues in debt underwriting were slightly lower compared with 2013, reflecting lower revenues from
commercial mortgage-related activity, while revenues in equity underwriting were slightly higher, principally from initial public offerings.
investment management revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $5.75billion for 2014, 11% higher than 2013, reflecting
higher management and other fees, primarily due to higher average assets under supervision, as well as higher incentive fees and transaction revenues.
commissions and fees on the consolidated statements of earnings were $3.32billion for 2014, 2% higher than 2013, due to higher
commissions and fees in both europe and the united states, reflecting generally higher client activity, consistent with increases in listed cash equity market volumes in these regions.
market-making revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $8.37billion for
2014, 11% lower than 2013. results for 2014 included a gain of $289million ($270million of which was recorded at extinguishment in the third quarter) related to the extinguishment of certain of our junior subordinated debt. excluding
this gain and a gain of $211million on the sale of a majority stake in our european insurance business in 2013, the decrease in market-making revenues compared with 2013 reflected significantly lower revenues in both credit products and equity
derivatives, lower revenues in mortgages and the sale of our americas reinsurance business in 2013. these decreases were partially offset by significantly higher revenues in commodities, as well as higher revenues in equity cash products, currencies
and interest rate products.  other principal transactions revenues on the consolidated statements of earnings were $6.59billion for
2014, 6% lower than 2013. revenues from investments in equity securities were lower due to a significant decrease in net gains from investments in public equities, as movements in global equity prices during 2014 were less favorable compared with
2013, as well as significantly lower revenues related to our consolidated investments, reflecting a decrease in operating revenues from commodities-related consolidated investments. these decreases were partially offset by an increase in net gains
from investments in private equities, primarily driven by company-specific events. revenues from debt securities and loans were slightly higher than 2013, primarily due to sales of certain investments during 2014.
net interest income. net interest income on the
consolidated statements of earnings was $4.05billion for 2014,19% higher than 2013. the increase compared with 2013 was primarily due to lower interest expense resulting from a reduction in our total liabilities, lower costs of long-term
funding due to a decline in interest rates and the impact of rebates in the securities services business, partially offset by lower interest income due to a reduction in our total assets. see supplemental financial information
statistical disclosures distribution of assets, liabilities and shareholders equity for further information about our sources of net interest income.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
operating expenses
our operating expenses are primarily influenced by compensation, headcount and levels of
business activity. compensation and benefits includes salaries, discretionary compensation, amortization of equity awards and other items such as benefits. discretionary compensation is significantly impacted by, among other factors, the level of
net revenues, overall financial performance, prevailing labor markets, business mix, the structure of our share-based compensation programs and the external environment. in addition, see use of estimates for additional information about
expenses that may arise from litigation and regulatory proceedings.  the table below presents our operating expenses and total staff (which
includes employees, consultants and temporary staff).
year ended december
$ inmillions
compensation and benefits
$12,678
$12,691
$12,613
brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees
2,576
2,501
2,341
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
1,337
1,322
occupancy
professional fees
insurance reserves1
other expenses2
5,699
2,585
2,931
total non-compensation expenses
12,364
9,480
9,856
total operating expenses
$25,042
$22,171
$22,469
total staff at period-end
36,800
34,000
32,900
1.
consists of changes in reserves related to our americas reinsurance business, including interest credited to policyholder account balances, and expenses
related to property catastrophe reinsurance claims. in april2013, we completed the sale of a majority stake in our americas reinsurance business and no longer consolidate this business.
2.
includes provisions of $3.37billion recorded during 2015 for the agreement in principle with the rmbs working group. see note 27 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information about this agreement in principle.  2015
versus 2014. operating expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $25.04billion for 2015, 13% higher than 2014. compensation and benefits expenses on the consolidated
statements of earnings were $12.68billion for 2015, essentially unchanged compared with 2014. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2015 was 37.5% compared with 36.8% for 2014. total staff increased 8% during 2015,
primarily due to activity levels in certain businesses and continued investment in regulatory compliance.
non-compensation expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $12.36billion
for 2015, 30% higher than 2014, due to significantly higher net provisions for mortgage-related litigation and regulatory matters, which are included in other expenses. this increase was partially offset by lower depreciation and amortization
expenses, primarily reflecting lower impairment charges related to consolidated investments, and a reduction in expenses related to the sale of metro in the fourth quarter of 2014. net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings for 2015
were $4.01billion compared with $754million for 2014 (both primarily comprised of net provisions for mortgage-related matters). 2015 included a $148million charitable contribution to goldman sachs gives, our donor-advised fund.
compensation was reduced to fund this charitable contribution to goldman sachs gives. the firm asks its participating managing directors to make recommendations regarding potential charitable recipients for this contribution.
2014 versus 2013. operating expenses on the
consolidated statements of earnings were $22.17billion for 2014, essentially unchanged compared with 2013. compensation and benefits expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $12.69billion for 2014, essentially unchanged
compared with 2013. the ratio of compensation and benefits to net revenues for 2014 was 36.8% compared with 36.9% for 2013. total staff increased 3% during 2014.
non-compensation expenses on the consolidated statements of earnings were $9.48billion for 2014, 4% lower than 2013. the decrease
compared with 2013 included a decrease in other expenses, due to lower net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings and lower operating expenses related to consolidated investments, as well as a decline in insurance reserves, reflecting
the sale of our americas reinsurance business in 2013. these decreases were partially offset by an increase in brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees. net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings for 2014 were
$754million compared with $962million for 2013 (both primarily comprised of net provisions for mortgage-related matters). 2014 included a charitable contribution of $137million to goldman sachs gives, our donor-advised fund.
compensation was reduced to fund this charitable contribution to goldman sachs gives. the firm asks its participating managing directors to make recommendations regarding potential charitable recipients for this contribution.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
provision for taxes
the effective income tax rate for 2015 was 30.7%, down from 31.4% for 2014. the decline compared with 2014 reflected reductions related to a
change in the mix of earnings, the impact of changes in tax law on deferred tax assets, settlements of tax audits and the determination that certain non-u.s. earnings would be permanently reinvested abroad, and an increase related to the impact of
non-deductible provisions for mortgage-related litigation and regulatory matters.  the effective income tax rate for 2014 was 31.4%,
essentially unchanged compared with 31.5% for 2013.  on december18,2015, u.s. federal legislation was enacted to permanently
defer u.s. tax on certain non-repatriated active financing income. this legislation did not have a material impact on our effective tax rate for the year ended december2015, and we do not expect it will have a material impact on our effective
tax rate for 2016.  new york state enacted executive budget legislation for the 2015-2016 fiscal year which makes changes to the income
taxation of corporations doing business in new york city. this change did not have a material impact on our effective tax rate for 2015, and we do not expect this legislation will have a material impact on our effective tax rate for 2016.
in november2015, the united kingdom government enacted a budget which contained several changes that impact our subsidiaries operating in
the u.k., including: (i)an 8 percentage point surcharge on banking profits effective in 2016, (ii)a 1 percentage point reduction in corporate income tax rates effective in 2017, (iii)a further 1 percentage point reduction in
corporate tax rates effective in 2020, and (iv)a phased-in reduction from 2016 through 2021 in the u.k. bank levy rate (for which the related expense is included in our non-compensation expenses). during the fourth quarter of 2015, we
recognized a benefit related to the revaluation of deferred income tax assets. beginning in 2016, the new legislation will increase our effective income tax rate and the impact will depend on the level and mix of our earnings.
segment operating results
the table below presents the net revenues, operating expenses and pre-tax earnings of our segments.
year ended december
$ inmillions
investment banking
net revenues
$7,027
$6,464
$6,004
operating expenses
3,713
3,688
3,479
pre-tax earnings
$3,314
$2,776
$2,525
institutional client
services
net revenues
$15,151
$15,197
$15,721
operating expenses1
13,938
10,880
11,792
pre-tax earnings
$1,213
$4,317
$3,929
investing&
lending
net revenues
$5,436
$6,825
$7,018
operating expenses
2,402
2,819
2,686
pre-tax earnings
$3,034
$4,006
$4,332
investment management
net revenues
$6,206
$6,042
$5,463
operating expenses
4,841
4,647
4,357
pre-tax earnings
$1,365
$1,395
$1,106
total net revenues
$33,820
$34,528
$34,206
total operating expenses2
25,042
22,171
22,469
total pre-tax earnings
$8,778
$12,357
$11,737
1.
includes provisions of $3.37billion recorded during 2015 for the agreement in principle with the rmbs working group. see note 27 to the consolidated
financial statements for further information about this agreement in principle.
2.
includes charitable contributions that have not been allocated to our segments of $148million for 2015, $137million for 2014 and $155million
for 2013.  net revenues in our segments include allocations of interest income and interest expense to specific
securities, commodities and other positions in relation to the cash generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying positions. see note25 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our business segments.
the cost drivers of goldman sachs taken as a whole compensation, headcount and levels of business activity are
broadly similar in each of our business segments. compensation and benefits expenses within our segments reflect, among other factors, the overall performance of goldman sachs as well as the performance of individual businesses. consequently,
pre-tax margins in one segment of our business may be significantly affected by the performance of our other business segments. a description of segment operating results follows.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
investment banking
our investment banking segment is comprised of:
financial advisory. includes strategic advisory
assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense activities, restructurings, spin-offs, risk management and derivative transactions directly related to these client advisory assignments.
underwriting. includes public offerings and private
placements, including local and cross-border transactions and acquisition financing, of a wide range of securities, loans and other financial instruments, and derivative transactions directly related to these client underwriting activities.
the table below presents the operating results of our investment banking segment.
year ended december
$ inmillions
financial advisory
$3,470
$2,474
$1,978
equity underwriting
1,546
1,750
1,659
debt underwriting
2,011
2,240
2,367
total underwriting
3,557
3,990
4,026
total net revenues
7,027
6,464
6,004
operating expenses
3,713
3,688
3,479
pre-tax earnings
$3,314
$2,776
$2,525
the table below presents our financial advisory and underwriting transaction volumes.1
year ended december
$ inbillions
announced mergers and acquisitions
$1,774
$973
$602
completed mergers and acquisitions
1,090
equity and equity-related offerings2
debt offerings3
1.
source: thomson reuters. announced and completed mergers and acquisitions volumes are based on full credit to each of the advisors in a transaction. equity
and equity-related offerings and debt offerings are based on full credit for single book managers and equal credit for joint book managers. transaction volumes may not be indicative of net revenues in a given period. in addition, transaction volumes
for prior periods may vary from amounts previously reported due to the subsequent withdrawal or a change in the value of a transaction.
2.
includes rule144a and public common stock offerings, convertible offerings and rights offerings.
3.
includes non-convertible preferred stock, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and taxable municipal debt. includes publicly registered and
rule144a issues. excludes leveraged loans.
2015 versus 2014. net revenues in investment banking were $7.03billion for 2015, 9% higher than 2014.  net
revenues in financial advisory were $3.47billion, 40% higher than 2014, reflecting strong client activity, particularly in the united states. industry-wide completed mergers and acquisitions increased significantly compared with the prior
year. net revenues in underwriting were $3.56billion, 11% lower compared with a strong 2014. net revenues in debt underwriting were lower compared with 2014, reflecting significantly lower leveraged finance activity. net revenues in equity
underwriting were also lower, reflecting significantly lower net revenues from initial public offerings and convertible offerings, partially offset by significantly higher net revenues from secondary offerings.
during 2015, investment banking operated in an environment characterized by strong industry-wide mergers and acquisitions activity.
industry-wide activity in both debt and equity underwriting declined compared with 2014. in the future, if client activity levels in mergers and acquisitions decline, or client activity levels in underwriting continue to decline, net revenues in
investment banking would likely be negatively impacted.  operating expenses were $3.71billion for 2015, essentially unchanged
compared with 2014. pre-tax earnings were $3.31billion in 2015,19% higher than 2014.  as of december2015, our investment
banking transaction backlog was higher compared with the end of 2014, primarily due to significantly higher estimated net revenues from potential debt underwriting transactions, principally related to leveraged finance transactions, and higher
estimated net revenues from potential advisory transactions, reflecting the continued high level of mergers and acquisitions activity. estimated net revenues from potential equity underwriting transactions were slightly higher compared with the end
of 2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
our investment banking transaction backlog represents an estimate of our future net revenues
from investment banking transactions where we believe that future revenue realization is more likely than not. we believe changes in our investment banking transaction backlog may be a useful indicator of client activity levels which, over the long
term, impact our net revenues. however, the time frame for completion and corresponding revenue recognition of transactions in our backlog varies based on the nature of the assignment, as certain transactions may remain in our backlog for longer
periods of time and others may enter and leave within the same reporting period. in addition, our transaction backlog is subject to certain limitations, such as assumptions about the likelihood that individual client transactions will occur in the
future. transactions may be cancelled or modified, and transactions not included in the estimate may also occur.  2014 versus 2013. net revenues in investment banking were $6.46billion for 2014, 8% higher than 2013.
net revenues in financial advisory were $2.47billion, 25% higher than 2013, reflecting an increase in industry-wide completed mergers and
acquisitions, primarily in the united states. net revenues in underwriting were $3.99billion, essentially unchanged compared with a strong 2013, as industry-wide activity levels remained high. net revenues in debt underwriting were slightly
lower compared with 2013, reflecting lower net revenues from commercial mortgage-related activity, while net revenues in equity underwriting were slightly higher, principally from initial public offerings.
during 2014, investment banking operated in an environment generally characterized by strong industry-wide underwriting activity in both equity
and debt, and an increase in industry-wide completed mergers and acquisitions activity compared with 2013. industry-wide announced mergers and acquisitions activity significantly increased compared with 2013.
operating expenses were $3.69billion for 2014, 6% higher than 2013, primarily due to increased compensation and benefits expenses,
reflecting higher net revenues. pre-tax earnings were $2.78billion in 2014, 10% higher than 2013.
as of december2014, our investment banking transaction backlog was significantly higher
compared with the end of 2013, due to a significant increase in estimated net revenues from potential advisory transactions. estimated net revenues from potential underwriting transactions were lower compared with the end of 2013, as a significant
decrease in estimated net revenues from potential equity underwriting transactions, particularly in initial public offerings, was partially offset by an increase in estimated net revenues from potential debt underwriting transactions, reflecting
increases across most products.  institutional client services
our institutional client services segment is comprised of:
fixed income, currency and commodities client
execution. includes client execution activities related to making markets in interest rate products, credit products, mortgages, currencies and commodities.
interest rate products. government bonds, money market instruments, treasury bills, repurchase
agreements and other highly liquid securities and instruments, as well as interest rate swaps, options and other derivatives.
credit products. investment-grade corporate securities, high-yield securities, credit derivatives,
bank and bridge loans, municipal securities, emerging market and distressed debt, and trade claims.
mortgages. commercial mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives, residential
mortgage-related securities, loans and derivatives (including u.s. government agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations, other prime, subprime and alt-a securities and loans), and other asset-backed securities, loans and derivatives.
currencies. most currencies, including growth-market currencies.
commodities. crude oil and petroleum products, natural gas, base, precious and other metals,
electricity, coal, agricultural and other commodity products.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
equities. includes client execution activities related
to making markets in equity products and commissions and fees from executing and clearing institutional client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide, as well as otc transactions. equities also includes our securities
services business, which provides financing, securities lending and other prime brokerage services to institutional clients, including hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds and foundations, and generates revenues primarily in the form of interest
rate spreads or fees.  the table below presents the operating results of our institutional client services segment.
year ended december
$ inmillions
fixed income, currency and commodities client execution
$7,322
$8,461
$8,651
equities client execution1
3,028
2,079
2,594
commissions and fees
3,156
3,153
3,103
securities services
1,645
1,504
1,373
total equities
7,829
6,736
7,070
total net revenues
15,151
15,197
15,721
operating expenses
13,938
10,880
11,792
pre-tax earnings
$1,213
$4,317
$3,929
1.
net revenues related to the americas reinsurance business were $317million for 2013. in april2013, we completed the sale of a majority stake in
our americas reinsurance business and no longer consolidate this business.  2015
versus 2014. net revenues in institutional client services were $15.15billion for 2015, essentially unchanged compared with 2014.
net revenues in fixed income, currency and commodities client execution were $7.32billion for 2015, 13% lower than 2014. excluding a gain
of $168million in 2014 related to the extinguishment of certain of our junior subordinated debt, net revenues in fixed income, currency and commodities client execution were 12% lower than 2014, reflecting significantly lower net revenues in
mortgages, credit products and commodities. the decreases in mortgages and credit products reflected challenging market-making conditions and generally low levels of activity during 2015. the decline in commodities primarily reflected less favorable
market-making conditions compared with 2014, which included a strong first quarter of 2014. these decreases were partially offset by significantly higher net revenues in interest rate products and currencies, reflecting higher volatility levels
which contributed to higher client activity levels, particularly during the first quarter of 2015.
net revenues in equities were $7.83billion for 2015, 16% higher than 2014. excluding a
gain of $121million ($30million and $91million included in equities client execution and securities services, respectively) in 2014 related to the extinguishment of certain of our junior subordinated debt, net revenues in equities
were 18% higher than 2014, primarily due to significantly higher net revenues in equities client execution across the major regions, reflecting significantly higher results in both derivatives and cash products, and higher net revenues in securities
services, reflecting the impact of higher average customer balances and improved securities lending spreads. commissions and fees were essentially unchanged compared with 2014.
the firm elects the fair value option for certain unsecured borrowings. the fair value net gain attributable to the impact of changes in our
credit spreads on these borrowings was $255million ($214million and $41million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution, respectively) for 2015, compared with a net gain of
$144million ($108million and $36million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution, respectively) for 2014.
during 2015, the operating environment for institutional client services was positively impacted by diverging central bank monetary policies in
the united states and the euro area in the first quarter, as increased volatility levels contributed to strong client activity levels in currencies, interest rate products and equity products, and market-making conditions improved. however, during
the remainder of the year, concerns about global growth and uncertainty about the u.s. federal reserves interest rate policy, along with lower global equity prices, widening high-yield credit spreads and declining commodity prices, contributed
to lower levels of client activity, particularly in mortgages and credit, and more difficult market-making conditions. if macroeconomic concerns continue over the long term and activity levels decline, net revenues in institutional client services
would likely be negatively impacted.  operating expenses were $13.94billion for 2015, 28% higher than 2014, due to significantly
higher net provisions for mortgage-related litigation and regulatory matters, partially offset by decreased compensation and benefits expenses. pre-tax earnings were $1.21billion in 2015, 72% lower than 2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
2014 versus 2013. net revenues in institutional client services were $15.20billion for 2014, 3% lower than 2013. results for 2014 included a gain of $289million ($270million of which was recorded at
extinguishment in the third quarter) related to the extinguishment of certain of our junior subordinated debt, of which $168million was included in fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and $121million in equities
($30million and $91million included in equities client execution and securities services, respectively).  net revenues
in fixed income, currency and commodities client execution were $8.46billion for 2014, 2% lower than 2013. excluding the gain related to the extinguishment of debt in 2014 and a gain of $211million on the sale of a majority stake in our
european insurance business in 2013, net revenues in fixed income, currency and commodities client execution were slightly lower compared with 2013. this decline reflected significantly lower net revenues in credit products and slightly lower net
revenues in both interest rate products and mortgages. the decrease in credit products primarily reflected difficult market-making conditions, particularly during the second half of 2014, and generally low levels of activity. these results were
largely offset by significantly higher net revenues in commodities and higher net revenues in currencies. the increase in commodities reflected more favorable market-making conditions in certain energy products, primarily during the first quarter of
2014. the increase in currencies reflected a stronger performance towards the end of 2014, as activity levels improved and volatility was higher.
net revenues in equities were $6.74billion for 2014, 5% lower than 2013. excluding the gain related to the extinguishment of debt in 2014
and net revenues of $317million related to the sale of a majority stake in our americas reinsurance business in 2013, net revenues in equities were slightly lower compared with 2013. this decline reflected lower net revenues in derivatives,
partially offset by slightly higher commissions and fees and slightly higher net revenues in securities services. the increase in securities services net revenues reflected the impact of higher average customer balances. the increase in commissions
and fees was due to higher commissions and fees in both europe and the united states, reflecting generally higher client activity, consistent with increases in listed cash equity market volumes in these regions.
the firm elects the fair value option for certain unsecured borrowings. the fair value net gain
attributable to the impact of changes in our credit spreads on these borrowings was $144million ($108million and $36million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution,
respectively) for 2014, compared with a net loss of $296million ($220million and $76million related to fixed income, currency and commodities client execution and equities client execution, respectively) for 2013.
during 2014, institutional client services continued to operate in a challenging environment, as economic uncertainty contributed to subdued
risk appetite for our clients and generally low levels of activity, particularly in credit products, interest rate products and mortgages. in addition, volatility levels remained low, although volatility increased in certain businesses towards the
end of the year. debt markets were also impacted by the widening of high-yield credit spreads and the decline in oil prices during the second half of the year, which contributed to low liquidity, particularly in credit. equity markets, however,
generally increased during the year.  operating expenses were $10.88billion for 2014, 8% lower than 2013, due to decreased
compensation and benefits expenses, reflecting lower net revenues, lower net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings, and lower expenses as a result of the sale of a majority stake in our americas reinsurance business. pre-tax earnings
were $4.32billion in 2014, 10% higher than 2013.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
investing& lending
investing& lending includes our investing activities and the origination of loans to
provide financing to clients. these investments and loans are typically longer-term in nature. we make investments, some of which are consolidated, directly and indirectly through funds and separate accounts that we manage, in debt securities and
loans, public and private equity securities, and real estate entities.  the table below presents the operating results of our
investing& lending segment.
year ended december
$ inmillions
equity securities
$3,781
$4,579
$4,974
debt securities and loans
1,655
2,246
2,044
total net revenues1
5,436
6,825
7,018
operating expenses
2,402
2,819
2,686
pre-tax earnings
$3,034
$4,006
$4,332
1.
net revenues related to our consolidated investments, previously reported in other net revenues within investing& lending, are now reported in
equity securities and debt securities and loans, as results from these activities ($391million for 2015) are no longer significant principally due to the sale of metro in the fourth quarter of 2014. reclassifications have been made to
previously reported amounts to conform to the current presentation.  2015 versus
2014. net revenues in investing& lending were $5.44billion for 2015,20% lower than 2014. this decrease was primarily due to lower net revenues from investments in equities,
principally reflecting the sale of metro in the fourth quarter of 2014 and lower net gains from investments in private equities, driven by corporate performance. in addition, net revenues in debt securities and loans were significantly lower,
reflecting lower net gains from investments.  although net revenues in investing& lending for 2015 benefited from
favorable company-specific events, including sales, initial public offerings and financings, a decline in global equity prices and widening high-yield credit spreads during the second half of the year impacted results. concern about the outlook for
the global economy continues to be a meaningful consideration for the global marketplace. if equity markets continue to decline or credit spreads widen further, net revenues in investing& lending would likely continue to be negatively
impacted.
operating expenses were $2.40billion for 2015, 15% lower than 2014, due to lower
depreciation and amortization expenses, primarily reflecting lower impairment charges related to consolidated investments, and a reduction in expenses related to the sale of metro in the fourth quarter of 2014. pre-tax earnings were
$3.03billion in 2015, 24% lower than 2014.  2014 versus 2013. net revenues in investing& lending were $6.83billion for 2014, 3% lower than 2013. net revenues from investments in equity securities were lower due to a significant decrease in net gains from
investments in public equities, as movements in global equity prices during 2014 were less favorable compared with 2013, as well as significantly lower net revenues related to our consolidated investments, reflecting a decrease in operating revenues
from commodities-related consolidated investments. these decreases were partially offset by an increase in net gains from investments in private equities, primarily driven by company-specific events. net revenues from debt securities and loans were
higher than 2013, reflecting a significant increase in net interest income, primarily driven by increased lending, and a slight increase in net gains, primarily due to sales of certain investments during 2014.
during 2014, net revenues in investing& lending generally reflected favorable company-specific events, including initial public
offerings and financings, and strong corporate performance, as well as net gains from sales of certain investments.  operating expenses
were $2.82billion for 2014, 5% higher than 2013, reflecting higher compensation and benefits expenses, partially offset by lower expenses related to consolidated investments. pre-tax earnings were $4.01billion in 2014, 8% lower than
2013.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
investment management
investment management provides investment management services and offers investment products
(primarily through separately managed accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a diverse set of institutional and individual clients. investment management also offers
wealth advisory services, including portfolio management and financial counseling, and brokerage and other transaction services to high-net-worth individuals and families.
assets under supervision include assets under management and other client assets. assets under management include client assets where we earn a
fee for managing assets on a discretionary basis. this includes net assets in our mutual funds, hedge funds, credit funds and private equity funds (including real estate funds), and separately managed accounts for institutional and individual
investors. other client assets include client assets invested with third-party managers, bank deposits and advisory relationships where we earn a fee for advisory and other services, but do not have investment discretion. assets under supervision do
not include the self-directed brokerage assets of our clients. long-term assets under supervision represent assets under supervision excluding liquidity products. liquidity products represent money market and bank deposit assets.
assets under supervision typically generate fees as a percentage of net asset value, which vary by asset class and are affected by investment
performance as well as asset inflows and redemptions. asset classes such as alternative investment and equity assets typically generate higher fees relative to fixed income and liquidity product assets. the average effective management fee (which
excludes non-asset-based fees) we earned on our assets under supervision was 39 basis points for 2015 and 40 basis points for both 2014 and 2013.
in certain circumstances, we are also entitled to receive incentive fees based on a percentage of a funds or a separately managed
accounts return, or when the return exceeds a specified benchmark or other performance target. incentive fees are recognized only when all material contingencies are resolved.
the table below presents the operating results of our investment management segment.
year ended december
$ inmillions
management and other fees
$4,887
$4,800
$4,386
incentive fees
transaction revenues
total net revenues
6,206
6,042
5,463
operating expenses
4,841
4,647
4,357
pre-tax earnings
$1,365
$1,395
$1,106
the tables below present our period-end assets under supervision (aus) by asset class and by distribution
channel.
as of december
$ inbillions
assets under management
$1,078
$1,027
$919
other client assets
total aus
$1,252
$1,178
$1,042
asset class
alternative investments1
$148
$143
$142
equity
fixed income
long-term aus
liquidity products
total aus
$1,252
$1,178
$1,042
distribution channel
institutional
$471
$412
$363
high-net-worth individuals
third-party distributed
total aus
$1,252
$1,178
$1,042
1.
primarily includes hedge funds, credit funds, private equity, real estate, currencies, commodities and asset allocation strategies.
the table below presents our average monthly assets under supervision by asset class.
average for the
year ended december
$ inbillions
alternative investments
$145
$145
$145
equity
fixed income
long-term aus
liquidity products
total aus
$1,194
$1,117
$985
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the table below presents a summary of the changes in our assets under supervision.
year ended december
$ inbillions
balance, beginning of year
$1,178
$1,042
$965
net inflows/(outflows)
alternative investments
(13
)
equity
fixed income
long-term aus net inflows/(outflows)
liquidity products
(4
)
total aus net inflows/(outflows)
net market appreciation/(depreciation)
(20
)
balance, end of year
$1,252
$1,178
$1,042
1.
includes $18billion of fixed income, equity and alternative investments asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of pacific global
advisors solutions business.
2.
includes $19billion of fixed income asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of deutsche asset& wealth managements stable value
business and $6billion of liquidity products inflows in connection with our acquisition of rbs asset managements money market funds.
3.
includes $10billion in assets managed by the firm related to our americas reinsurance business, in which a majority stake was sold in april2013,
that were previously excluded from assets under supervision as they were assets of a consolidated subsidiary.  2015 versus 2014. net revenues in investment management were $6.21billion for 2015, 3% higher than 2014, due to slightly higher management and other fees,
primarily reflecting higher average assets under supervision, and higher transaction revenues. during 2015, total assets under supervision increased $74billion to $1.25trillion. long-term assets under supervision increased
$51billion, including net inflows of $71billion (which includes $18billion of asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of pacific global advisors solutions business), and net market depreciation of $20billion,
both primarily in fixed income and equity assets. in addition, liquidity products increased $23billion.  during 2015,
investment management operated in an environment generally characterized by strong client net inflows, which more than offset the declines in equity and fixed income asset prices, which resulted in depreciation in the value of client assets,
particularly in the third quarter of 2015. the mix of average assets under supervision shifted slightly from long-term assets under supervision to liquidity products compared with 2014. in the future, if asset prices continue to decline, or
investors continue to favor asset classes that typically generate lower fees or investors withdraw their assets, net revenues in investment management would likely be negatively impacted.
operating expenses were $4.84billion for 2015, 4% higher than 2014, due to increased
compensation and benefits expenses, reflecting higher net revenues. pre-tax earnings were $1.37billion in 2015, 2% lower than 2014.  2014 versus 2013. net revenues in investment management were $6.04billion for 2014, 11% higher than 2013, reflecting higher management and other fees, primarily
due to higher average assets under supervision, as well as higher incentive fees and transaction revenues. during 2014, total assets under supervision increased $136billion to $1.18trillion. long-term assets under supervision increased
$99billion, including net inflows of $74billion (including $19billion of fixed income asset inflows in connection with our acquisition of deutsche asset& wealth managements stable value business) and net market
appreciation of $25billion, both primarily in fixed income and equity assets. in addition, liquidity products increased $37billion (including $6billion of inflows in connection with our acquisition of rbs asset managements
money market funds).  during 2014, investment management operated in an environment generally characterized by improved asset
prices, primarily in equity and fixed income assets, resulting in appreciation in the value of client assets. in addition, the mix of average assets under supervision shifted slightly from liquidity products to long-term assets under supervision,
due to growth in fixed income and equity assets, compared with 2013.  operating expenses were $4.65billion for 2014, 7% higher than
2013, primarily due to increased compensation and benefits expenses, reflecting higher net revenues, and higher fund distribution fees. pre-tax earnings were $1.40billion in 2014, 26% higher than 2013.
geographic data  see note25 to the
consolidated financial statements for a summary of our total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings by geographic region.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
balance sheet and funding sources
balance sheet management
one of our most important risk management disciplines is our ability to manage the size and
composition of our balance sheet. while our asset base changes due to client activity, market fluctuations and business opportunities, the size and composition of our balance sheet reflect (i)our overall risk tolerance, (ii)our ability
to access stable funding sources and (iii)the amount of equity capital we hold. see equity capital management and regulatory capital equity capital management for information about our equity capital management process.
although our balance sheet fluctuates on a day-to-day basis, our total assets at quarter-end and year-end dates are generally not
materially different from those occurring within our reporting periods.  in order to ensure appropriate risk management, we seek to
maintain a liquid balance sheet and have processes in place to dynamically manage our assets and liabilities which include (i)quarterly planning, (ii)business-specific limits, (iii)monitoring of key metrics and (iv)scenario
analyses.  quarterly planning. we prepare a
quarterly balance sheet plan that combines our projected total assets and composition of assets with our expected funding sources for the upcoming quarter. the objectives of this quarterly planning process are:
to develop our near-term balance sheet projections, taking into account the general state of the financial markets and expected business activity
levels, as well as current regulatory requirements;
to determine the target amount, tenor and type of funding to raise, based on our projected assets and forecasted maturities; and
to allow business risk managers and managers from our independent control and support functions to objectively evaluate balance sheet limit
requests from business managers in the context of the firms overall balance sheet constraints, including the firms liability profile and equity capital levels, and key metrics. limits are typically set at levels that will be periodically
exceeded, rather than at levels which reflect our maximum risk appetite.
to prepare our quarterly balance sheet plan, business risk managers and managers from our
independent control and support functions meet with business managers to review current and prior period information and discuss expectations for the upcoming quarter. the specific information reviewed includes asset and liability size and
composition, aged inventory, limit utilization, risk and performance measures, and capital usage.  our consolidated quarterly plan,
including our balance sheet plans by business, funding projections, and projected key metrics, is reviewed and approved by the firmwide finance committee. see overview and structure of risk management for an overview of our risk
management structure.  business-specific limits.
the firmwide finance committee sets asset and liability limits for each business and aged inventory limits for certain financial instruments as a disincentive to hold inventory over longer periods of time. these limits are set at levels which are
close to actual operating levels in order to ensure prompt escalation and discussion among business managers and managers in our independent control and support functions on a routine basis. the firmwide finance committee reviews and approves
balance sheet limits on a quarterly basis and may also approve changes in limits on an ad hoc basis in response to changing business needs or market conditions. requests for changes in limits are evaluated after giving consideration to their impact
on key firm metrics. compliance with limits is monitored on a daily basis by business risk managers, as well as managers in our independent control and support functions.
monitoring of key metrics. we monitor key balance sheet
metrics daily both by business and on a consolidated basis, including asset and liability size and composition, aged inventory, limit utilization and risk measures. we allocate assets to businesses and review and analyze movements resulting from new
business activity as well as market fluctuations.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
scenario analyses. we conduct various scenario analyses including as part of the comprehensive capital analysis and review (ccar) and dodd-frank act stress tests (dfast), as well as our resolution and recovery planning. see
equity capital management and regulatory capital equity capital management below for further information. these scenarios cover short-term and long-term time horizons using various macroeconomic and firm-specific assumptions,
based on a range of economic scenarios. we use these analyses to assist us in developing our longer-term balance sheet management strategy, including the level and composition of assets, funding and equity capital. additionally, these analyses help
us develop approaches for maintaining appropriate funding, liquidity and capital across a variety of situations, including a severely stressed environment.
balance sheet allocation  in addition to preparing
our consolidated statements of financial condition in accordance with u.s. gaap, we prepare a balance sheet that generally allocates assets to our businesses, which is a non-gaap presentation and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap
presentations used by other companies. we believe that presenting our assets on this basis is meaningful because it is consistent with the way management views and manages risks associated with the firms assets and better enables investors to
assess the liquidity of the firms assets.  the table below presents our balance sheet allocation.
as of december
$ inmillions
global core liquid assets (gcla)
$199,120
$182,947
other cash
9,180
7,805
gcla and cash
208,300
190,752
secured client financing
221,325
210,641
inventory
208,836
230,667
secured financing agreements
63,495
74,767
receivables
39,976
47,317
institutional client services
312,307
352,751
public equity
3,991
4,041
private equity
16,985
17,979
debt1
23,216
24,768
loans receivable2
45,407
28,938
other
4,646
3,771
investing& lending
94,245
79,497
total inventory and related assets
406,552
432,248
other assets
25,218
22,201
total assets
$861,395
$855,842
1.
includes $17.29billion and $18.24billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, of direct loans primarily extended to
corporate and private wealth management clients that are accounted for at fair value.
2.
see note9 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about loans receivable.
the following is a description of the captions in the table above:
global core liquid assets and cash. we maintain liquidity to meet a broad range of potential cash
outflows and collateral needs in a stressed environment. see liquidity risk management below for details on the composition and sizing of our global core liquid assets (gcla). in addition to our gcla, we maintain other
operating cash balances, primarily for use in specific currencies, entities, or jurisdictions where we do not have immediate access to parent company liquidity.
secured client financing. we provide collateralized financing for client positions, including margin
loans secured by client collateral, securities borrowed, and resale agreements primarily collateralized by government obligations. as a result of client activities, we are required to segregate cash and securities to satisfy regulatory requirements.
our secured client financing arrangements, which are generally short-term, are accounted for at fair value or at amounts that approximate fair value, and include daily margin requirements to mitigate counterparty credit risk.
institutional client services. in institutional client services, we maintain inventory positions to
facilitate market making in fixed income, equity, currency and commodity products. additionally, as part of market-making activities, we enter into resale or securities borrowing arrangements to obtain securities which we can use to cover
transactions in which we or our clients have sold securities that have not yet been purchased. the receivables in institutional client services primarily relate to securities transactions.
investing& lending. in investing& lending, we make investments and originate
loans to provide financing to clients. these investments and loans are typically longer-term in nature. we make investments, directly and indirectly through funds and separate accounts that we manage, in debt securities, loans, public and private
equity securities, real estate entities and other investments.
other assets. other assets are generally less liquid, non-financial assets, including property,
leasehold improvements and equipment, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, income tax-related receivables, equity-method investments, assets classified as held for sale and miscellaneous receivables.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the tables below present the reconciliation of this balance sheet allocation to our u.s. gaap
balance sheet. in the tables below:
total assets for institutional client services and investing& lending represent inventory and related assets. these amounts differ from
total assets by business segment disclosed in note25 to the consolidated financial statements because total assets disclosed in note25 include allocations of our gcla and cash, secured client financing and other assets.
see balance sheet analysis and metrics for explanations on the changes in our balance sheet from december2014 to
december2015.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
gclaand cash
securedclientfinancing
institutionalclientservices
investing&lending
otherassets
totalassets
cashandcashequivalents
$75,105
$
$
$
$
$75,105
cashand securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
56,838
56,838
securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds sold
60,092
42,786
16,368
1,659
120,905
securities borrowed
33,260
91,712
47,127
172,099
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
5,912
19,541
25,453
receivables from customers and counterparties
24,077
20,435
1,918
46,430
loans receivable
45,407
45,407
financial instruments owned, at fair value
39,843
208,836
45,261
293,940
other assets
25,218
25,218
total assets
$208,300
$221,325
$312,307
$94,245
$25,218
$861,395
as of december2014
$ inmillions
gcla and cash
securedclientfinancing
institutionalclientservices
investing&lending
otherassets
totalassets
cashandcashequivalents
$57,600
$
$
$
$
$57,600
cashand securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
51,716
51,716
securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds sold
66,928
34,506
24,940
1,564
127,938
securities borrowed
32,311
78,584
49,827
160,722
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
8,908
21,656
30,671
receivables from customers and counterparties
36,927
25,661
1,220
63,808
loans receivable
28,938
28,938
financial instruments owned, at fair value
33,913
230,667
47,668
312,248
other assets
22,201
22,201
total assets
$190,752
$210,641
$352,751
$79,497
$22,201
$855,842
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
balance sheet analysis and metrics
as of december2015, total assets on our consolidated statements of financial condition
were $861.40billion, an increase of $5.55billion from december2014, reflecting increases in cash and cash equivalents of $17.51billion, loans receivable of $16.47billion and securities borrowed of $11.38billion,
partially offset by decreases in financial instruments owned, at fair value of $18.31billion, and receivables from customers and counterparties of $17.38billion. during 2015, cash and cash equivalents increased primarily due to an
increase in gcla, loans receivable increased, reflecting lending activity, and securities borrowed increased due to firm-related activity. financial instruments owned, at fair value decreased primarily reflecting the impact of movements in interest
rate and currency markets on derivative valuations and the impact of lower market-making activity related to non-u.s. government and agency obligations and corporate debt securities, partially offset by the impact of higher market-making activity
related to equities and convertible debentures. receivables from customers and counterparties decreased primarily due to lower client activity.
as of december2015, total liabilities on our consolidated statements of financial condition were $774.67billion, an increase of
$1.62billion from december2014, reflecting increases in deposits of $14.64billion and unsecured long-term borrowings of $8.12billion, partially offset by a decrease in financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at
fair value of $16.84billion. during 2015, deposits increased primarily in goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank usa) and unsecured long-term borrowings increased due to net new issuances. financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair
value decreased primarily reflecting the impact of movements in interest rate and currency markets on derivative valuations.  as of
december2015, our total securities sold under agreements to repurchase, accounted for as collateralized financings, were $86.07billion, which was 3% higher than the daily average amount of repurchase agreements during both the quarter
ended and year ended december2015. the increase in our repurchase agreements relative to the daily average during 2015 resulted from an increase in firm financing and client activity at the end of the year.
as of december2014, our total securities sold under agreements to repurchase, accounted
for as collateralized financings, were $88.22billion, which was 3% lower and 26% lower than the daily average amount of repurchase agreements during the quarter ended and year ended december2014, respectively. the decrease in our
repurchase agreements relative to the daily average during 2014 resulted from a decrease in client and firm financing activity during the second half of the year, including a reduction in our matched book, primarily resulting from a firmwide
initiative to reduce activities with lower returns.  the level of our repurchase agreements fluctuates between and within periods,
primarily due to providing clients with access to highly liquid collateral, such as u.s. government and federal agency, and investment-grade sovereign obligations through collateralized financing activities.
the table below presents information about our assets, unsecured long-term borrowings, shareholders equity and leverage ratios.
as of december
$ inmillions
total assets
$861,395
$855,842
unsecured long-term borrowings
$175,422
$167,302
total shareholders equity
$86,728
$82,797
leverage ratio
9.9x
10.3x
debt to equity ratio
2.0x
2.0x
in the table above:
the leverage ratio equals total assets divided by total shareholders equity and measures the proportion of equity and debt the firm is using
to finance assets. this ratio is different from the tier1 leverage ratio included in note20 to the consolidated financial statements.
the debt to equity ratio equals unsecured long-term borrowings divided by total shareholders equity.
the table below presents information about our shareholders equity and book value per common share, including the reconciliation of total
shareholders equity to tangible common shareholders equity.
as of december
$ inmillions, except per share amounts
total shareholders equity
$86,728
$82,797
less: preferred stock
(11,200
)
(9,200
)
common shareholders equity
75,528
73,597
less:goodwillandidentifiableintangibleassets
(4,148
)
(4,160
)
tangible common shareholders equity
$71,380
$69,437
book value per common share
$171.03
$163.01
tangible book value per common share
161.64
153.79
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
in the table above:
tangible common shareholders equity equals total shareholders equity less preferred stock, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
we believe that tangible common shareholders equity is meaningful because it is a measure that we and investors use to assess capital adequacy. tangible common shareholders equity is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to
similar non-gaap measures used by other companies.
book value per common share and tangible book value per common share are based on common shares outstanding, including restricted stock units
(rsus) granted to employees with no future service requirements, of 441.6million and 451.5million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. we believe that tangible book value per common share (tangible common
shareholders equity divided by common shares outstanding, including rsus granted to employees with no future service requirements) is meaningful because it is a measure that we and investors use to assess capital adequacy. tangible book value
per common share is a non-gaap measure and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other companies.  funding sources
our primary sources of funding are secured financings, unsecured long-term and short-term borrowings, and deposits. we seek to maintain broad
and diversified funding sources globally across products, programs, markets, currencies and creditors to avoid funding concentrations.  we
raise funding through a number of different products, including:
collateralized financings, such as repurchase agreements, securities loaned and other secured financings;
long-term unsecured debt (including structured notes) through syndicated u.s. registered offerings, u.s. registered and rule144a medium-term
note programs, offshore medium-term note offerings and other debt offerings;
savings and demand deposits through deposit sweep programs and time deposits through internal and third-party broker-dealers; and
short-term unsecured debt at the subsidiary level through u.s. and non-u.s. hybrid financial instruments, commercial paper and promissory note
issuances and other methods.
our funding is primarily raised in u.s. dollar, euro, british pound and japanese yen. we
generally distribute our funding products through our own sales force and third-party distributors to a large, diverse creditor base in a variety of markets in the americas, europe and asia. we believe that our relationships with our creditors are
critical to our liquidity. our creditors include banks, governments, securities lenders, pension funds, insurance companies, mutual funds and individuals. we have imposed various internal guidelines to monitor creditor concentration across our
funding programs.  secured funding. we fund a
significant amount of inventory on a secured basis. secured funding is less sensitive to changes in our credit quality than unsecured funding, due to our posting of collateral to our lenders. nonetheless, we continually analyze the refinancing risk
of our secured funding activities, taking into account trade tenors, maturity profiles, counterparty concentrations, collateral eligibility and counterparty rollover probabilities. we seek to mitigate our refinancing risk by executing term trades
with staggered maturities, diversifying counterparties, raising excess secured funding, and pre-funding residual risk through our gcla.
we seek to raise secured funding with a term appropriate for the liquidity of the assets that are being financed, and we seek longer maturities
for secured funding collateralized by asset classes that may be harder to fund on a secured basis especially during times of market stress. substantially all of our secured funding, excluding funding collateralized by liquid government obligations,
is executed for tenors of one month or greater. assets that may be harder to fund on a secured basis during times of market stress include certain financial instruments in the following categories: mortgage and other asset-backed loans and
securities, non-investment-grade corporate debt securities, equities and convertible debentures and emerging market securities. assets that are classified as level3 in the fair value hierarchy are generally funded on an unsecured basis. see
notes5 and 6 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about the classification of financial instruments in the fair value hierarchy and unsecured long-term borrowings below for further information about the
use of unsecured long-term borrowings as a source of funding.  the weighted average maturity of our secured funding, excluding funding
collateralized by highly liquid securities eligible for inclusion in our gcla, exceeded 120days as of december2015.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
a majority of our secured funding for securities not eligible for inclusion in the gcla is
executed through term repurchase agreements and securities loaned contracts. we also raise financing through other types of collateralized financings, such as secured loans and notes. gs bank usa has access to funding from the federal home loan bank
(fhlb). as of december2015, our outstanding borrowings against the fhlb were $2.92billion.  gs bank usa also has access to
funding through the federal reserve bank discount window. while we do not rely on this funding in our liquidity planning and stress testing, we maintain policies and procedures necessary to access this funding and test discount window borrowing
procedures.  unsecured long-term borrowings. we
issue unsecured long-term borrowings as a source of funding for inventory and other assets and to finance a portion of our gcla. we issue in different tenors, currencies and products to maximize the diversification of our investor base.
the table below presents our quarterly unsecured long-term borrowings maturity profile as of december2015.
unsecured long-term borrowings maturity profile
$ inmillions
firstquarter
secondquarter
thirdquarter
fourthquarter
total
$12,618
$3,403
$7,305
$2,036
$25,362
8,114
8,258
5,243
3,516
25,131
6,318
2,243
6,811
16,035
4,290
7,368
5,455
17,955
2021-thereafter
90,939
total
$175,422
the weighted average maturity of our unsecured long-term borrowings as of december2015 was approximately
nine years. to mitigate refinancing risk, we seek to limit the principal amount of debt maturing on any one day or during any week or year. we enter into interest rate swaps to convert a majority of the amount of our unsecured long-term borrowings
into floating-rate obligations in order to manage our exposure to interest rates. see note16 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our unsecured long-term borrowings.
deposits.
we raise deposits mainly through gs bank usa and goldman sachs international bank (gsib). the tables below present the types and sources of our deposits.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
savingsanddemand
time
total
private bank deposits3
$38,715
$2,354
$41,069
certificates of deposit
34,375
34,375
deposit sweep programs4
15,791
15,791
institutional
6,283
6,284
total5
$54,507
$43,012
$97,519
as of december2014
$ inmillions
savingsanddemand
time
total
private bank deposits3
$33,590
$1,609
$35,199
certificates of deposit
25,780
25,780
deposit sweep programs4
15,691
15,691
institutional
6,198
6,210
total5
$49,293
$33,587
$82,880
1.
represents deposits with no stated maturity.
2.
weighted average maturity of approximately three years as of both december2015 and december2014.
3.
substantially all were from overnight deposit sweep programs related to private wealth management clients.
4.
represents long-term contractual agreements with several u.s. broker-dealers who sweep client cash to fdic-insured deposits.
5.
deposits insured by the fdic as of december2015 and december2014 were approximately $55.48billion and $45.72billion, respectively.
in august2015, gs bank usa entered into an agreement, subject to regulatory approval, to acquire ge capital
banks online deposit platform and to assume approximately $16billion of deposits, consisting of approximately $8billion in online deposit accounts and approximately $8billion in brokered certificates of deposit.
unsecured short-term borrowings. a significant portion
of our unsecured short-term borrowings was originally long-term debt that is scheduled to mature within one year of the reporting date. we use unsecured short-term borrowings to finance liquid assets and for other cash management purposes. we issue
hybrid financial instruments, commercial paper and promissory notes. in light of regulatory developments, since the third quarter of 2015, group inc. has not issued debt with an original maturity of less than one year and currently does not expect
to issue short-term debt in the future.  as of december2015 and december2014, our unsecured short-term borrowings,
including the current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings, were $42.79billion and $44.54billion, respectively. see note15 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our unsecured short-term
borrowings.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
equity capital management and regulatory capital
capital adequacy is of critical importance to us. we have in place a comprehensive capital
management policy that provides a framework, defines objectives and establishes guidelines to assist us in maintaining the appropriate level and composition of capital in both business-as-usual and stressed conditions.
equity capital management  we determine the
appropriate level and composition of our equity capital by considering multiple factors including our current and future consolidated regulatory capital requirements, the results of our capital planning and stress testing process and other factors
such as rating agency guidelines, subsidiary capital requirements, the business environment and conditions in the financial markets. we manage our capital requirements and the levels of our capital usage principally by setting limits on balance
sheet assets and/or limits on risk, in each case at both the consolidated and business levels.  we principally manage the level and
composition of our equity capital through issuances and repurchases of our common stock. we may also, from time to time, issue or repurchase our preferred stock, junior subordinated debt issued to trusts, and other subordinated debt or other forms
of capital as business conditions warrant. prior to any repurchases, we must receive confirmation that the board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal reserve board) does not object to such capital actions. see notes16 and 19 to
the consolidated financial statements for further information about our preferred stock, junior subordinated debt issued to trusts and other subordinated debt.
capital planning and stress testing process. as part of
capital planning, we project sources and uses of capital given a range of business environments, including stressed conditions. our stress testing process is designed to identify and measure material risks associated with our business activities
including market risk, credit risk and operational risk, as well as our ability to generate revenues.
the following is a description of our capital planning and stress testing process:
capital planning. our capital planning process incorporates an internal capital adequacy assessment
with the objective of ensuring that we are appropriately capitalized relative to the risks in our business. we incorporate stress scenarios into our capital planning process with a goal of holding sufficient capital to ensure we remain adequately
capitalized after experiencing a severe stress event. our assessment of capital adequacy is viewed in tandem with our assessment of liquidity adequacy and is integrated into our overall risk management structure, governance and policy framework.
our capital planning process also includes an internal risk-based capital assessment. this assessment incorporates market risk, credit risk and operational
risk. market risk is calculated by using value-at-risk (var) calculations supplemented by risk-based add-ons which include risks related to rare events (tail risks). credit risk utilizes assumptions about our counterparties probability of
default and the size of our losses in the event of a default. operational risk is calculated based on scenarios incorporating multiple types of operational failures as well as incorporating internal and external actual loss experience. backtesting
is used to gauge the effectiveness of models at capturing and measuring relevant risks.
stress testing. our stress tests incorporate our internally designed stress scenarios, including our
internally developed severely adverse scenario, and those required under ccar and dfast, and are designed to capture our specific vulnerabilities and risks. we provide additional information about our stress test processes and a summary of the
results on our web site as described under business available information in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
as required by the federal reserve boards annual ccar rules, we submit a capital plan for
review by the federal reserve board. the purpose of the federal reserve boards review is to ensure that we have a robust, forward-looking capital planning process that accounts for our unique risks and that permits continued operation during
times of economic and financial stress.  the federal reserve board evaluates us based, in part, on whether we have the capital necessary to
continue operating under the baseline and stress scenarios provided by the federal reserve board and those developed internally. this evaluation also takes into account our process for identifying risk, our controls and governance for capital
planning, and our guidelines for making capital planning decisions. in addition, the federal reserve board evaluates our plan to make capital distributions (i.e., dividend payments and repurchases or redemptions of stock, subordinated debt or other
capital securities) and issue capital, across a range of macroeconomic scenarios and firm-specific assumptions.  in addition, the dfast
rules require us to conduct stress tests on a semi-annual basis and publish a summary of certain results. the federal reserve board also conducts its own annual stress tests and publishes a summary of certain results.
we submitted our initial 2015 ccar to the federal reserve board in january2015 and, based on the federal reserve board feedback, we
submitted revised capital actions in march2015. the federal reserve board informed us that it did not object to our revised capital actions, including the repurchase of outstanding common stock, an increase in our quarterly common stock
dividend and the possible issuance, redemption and modification of other capital securities from the second quarter of 2015 through the second quarter of 2016. we published a summary of our annual dfast results in march2015. see
business available information in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k.  in july2015, we
submitted the results of our semi-annual dfast to the federal reserve board and published a summary of our internally developed severely adverse scenario results. see business available information in parti, item1
of the 2015 form10-k.  in accordance with the federal reserve board requirements, we plan to submit our 2016 ccar in april2016.
in addition, the rules adopted by the federal reserve board under the dodd-frank act require gs
bank usa to conduct stress tests on an annual basis and publish a summary of certain results. gs bank usa submitted its 2015 annual dfast stress results to the federal reserve board in january2015 and published a summary of its results in
march2015. see business available information in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k.
goldman sachs international (gsi) also has its own capital planning and stress testing process, which incorporates internally designed stress
tests and those required under the prudential regulation authoritys (pra) internal capital adequacy assessment process.  contingency capital plan. as part of our comprehensive capital management policy, we maintain a contingency capital plan. our contingency capital plan provides a
framework for analyzing and responding to a perceived or actual capital deficiency, including, but not limited to, identification of drivers of a capital deficiency, as well as mitigants and potential actions. it outlines the appropriate
communication procedures to follow during a crisis period, including internal dissemination of information as well as timely communication with external stakeholders.
capital attribution. we assess each of our
businesses capital usage based upon our internal assessment of risks, which incorporates an attribution of all of our relevant regulatory capital requirements. these regulatory capital requirements are allocated using our attributed equity
framework, which takes into consideration our binding capital constraints. we also attribute risk-weighted assets (rwas) to our business segments. as of december2015, approximately two-thirds of rwas calculated in accordance with the
standardized capital rules and the baseliii advanced rules, subject to transitional provisions, were attributed to our institutional client services segment and substantially all of the remaining rwas were attributed to our
investing& lending segment. we manage the levels of our capital usage based upon balance sheet and risk limits, as well as capital return analyses of our businesses based on our capital attribution.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
share repurchase program. we use our share repurchase program to help maintain the appropriate level of common equity. the repurchase program is effected primarily through regular open-market purchases (which may include repurchase plans
designed to comply with rule10b5-1), the amounts and timing of which are determined primarily by our current and projected capital position and our capital plan submitted to the federal reserve board as part of ccar. the amounts and timing of
the repurchases may also be influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of our common stock.
on october14,2015, the board of directors of group inc. (board) authorized the repurchase of an additional 60.0million shares
of common stock pursuant to our existing share repurchase program. as of december2015, the remaining share authorization under our existing repurchase program was 63.2million shares; however, we are only permitted to make repurchases to
the extent that such repurchases have not been objected to by the federal reserve board. see market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities in partii, item5
of the 2015 form10-k and note19 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information about our share repurchase program and see above for information about our capital planning and
stress testing process.  resolution and recovery plans
we are required by the federal reserve board and the fdic to submit an annual plan that describes our strategy for a rapid and orderly
resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure (resolution plan). we are also required by the federal reserve board to submit and have submitted, on an annual basis, a global recovery plan that outlines the steps that management
could take to reduce risk, maintain sufficient liquidity, and conserve capital in times of prolonged stress. in august2014, the federal reserve board and the fdic indicated that we and other large industry participants had certain shortcomings
in the 2013 resolution plans that must be addressed in the 2015 resolution plans. we submitted our 2015 resolution plan on june30,2015. see risk factors in part1, item1a of the 2015 form10-k for information
about the potential consequences to us if we failed to address the identified shortcomings in our 2015 resolution plan.  in addition, gs
bank usa is required by the fdic to submit a resolution plan. as required, gs bank usas 2015 resolution plan was submitted on september1,2015.
rating agency guidelines
the credit rating agencies assign credit ratings to the obligations of group inc., which directly issues or guarantees substantially all of the
firms senior unsecured obligations. goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.) and gsi have been assigned long- and short-term issuer ratings by certain credit rating agencies. gs bank usa and gsib have also been assigned long- and short-term
issuer ratings, as well as ratings on their long-term and short-term bank deposits. in addition, credit rating agencies have assigned ratings to debt obligations of certain other subsidiaries of group inc.
the level and composition of our equity capital are among the many factors considered in determining our credit ratings. each agency has its
own definition of eligible capital and methodology for evaluating capital adequacy, and assessments are generally based on a combination of factors rather than a single calculation. see liquidity risk management credit
ratings for further information about credit ratings of group inc., gs bank usa, gsib, gs&co. and gsi.  consolidated regulatory capital
we are subject to the federal reserve boards revised risk-based capital and leverage regulations, subject to certain transitional
provisions (revised capital framework). these regulations are largely based on the basel committee on banking supervisions (basel committee) final capital framework for strengthening international capital standards (baseliii) and also
implement certain provisions of the dodd-frank act. under the revised capital framework, we are an advanced approach banking organization.
as of december2015, we calculated our common equity tier1 (cet1), tier1 capital and total capital ratios in accordance with
(i)the standardized approach and market risk rules set out in the revised capital framework (together, the standardized capital rules) and (ii)the advanced approach and market risk rules set out in the revised capital framework
(together, the baseliii advanced rules) as described in note20 to the consolidated financial statements. the lower of each ratio calculated in (i)and (ii)is the ratio against which our compliance with minimum ratio
requirements is assessed. each of the ratios calculated in accordance with the baseliii advanced rules was lower than that calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules and therefore the baseliii advanced ratios were the
ratios that applied to us as of december2015.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
as of december2014, we calculated our cet1, tier1 capital and total capital ratios
using the revised capital framework for regulatory capital, but rwas were calculated in accordance with (i)the baseli capital accord of the basel committee, incorporating the market risk requirements set out in the revised capital
framework, and adjusted for certain items related to capital deductions and for the phase-in of capital deductions (hybrid capital rules), and (ii)the baseliii advanced rules. the lower of each ratio calculated in (i)and
(ii)was the ratio against which our compliance with minimum ratio requirements was assessed. each of the ratios calculated in accordance with the baseliii advanced rules was lower than that calculated in accordance with the hybrid
capital rules and therefore the baseliii advanced ratios were the ratios that applied to us as of december2014.  see
note20 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our capital ratios as of december2015 and december2014, and for additional information about the revised capital framework.
minimum capital ratios and capital buffers  the
table below presents our minimum required ratios as of december2015, as well as the minimum ratios that we expect will apply at the end of the transitional provisions beginning january2019.
december2015minimumratio
january2019 minimumratio
cet1 ratio
4.5%
10.0%
tier1 capital ratio
6.0%
11.5%
total capital ratio
8.0%
13.5%
tier1 leverage ratio2
4.0%
4.0%
1.
does not reflect the capital conservation buffer or global systemically important banks (g-sibs) surcharge described below.
2.
tier1 leverage ratio is defined as tier1 capital divided by quarterly average adjusted total assets (which includes adjustments for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, and certain investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions).
3.
in order to meet the quantitative requirements for being well-capitalized under the federal reserve boards regulations, we must meet a
higher required minimum total capital ratio of 10.0%.
4.
includes the capital conservation buffer of 2.5% and a preliminary g-sib surcharge of 3.0% estimated by the federal reserve board under the methodology
described below.  under the revised capital framework, the minimum cet1, tier1 capital, and total capital ratios
will be supplemented by a capital conservation buffer, consisting entirely of capital that qualifies as cet1, that phases in beginning on january1,2016, in increments of 0.625%per year until it reaches 2.5% of rwas on
january1,2019.
in july2015, the federal reserve board approved a final rule establishing a capital
surcharge for u.s. g-sibs (generally higher than that required by the basel committee) to be implemented as an extension of the u.s. capital conservation buffer. this surcharge will be phased-in ratably, beginning in 2016, becoming fully effective
on january1,2019, and must consist entirely of capital that qualifies as cet1. the surcharge must be calculated using two methodologies, the higher of which will be reflected in our minimum risk-based capital ratios. the first
calculation is based upon the basel committees methodology which, among other factors, relies upon measures of the size, activity and complexity of each g-sib (method one). the second calculation uses similar inputs, but it includes a measure
of each firms reliance on short-term wholesale funding (method two). the federal reserve board has indicated that its preliminary estimate of our g-sib surcharge is 3.0%, based on the method two calculation using financial data as of
december2014. the surcharge becomes applicable to us beginning in 2016 on a phased-in basis, and will be updated annually based on financial data as of the end of the prior year. we currently estimate that, based on information as of
december2015, we are at or near the threshold for a lower g-sib surcharge. however, the surcharge in the future may differ from the estimate above due to additional guidance from our regulators and/or positional changes.
the revised capital framework also provides a counter-cyclical capital buffer of up to 2.5% (and also consisting entirely of cet1) in order to
counteract excessive credit growth. the federal reserve board has not finalized all of the regulations with respect to this buffer and the table above does not reflect this buffer.
our regulators could change these buffers in the future. as a result, the minimum ratios we are subject to as of january1,2019
could be higher than the amounts presented in the table above.  our minimum required supplementary leverage ratio will be 5.0% on
january1,2018. see supplementary leverage ratio below for further information.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
fully phased-in capital ratios
the table below presents our capital ratios calculated in accordance with the standardized
capital rules and the baseliii advanced rules on a fully phased-in basis.
as of december
$ inmillions
common shareholders equity
$75,528
$73,597
deductions for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, net of deferred tax liabilities
(3,044
)
(3,196
)
deductions for investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions
(2,274
)
(4,928
)
other adjustments
(1,409
)
(1,213
)
total common equity tier1
68,801
64,260
perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock
11,200
9,200
deduction for investments in covered funds
(413
)
other adjustments
(128
)
(286
)
tier1 capital
$79,460
$73,174
standardized tier2 and total
capital
tier1 capital
$79,460
$73,174
qualifying subordinated debt
15,132
11,894
allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments
other adjustments
(19
)
(9
)
standardized tier2 capital
15,715
12,201
standardized total capital
$95,175
$85,375
baseliii advanced tier2 and
total capital
tier1 capital
$79,460
$73,174
standardized tier2 capital
15,715
12,201
allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments
(602
)
(316
)
baseliii advanced tier2 capital
15,113
11,885
baseliii advanced total capital
$94,573
$85,059
rwas
standardized
$534,135
$627,444
baseliii advanced
587,319
577,869
cet1 ratio
standardized
12.9%
10.2%
baseliii advanced
11.7%
11.1%
tier1 capital ratio
standardized
14.9%
11.7%
baseliii advanced
13.5%
12.7%
total capital ratio
standardized
17.8%
13.6%
baseliii advanced
16.1%
14.7%
although the fully phased-in capital ratios are not applicable until 2019, we believe that the ratios in the
table above are meaningful because they are measures that we, our regulators and investors use to assess our ability to meet future regulatory capital requirements. the fully phased-in baseliii advanced and standardized capital ratios are
non-gaap measures as of both december2015 and december2014 and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other companies as of those dates. these ratios are based on our current interpretation, expectations and
understanding of the revised capital framework and may evolve as we discuss its interpretation and application with our regulators.
in the table above:
the deductions for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, include goodwill of $3.66billion and
$3.65billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, and identifiable intangible assets of $491million and $515million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, net of associated deferred
tax liabilities of $1.10billion and $964million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively.
the deductions for investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions represent the amount by which our investments in the capital of
nonconsolidated financial institutions exceed certain prescribed thresholds. the decrease from december2014 to december2015 primarily reflects reductions in our fund investments.
the deduction for investments in covered funds represents our aggregate investments in applicable covered funds, as permitted by the volcker rule,
that were purchased after december2013. substantially all of these investments in covered funds were purchased in connection with our market-making activities. this deduction became effective in july2015 and is not subject to a
transition period. see regulatory developments below for further information about the volcker rule.
other adjustments within cet1 and tier1 capital primarily include the overfunded portion of our defined benefit pension plan obligation net
of associated deferred tax liabilities, disallowed deferred tax assets, credit valuation adjustments on derivative liabilities, debt valuation adjustments and other required credit risk-based deductions.
qualifying subordinated debt represents subordinated debt issued by group inc. with an original term to maturity of five years or greater. the
outstanding amount of subordinated debt qualifying for tier2 capital is reduced upon reaching a remaining maturity of five years. see note16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information about our subordinated debt.
see note20 to the consolidated financial statements for information about our transitional capital ratios, which
represent the ratios that are applicable to us as of december2015 and december2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
supplementary leverage ratio
the revised capital framework includes a supplementary leverage ratio requirement for advanced approach banking organizations. under amendments
to the revised capital framework, the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies approved a final rule that implements the supplementary leverage ratio aligned with the definition of leverage established by the basel committee. the supplementary leverage
ratio compares tier1 capital to a measure of leverage exposure, defined as total daily average assets for the quarter less certain deductions plus certain off-balance-sheet exposures, including a measure of derivatives exposures and
commitments. the revised capital framework requires a minimum supplementary leverage ratio of 5.0% (comprised of the minimum requirement of 3.0% and a 2.0% buffer) for u.s. bank holding companies deemed to be g-sibs, effective on
january1,2018.  as of december2015 and december2014, our supplementary leverage ratio was 5.9% and 5.0%,
respectively, based on tier1 capital on a fully phased-in basis of $79.46billion and $73.17billion, respectively, divided by total leverage exposure of $1.34trillion (total daily average assets for the quarter of
$878billion plus adjustments of $465billion) and $1.45trillion (total daily average assets for the quarter of $873billion plus adjustments of $579billion), respectively. within total leverage exposure, the adjustments
to quarterly average assets in both periods were primarily comprised of off-balance-sheet exposures related to derivatives, secured financing transactions, commitments and guarantees.
the supplementary leverage ratio was not a required regulatory disclosure as of december2014. therefore, it was a non-gaap measure as of
december2014 and may not be comparable to similar non-gaap measures used by other companies as of that date.  this supplementary
leverage ratio is based on our current interpretation and understanding of the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies final rule and may evolve as we discuss its interpretation and application with our regulators.
subsidiary capital requirements  many of our
subsidiaries, including gs bank usa and our broker-dealer subsidiaries, are subject to separate regulation and capital requirements of the jurisdictions in which they operate.
gs bank usa. gs bank usa is subject to regulatory capital requirements that are calculated in substantially the same manner as those applicable to bank holding companies and calculates its capital ratios in accordance with
the risk-based capital and leverage requirements applicable to state member banks, which are based on the revised capital framework. see note20 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about the revised capital
framework as it relates to gs bank usa, including gs bank usas capital ratios and required minimum ratios.  in addition, under
federal reserve board rules, commencing on january1,2018, in order to be considered a well-capitalized depository institution, gs bank usa must have a supplementary leverage ratio of 6.0% or greater. the supplementary
leverage ratio compares tier1 capital to a measure of leverage exposure, defined as total daily average assets for the quarter less certain deductions plus certain off-balance-sheet exposures, including a measure of derivatives exposures and
commitments. as of december2015, gs bank usas supplementary leverage ratio was 7.1%, based on tier1 capital on a fully phased-in basis of $23.02billion, divided by total leverage exposure of $324billion (total daily
average assets for the quarter of $134billion plus adjustments of $190billion). as of december2014, gs bank usa would also have met the well-capitalized minimum. this supplementary leverage ratio is based on our current
interpretation and understanding of this rule and may evolve as we discuss their interpretation and application with our regulators.  gsi. our regulated u.k. broker-dealer, gsi, is one of our principal non-u.s. regulated subsidiaries and is regulated by the pra and the financial conduct authority.
gsi is subject to the revised capital framework for european union (eu)-regulated financial institutions (the fourth eu capital requirements directive and eu capital requirements regulation, collectively known as crd iv). these capital
regulations are largely based on baseliii.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the table below presents gsis minimum required ratios as of december2015, as well as
the minimum required ratios that became effective in january2016.
december2015minimumratio
january2016minimumratio
cet1 ratio
6.1%
6.6%
tier1 capital ratio
8.2%
8.5%
total capital ratio
10.9%
11.2%
the minimum ratios in the table above incorporate capital guidance received from the pra and could change in
the future. gsis future capital requirements may also be impacted by developments such as the introduction of capital buffers as described above in minimum capital ratios and capital buffers.
as of december2015, gsi had a cet1 ratio of 12.9%, a tier1 capital ratio of 12.9% and a total capital ratio of 17.6%. each of these
ratios includes approximately 70bps attributable to unaudited results for the year ended december2015. these ratios will be finalized upon the completion of the 2015 gsi audit. as of december2014, gsi had a cet1 ratio of 9.7%, a
tier1 capital ratio of 9.7% and a total capital ratio of 12.7%. the ratios for both december2015 and december2014 reflect the applicable transitional provisions.
crd iv, as amended by the european commission delegated act (the delegated act), introduced a new leverage ratio, which compares crd ivs
definition of tier1 capital to a measure of leverage exposure, defined as the sum of assets less tier1 capital deductions plus certain off-balance-sheet exposures, includinga measure of derivatives exposures, securities financing
transactions and commitments. the delegated act does not currently include a minimum leverage ratio requirement; however, the basel committee has proposed a minimum requirement of 3%. any required minimum ratio is expected to become effective for
gsi on january1,2018. as of december2015, gsi had a leverage ratio of 3.6%. this leverage ratio is based on our current interpretation and understanding of this rule and may evolve as we discuss its interpretation and application
with gsis regulators.  other subsidiaries. we
expect that the capital requirements of several of our subsidiaries are likely to increase in the future due to the various developments arising from the basel committee, the dodd-frank act, and other governmental entities and regulators. see
note20 to the consolidated financial statements for information about the capital requirements of our other regulated subsidiaries.
subsidiaries not subject to separate regulatory capital requirements may hold capital to satisfy
local tax and legal guidelines, rating agency requirements (for entities with assigned credit ratings) or internal policies, including policies concerning the minimum amount of capital a subsidiary should hold based on its underlying level of risk.
in certain instances, group inc. may be limited in its ability to access capital held at certain subsidiaries as a result of regulatory, tax or other constraints. as of december2015 and december2014, group inc.s equity investment
in subsidiaries was $85.52billion and $79.70billion, respectively, compared with its total shareholders equity of $86.73billion and $82.80billion, respectively.
our capital invested in non-u.s. subsidiaries is generally exposed to foreign exchange risk, substantially all of which is managed through a
combination of derivatives and non-u.s. denominated debt. see note7 to the consolidated financial statements for information about our net investment hedges, which are used to hedge this risk.
guarantees of subsidiaries. group inc. has guaranteed
the payment obligations of gs&co., gs bank usa, and goldman sachs execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec), in each case subject to certain exceptions. in november2008, group inc. contributed subsidiaries into gs bank usa, and group inc.
agreed to guarantee certain losses, including credit-related losses, relating to assets held by the contributed entities.
regulatory developments
our businesses are subject to significant and evolving regulation. the dodd-frank act, enacted in july2010, significantly altered the
financial regulatory regime within which we operate. in addition, other reforms have been adopted or are being considered by regulators and policy makers worldwide. we expect that the principal areas of impact from regulatory reform for us will be
increased regulatory capital requirements and increased regulation and restriction on certain activities. however, given that many of the new and proposed rules are highly complex, the full impact of regulatory reform will not be known until the
rules are implemented and market practices develop under the final regulations.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
there has been increased regulation of, and limitations on, our activities, including the
dodd-frank act prohibition on proprietary trading and the limitation on the sponsorship of, and investment in, covered funds (as defined in the volcker rule). in addition, there is increased regulation of, and restrictions
on, otc derivatives markets and transactions, particularly related to swaps and security-based swaps.  see business
regulation in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k for more information about the laws, rules and regulations and proposed laws, rules and regulations that apply to us and our operations. in addition, see note20 to the
consolidated financial statements for information about regulatory developments as they relate to our regulatory capital and leverage ratios.  volcker rule
the provisions of the dodd-frank act referred to as the volcker rule, became effective in july2015 (subject to a
conformance period, as applicable). the volcker rule prohibits proprietary trading, but permits activities such as underwriting, market making and risk-mitigation hedging, requires an extensive compliance program and includes additional
reporting and record keeping requirements. the initial implementation of these rules did not have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. however, the rule is highly complex, and its impact may change as
market practices further develop.  in addition to the prohibition on proprietary trading, the volcker rule limits the sponsorship of, and
investment in, covered funds by banking entities, including group inc. and its subsidiaries. it also limits certain types of transactions between us and our sponsored funds, similar to the limitations on transactions between depository institutions
and their affiliates as described in business regulation in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k. covered funds include our private equity funds, certain of our credit and real estate funds, our hedge funds and
certain other investment structures. the limitation on investments in covered funds requires us to reduce our investment in each such fund to 3% or less of the funds net asset value, and to reduce our aggregate investment in all such funds to
3% or less of our tier1 capital.  beginning in july2015, our investments in applicable covered funds purchased after
december2013 are required to be deducted from tier1 capital. see fully phased-in capital ratios above for further information about our tier1 capital and the deduction for investments in covered funds.
we continue to manage our existing interests in such funds, taking into account the conformance
period under the volcker rule. we plan to continue to conduct our investing and lending activities in ways that are permissible under the volcker rule.
our current investment in funds that are measured at nav is $7.76billion. in order to be compliant with the volcker rule, we will be
required to reduce most of our interests in these funds by the end of the conformance period. see note6 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our investment in funds measured at nav and the conformance period
for covered funds.  although our net revenues from our interests in private equity, credit, real estate and hedge funds may vary from
period to period, our aggregate net revenues from these investments were approximately 3% and 5% of our aggregate total net revenues over the last 10years and 5years, respectively.
total loss-absorbing capacity  in october2015,
the federal reserve board issued a proposed rule which would establish a new total loss-absorbing capacity (tlac) requirement for u.s. bank holding companies designated as g-sibs. the tlac proposal has been
designed so that, in the event of a g-sibs failure, there will be sufficient external loss-absorbing capacity available in order for authorities to implement an orderly resolution of the g-sib. the proposal would require g-sibs to maintain an
amount of regulatory capital and eligible long-term debt (i.e., debt that is unsecured, has a maturity greater than one year from issuance and satisfies certain additional criteria) to cover a percentage of rwas and/or leverage exposure (the
denominator in the supplementary leverage ratio).  under the proposed rule, eligible long-term debt would exclude, among other instruments,
debt securities that permit acceleration for reasons other than insolvency or payment default, as well as structured notes, as defined in the tlac proposal, and debt securities not governed by u.s. law. the senior long-term debt of u.s. g-sibs, including group inc., typically permits acceleration for reasons other than insolvency or payment default, and therefore would not qualify as eligible long-term debt under the proposed rule.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the proposed rule would prohibit group inc., as a u.s.
g-sib, from (i)guaranteeing liabilities of subsidiaries that are subject to early termination provisions under certain conditions, (ii)incurring liabilities guaranteed by subsidiaries,
(iii)issuing short-term debt, or (iv)entering into derivatives and certain other financial contracts with external counterparties. additionally, the proposed rule would cap the amount of certain liabilities of a u.s. g-sib that are not
eligible long-term debt. finally, the proposed rule would require u.s. g-sibs and other large banking entities to deduct from their own tier2 capital certain holdings in unsecured debt of other u.s.
g-sibs, as well as holdings of their own unsecured debt securities.  under the proposal, the tlac
requirements would phase in between 2019 and 2022. we are currently evaluating the impact of the proposed tlac requirements. see business regulation in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k for further
information on the federal reserve boards proposed tlac rule.  other developments
in january2016, the basel committee finalized a revised framework for calculating minimum capital requirements for market risk. the
revisions constitute a fundamental change to the calculation of both model-based and non-model-based components of market risk capital. the basel committee has set an effective date for first reporting under the revised framework of
december31,2019. the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies have not yet proposed rules implementing these revisions for u.s. banking organizations. we are currently evaluating the potential impact of the basel committees revised
framework.  see business regulation in part i, item1 of the 2015
form10-k for further information on regulations that may impact us in the future.
off-balance-sheet arrangements
and contractual obligations  off-balance-sheet arrangements
we have various types of off-balance-sheet arrangements that we enter into in the ordinary course of business. our involvement in these
arrangements can take many different forms, including:
purchasing or retaining residual and other interests in special purpose entities such as mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securitization
vehicles;
holding senior and subordinated debt, interests in limited and general partnerships, and preferred and common stock in other nonconsolidated
vehicles;
entering into interest rate, foreign currency, equity, commodity and credit derivatives, including total return swaps;
entering into operating leases; and
providing guarantees, indemnifications, loan commitments, letters of credit and representations and warranties.
we enter into these arrangements for a variety of business purposes, including securitizations. the securitization vehicles that purchase
mortgages, corporate bonds, and other types of financial assets are critical to the functioning of several significant investor markets, including the mortgage-backed and other asset-backed securities markets, since they offer investors access to
specific cash flows and risks created through the securitization process.  we also enter into these arrangements to underwrite client
securitization transactions; provide secondary market liquidity; make investments in performing and nonperforming debt, equity, real estate and other assets; provide investors with credit-linked and asset-repackaged notes; and receive or provide
letters of credit to satisfy margin requirements and to facilitate the clearance and settlement process.  our financial interests in, and
derivative transactions with, such nonconsolidated entities are generally accounted for at fair value, in the same manner as our other financial instruments, except in cases where we apply the equity method of accounting.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the table below presents where information about our various
off-balance-sheet arrangements may be found in the 2015 form10-k. in addition, see note3 to the consolidated financial statements for information about our
consolidation policies.
type of off-balance-sheet arrangement
disclosure in form10-k
variable interests and other obligations, including contingent obligations, arising from variable interests in nonconsolidated vies
see note12 to the consolidated financial statements.
leases, letters of credit, and lending and other commitments
see contractual obligations below and note18 to the consolidated financial statements.
guarantees
see contractual obligations below and note18 to the consolidated financial statements.
derivatives
see credit risk management credit exposures otc derivatives below and notes4, 5, 7 and
18 to the consolidated financial statements.
contractual obligations
we have certain contractual obligations which require us to make future cash payments. these contractual obligations include our unsecured
long-term borrowings, secured long-term financings, time deposits and contractual interest payments, all of which are included in our consolidated statements of financial condition.
our obligations to make future cash payments also include certain off-balance-sheet contractual obligations such as purchase obligations,
minimum rental payments under noncancelable leases and commitments and guarantees.
the table below presents our contractual obligations, commitments and guarantees by type.
as of december
$ inmillions
amounts related to on-balance-sheet obligations
time deposits
$25,748
$18,719
secured long-term financings
10,520
7,249
unsecured long-term borrowings
175,422
167,302
contractual interest payments
59,327
61,416
subordinated liabilities issued by consolidated vies
amounts related to off-balance-sheet arrangements
commitments to extend credit
117,158
95,949
contingent and forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements
28,874
35,225
forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements
5,878
8,180
letters of credit
investment commitments
6,054
5,164
other commitments
6,944
6,321
minimum rental payments
2,575
2,173
derivative guarantees
926,443
612,735
securities lending indemnifications
31,902
27,567
other financial guarantees
4,461
4,486
the table below presents our contractual obligations, commitments and guarantees by period of expiration.
contractual obligations, commitments and
guarantees amount by period of expiration as of
december2015
$ inmillions
2017 - 2018
2019 - 2020
2021 - thereafter
amounts related to on-balance-sheet obligations
time deposits
$
$10,314
$7,122
$8,312
secured long-term financings
8,465
1,435
unsecured long-term borrowings
50,493
33,990
90,939
contractual interest payments
6,613
11,742
8,381
32,591
subordinatedliabilitiesissued by consolidated vies
amounts related to off-balance-sheet arrangements
commitments to extend credit
28,404
24,956
53,822
9,976
contingent and forward startingresaleandsecurities borrowing agreements
28,839
forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements
5,878
letters of credit
investment commitments
4,600
1,094
other commitments
6,484
minimum rental payments
1,160
derivative guarantees
640,288
168,784
67,643
49,728
securities lending indemnifications
31,902
other financial guarantees
1,402
1,772
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
in the table above:
the 2016 column includes $2.53billion of investment commitments to covered funds (as defined by the volcker rule). we expect that
substantially all of these commitments will not be called.
obligations maturing within one year of our financial statement date or redeemable within one year of our financial statement date at the option of
the holders are excluded as they are treated as short-term obligations.
obligations that are repayable prior to maturity at our option are reflected at their contractual maturity dates and obligations that are
redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holders are reflected at the earliest dates such options become exercisable.
amounts included in the table do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash flow requirements for these arrangements because commitments and
guarantees represent notional amounts and may expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the counterpartys request.
due to the uncertainty of the timing and amounts that will ultimately be paid, our liability for unrecognized tax benefits has been excluded. see
note24 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our unrecognized tax benefits.
unsecured long-term borrowings includes $8.34billion of adjustments to the carrying value of certain unsecured long-term borrowings resulting
from the application of hedge accounting.
the aggregate contractual principal amount of secured long-term financings and unsecured long-term borrowings for which the fair value option was
elected exceeded the related fair value by $362million and $1.12billion, respectively.
contractual interest payments represents estimated future interest payments related to unsecured long-term borrowings, secured long-term financings
and time deposits based on applicable interest rates as of december2015, and includes stated coupons, if any, on structured notes.
see notes15 and 18 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our short-term borrowings and commitments and
guarantees, respectively.
as of december2015, our unsecured long-term borrowings were $175.42billion, with
maturities extending to 2061, and consisted principally of senior borrowings. see note16 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about our unsecured long-term borrowings.
as of december2015, our future minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals under noncancelable leases, were
$2.58billion. these lease commitments for office space expire on various dates through 2069. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges. see note18 to the
consolidated financial statements for further information about our leases.  our occupancy expenses include costs associated with office
space held in excess of our current requirements. this excess space, the cost of which is charged to earnings as incurred, is being held for potential growth or to replace currently occupied space that we may exit in the future. we regularly
evaluate our current and future space capacity in relation to current and projected staffing levels. for 2015, total occupancy expenses for space held in excess of our current requirements and exit costs related to our office space were not
material. we may incur exit costs in the future to the extent we (i)reduce our space capacity or (ii)commit to, or occupy, new properties in the locations in which we operate and, consequently, dispose of existing space that had been
held for potential growth. these exit costs may be material to our results of operations in a given period.  risk management
risks are inherent in our business and include liquidity, market, credit, operational, legal, regulatory and reputational risks. for further
information about our risk management processes, see overview and structure of risk management below. our risks include the risks across our risk categories, regions or global businesses, as well as those which have uncertain
outcomes and have the potential to materially impact our financial results, our liquidity and our reputation. for further information about our areas of risk, see liquidity risk management, market risk
management, credit risk management, operational risk management, model risk management and risk factors in parti, item1a of the 2015
form10-k.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
overview and structure of risk
management  overview
we believe that effective risk management is of primary importance to the success of the firm.
accordingly, we have comprehensive risk management processes through which we monitor, evaluate and manage the risks we assume in conducting our activities. these include market, credit, liquidity, operational, model, legal, regulatory and
reputational risk exposures. our risk management framework is built around three core components: governance, processes and people.  governance. risk management governance starts with our board, which plays an important role in reviewing and approving risk management policies and practices, both
directly and through its committees, including its risk committee. the board also receives regular briefings on firmwide risks, including market risk, liquidity risk, credit risk, operational risk and model risk from our independent control and
support functions, including the chief risk officer, and on matters impacting our reputation from the chair of our firmwide client and business standards committee. the chief risk officer, as part of the review of the firmwide risk portfolio,
regularly advises the risk committee of the board of relevant risk metrics and material exposures. next, at the most senior levels of the firm, our leaders are experienced risk managers, with a sophisticated and detailed understanding of the risks
we take. our senior management, and senior managers in our revenue-producing units and independent control and support functions, lead and participate in risk-oriented committees. independent control and support functions include business selection
and conflicts resolution (conflicts), compliance, controllers, credit risk management and advisory (credit risk management), human capital management, legal, liquidity risk management and analysis (liquidity risk management), market risk management
and analysis (market risk management), model risk management, operations, operational risk management and analysis (operational risk management), tax, technology and treasury.
our governance structure provides the protocol and responsibility for decision-making on risk management issues and ensures implementation of
those decisions. we make extensive use of risk-related committees that meet regularly and serve as an important means to facilitate and foster ongoing discussions to identify, manage and mitigate risks.
we maintain strong communication about risk and we have a culture of collaboration in
decision-making among the revenue-producing units, independent control and support functions, committees and senior management. while we believe that the first line of defense in managing risk rests with the managers in our revenue-producing units,
we dedicate extensive resources to independent control and support functions in order to ensure a strong oversight structure and an appropriate segregation of duties. we regularly reinforce our strong culture of escalation and accountability across
all divisions and functions.  processes. we
maintain various processes and procedures that are critical components of our risk management. first and foremost is our daily discipline of marking substantially all of our inventory to current market levels. goldman sachs carries its inventory at
fair value, with changes in valuation reflected immediately in our risk management systems and in net revenues. we do so because we believe this discipline is one of the most effective tools for assessing and managing risk and that it provides
transparent and realistic insight into our financial exposures.  we also apply a rigorous framework of limits to control risk across
multiple transactions, products, businesses and markets. this includes approval of limits at both firmwide and business levels by the risk committee of the board. in addition, the firmwide risk committee is responsible for approving limits, subject
to the overall limits approved by the risk committee of the board, at a variety of levels and monitoring these limits on a daily basis. divisional risk committees are responsible for setting sub-limits below the overall business-level limits
approved by the firmwide risk committee. limits are typically set at levels that will be periodically exceeded, rather than at levels which reflect our maximum risk appetite. this fosters an ongoing dialogue on risk among revenue-producing units,
independent control and support functions, committees and senior management, as well as rapid escalation of risk-related matters. see liquidity risk management, market risk management and credit risk management
for further information about our risk limits.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
active management of our positions is another important process. proactive mitigation of our
market and credit exposures minimizes the risk that we will be required to take outsized actions during periods of stress.  we also focus
on the rigor and effectiveness of our risk systems. the goal of our risk management technology is to get the right information to the right people at the right time, which requires systems that are comprehensive, reliable and timely. we devote
significant time and resources to our risk management technology to ensure that it consistently provides us with complete, accurate and timely information.
people. even the best technology serves only as a tool
for helping to make informed decisions in real time about the risks we are taking. ultimately, effective risk management requires our people to interpret our risk data on an ongoing and timely basis and adjust risk positions accordingly. in both our
revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions, the experience of our professionals, and their understanding of the nuances and limitations of each risk measure, guide us in assessing exposures and maintaining them within
prudent levels.  we reinforce a culture of effective risk management in our training and development programs as well as the way we
evaluate performance, and recognize and reward our people. our training and development programs, including certain sessions led by our most senior leaders, are focused on the importance of risk management, client relationships and reputational
excellence. as part of our annual performance review process, we assess reputational excellence including how an employee exercises good risk management and reputational judgment, and adheres to our code of conduct and compliance policies. our
review and reward processes are designed to communicate and reinforce to our professionals the link between behavior and how people are recognized, the need to focus on our clients and our reputation, and the need to always act in accordance with
the highest standards of the firm.
structure
ultimate oversight of risk is the responsibility of our board. the board oversees risk both directly and through its committees, including its
risk committee. within the firm, a series of committees with specific risk management mandates have oversight or decision-making responsibilities for risk management activities. committee membership generally consists of senior managers from both
our revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions. we have established procedures for these committees to ensure that appropriate information barriers are in place. our primary risk committees, most of which also have
additional sub-committees or working groups, are described below. in addition to these committees, we have other risk-oriented committees which provide oversight for different businesses, activities, products, regions and legal entities. all of our
firmwide, regional and divisional committees have responsibility for considering the impact of transactions and activities which they oversee on our reputation.
membership of our risk committees is reviewed regularly and updated to reflect changes in the responsibilities of the committee members.
accordingly, the length of time that members serve on the respective committees varies as determined by the committee chairs and based on the responsibilities of the members within the firm.
in addition, independent control and support functions, which report to the chief executive officer, the president and chief operating officer,
the chief financial officer, the chief risk officer and the chief administrative officer, are responsible for day-to-day oversight or monitoring of risk, as illustrated in the chart below and as described in greater detail in the following sections.
internal audit, which reports to the audit committee of the board and includes professionals with a broad range of audit and industry experience, including risk management expertise, is responsible for independently assessing and validating key
controls within the risk management framework.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the chart below presents an overview of our risk management governance structure, highlighting
the
oversight of our board, our key risk-related committees and the independence of our key control and support functions.
management committee. the management committee oversees our global activities, including all of our independent control and support functions. it provides this oversight directly and through authority delegated to committees it has
established. this committee is comprised of our most senior leaders, and is chaired by our chief executive officer. the management committee has established various committees with delegated authority and the chair of the management committee
appoints the chairs of these committees. most members of the management committee are also members of other firmwide, divisional and regional committees. the following are the committees that are principally involved in firmwide risk management.
firmwide client and business standards committee. the firmwide client and business standards committee assesses and makes determinations regarding business standards and practices, reputational risk management, client relationships and client service, is chaired
by our president and chief operating officer, and reports to the management committee. this committee also has responsibility for overseeing recommendations of the business standards committee. this committee periodically updates and receives
guidance from the public responsibilities committee of the board. this committee has also established certain committees that report to it, including divisional client and business standards committees and risk-related committees. the following are
the risk-related committees that report to the firmwide client and business standards committee:
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
firmwide new activity committee. the firmwide new activity committee is responsible for reviewing new
activities and for establishing a process to identify and review previously approved activities that are significant and that have changed in complexity and/or structure or present different reputational and suitability concerns over time to
consider whether these activities remain appropriate. this committee is co-chaired by our global treasurer and the chief administrative officer of our investment management division, who are appointed as co-chairs by the chair of the firmwide client
and business standards committee.
firmwide suitability committee. the firmwide suitability committee is responsible for setting
standards and policies for product, transaction and client suitability and providing a forum for consistency across divisions, regions and products on suitability assessments. this committee also reviews suitability matters escalated from other
committees. this committee is co-chaired by the deputy head of compliance and the co-head of fixed income, currency and commodities sales, who are appointed as co-chairs by the chair of the firmwide client and business standards committee.
firmwide reputational risk committee. the firmwide reputational risk committee is responsible for
assessing reputational risks arising from transactions that have been identified as presenting heightened reputational risk, and other situations where the facts and circumstances warrant escalation. this committee is co-chaired by the head of
compliance and the head of conflicts, who are appointed as co-chairs by the firmwide client and business standards committee.
firmwide risk committee. the firmwide risk committee is globally responsible for the ongoing monitoring and management of our financial risks. through both direct and delegated authority, the firmwide risk committee approves firmwide and
business-level limits for both market and credit risks, approves sovereign credit risk limits, reviews results of stress tests and scenario analyses, and provides oversight over model risk. this committee is co-chaired by our chief financial officer
and our chief risk officer, and reports to the management committee. the following are the primary committees that report to the firmwide risk committee:
credit policy committee. the credit policy committee establishes and reviews broad firmwide credit
policies and parameters that are implemented by credit risk management. this committee is co-chaired by a deputy chief risk officer and the head of credit risk management for our securities division, who are appointed as co-chairs by our chief risk
officer.
firmwide operational risk committee. the firmwide operational risk committee provides oversight of
the ongoing development and implementation of our operational risk policies, framework and methodologies, and monitors the effectiveness of operational risk management. this committee is co-chaired by a managing director in credit risk management
and the head of operational risk management, who are appointed as co-chairs by our chief risk officer.
firmwide finance committee. the firmwide finance committee has oversight responsibility for liquidity
risk, the size and composition of our balance sheet and capital base, and credit ratings. this committee regularly reviews our liquidity, balance sheet, funding position and capitalization, approves related policies, and makes recommendations as to
any adjustments to be made in light of current events, risks, exposures and regulatory requirements. as a part of such oversight, among other things, this committee reviews and approves balance sheet limits and the size of our gcla. this committee
is co-chaired by our chief financial officer and our global treasurer, who are appointed as co-chairs by the firmwide risk committee.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
firmwide technology risk committee. the firmwide technology risk committee reviews matters related to
the design, development, deployment and use of technology. this committee oversees cyber security matters, as well as technology risk management frameworks and methodologies, and monitors their effectiveness. this committee is co-chaired by our
chief information officer and the head of global investment research, who are appointed as co-chairs by the firmwide risk committee.
firmwide investment policy committee. the firmwide investment policy committee reviews, approves,
sets policies, and provides oversight for certain illiquid principal investments, including review of risk management and controls for these types of investments. this committee is co-chaired by the head of our merchant banking division and a
co-head of our securities division, who are appointed as co-chairs by our president and chief operating officer and our chief financial officer.
firmwide model risk control committee. the firmwide model risk control committee is responsible for
oversight of the development and implementation of model risk controls, which includes governance, policies and procedures related to our reliance on financial models. this committee is chaired by a deputy chief risk officer, who is appointed as
chair by the firmwide risk committee.
global business resilience committee. the global business resilience committee is responsible for
oversight of business resilience initiatives, promoting increased levels of security and resilience, and reviewing certain operating risks related to business resilience. this committee is chaired by our chief administrative officer, who is
appointed as chair by the firmwide risk committee.
firmwide volcker oversight committee. the firmwide volcker oversight committee is responsible for the
oversight and periodic review of the implementation of our volcker rule compliance program, as approved by the board, and other volcker rule-related matters. this committee is co-chaired by our chief risk officer and a deputy general counsel, who
are appointed as co-chairs by the firmwide risk committee.
securities division risk committee. the securities division risk committee sets market risk limits,
subject to business-level risk limits approved by the firmwide risk committee, for the securities division based on a number of risk measures, including but not limited to var, stress tests and scenario analyses. this committee is chaired by the
securities divisions chief risk officer, who is appointed as chair by the co-chairs of the firmwide risk committee.
investment banking division risk committee. the investment banking division risk committee is
responsible for the ongoing monitoring and control of financial risks for the investment banking division, including setting risk limits, subject to business-level risk limits approved by the firmwide risk committee, reviewing established risk
limits and monitoring risk exposures. this committee is co-chaired by the co-head of the global financing group in our investment banking division and the head of credit risk management for our investment banking division and our merchant banking
division. the co-chairs of the investment banking division risk committee are appointed by the co-chairs of the firmwide risk committee.
merchant banking division risk committee. the merchant banking division risk committee is responsible
for the ongoing monitoring and control of financial risks for the merchant banking division. this committee is chaired by a managing director in the merchant banking division, who is appointed as chair by the co-chairs of the firmwide risk
committee.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the following committees report jointly to the firmwide risk committee and the firmwide client
and business standards committee:
firmwide commitments committee. the firmwide commitments committee reviews our underwriting and
distribution activities with respect to equity and equity-related product offerings, and sets and maintains policies and procedures designed to ensure that legal, reputational, regulatory and business standards are maintained on a global basis. in
addition to reviewing specific transactions, this committee periodically conducts general strategic reviews of sectors and products and establishes policies in connection with transaction practices. this committee is co-chaired by the co-head of the
financial institutions group in our investment banking division and an advisory director to the firm, who are appointed as co-chairs by the chair of the firmwide client and business standards committee.
firmwide capital committee. the firmwide capital committee provides approval and oversight of
debt-related transactions, including principal commitments of our capital. this committee aims to ensure that business and reputational standards for underwritings and capital commitments are maintained on a global basis. this committee is
co-chaired by the head of credit risk management for our investment banking division and our merchant banking division and the head of credit finance for europe, middle east and africa (emea). the co-chairs of the firmwide capital committee are
appointed by the co-chairs of the firmwide risk committee.  investment management
division risk committee. the investment management division risk committee is responsible for the ongoing monitoring and control of global market, counterparty credit and liquidity risks
associated with the activities of our investment management businesses and reports to our chief risk officer. this committee is chaired by the investment management divisions chief risk officer, who is appointed as chair by our chief risk
officer.
conflicts management
conflicts of interest and our approach to dealing with them are fundamental to our client relationships, our reputation and our long-term
success. the term conflict of interest does not have a universally accepted meaning, and conflicts can arise in many forms within a business or between businesses. the responsibility for identifying potential conflicts, as well as
complying with our policies and procedures, is shared by the entire firm.  we have a multilayered approach to resolving conflicts and
addressing reputational risk. our senior management oversees policies related to conflicts resolution, and, in conjunction with conflicts, legal and compliance, the firmwide client and business standards committee, and other internal committees,
formulates policies, standards and principles, and assists in making judgments regarding the appropriate resolution of particular conflicts. resolving potential conflicts necessarily depends on the facts and circumstances of a particular situation
and the application of experienced and informed judgment.  as a general matter, conflicts reviews all financing and advisory assignments in
investment banking and certain investing, lending and other activities of the firm. in addition, we have various transaction oversight committees, such as the firmwide capital, commitments and suitability committees and other committees across the
firm that also review new underwritings, loans, investments and structured products. these groups and committees work with internal and external counsel and compliance to evaluate and address any actual or potential conflicts.
we regularly assess our policies and procedures that address conflicts of interest in an effort to conduct our business in accordance with the
highest ethical standards and in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
liquidity risk management
overview
liquidity risk is the risk that we will be unable to fund the firm or meet our liquidity needs in the event of firm-specific, broader industry,
or market liquidity stress events. liquidity is of critical importance to us, as most of the failures of financial institutions have occurred in large part due to insufficient liquidity. accordingly, we have in place a comprehensive and conservative
set of liquidity and funding policies. our principal objective is to be able to fund the firm and to enable our core businesses to continue to serve clients and generate revenues, even under adverse circumstances.
treasury has the primary responsibility for assessing, monitoring and managing our liquidity and funding strategy. treasury is independent of
the revenue-producing units and reports to our chief financial officer.  liquidity risk management is an independent risk management
function responsible for control and oversight of the firms liquidity risk management framework, including stress testing and limit governance. liquidity risk management is independent of the revenue-producing units and treasury, and reports
to our chief risk officer.  liquidity risk management principles
we manage liquidity risk according to three principles (i)hold sufficient excess liquidity in the form of global core liquid assets
(gcla) to cover outflows during a stressed period, (ii)maintain appropriate asset-liability management and (iii)maintain a viable contingency funding plan.
global core liquid assets. gcla is liquidity that we
maintain to meet a broad range of potential cash outflows and collateral needs in a stressed environment. our most important liquidity policy is to pre-fund our estimated potential cash and collateral needs during a liquidity crisis and hold this
liquidity in the form of unencumbered, highly liquid securities and cash. we believe that the securities held in our gcla would be readily convertible to cash in a matter of days, through liquidation, by entering into repurchase agreements or from
maturities of resale agreements, and that this cash would allow us to meet immediate obligations without needing to sell other assets or depend on additional funding from credit-sensitive markets.
our gcla reflects the following principles:
the first days or weeks of a liquidity crisis are the most critical to a companys survival;
focus must be maintained on all potential cash and collateral outflows, not just disruptions to financing flows. our businesses are diverse, and
our liquidity needs are determined by many factors, including market movements, collateral requirements and client commitments, all of which can change dramatically in a difficult funding environment;
during a liquidity crisis, credit-sensitive funding, including unsecured debt and some types of secured financing agreements, may be unavailable,
and the terms (e.g., interest rates, collateral provisions and tenor) or availability of other types of secured financing may change; and
as a result of our policy to pre-fund liquidity that we estimate may be needed in a crisis, we hold more unencumbered securities and have larger
debt balances than our businesses would otherwise require. we believe that our liquidity is stronger with greater balances of highly liquid unencumbered securities, even though it increases our total assets and our funding costs.
we maintain our gcla across major broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries, asset types, and clearing agents to provide us
with sufficient operating liquidity to ensure timely settlement in all major markets, even in a difficult funding environment. in addition to the gcla, we maintain cash balances in several of our other entities, primarily for use in specific
currencies, entities, or jurisdictions where we do not have immediate access to parent company liquidity.  we believe that our gcla
provides us with a resilient source of funds that would be available in advance of potential cash and collateral outflows and gives us significant flexibility in managing through a difficult funding environment.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
asset-liability management. our liquidity risk management policies are designed to ensure we have a sufficient amount of financing, even when funding markets experience persistent stress. we manage the maturities and diversity of our
funding across markets, products and counterparties, and seek to maintain a long-dated and diversified funding profile, taking into consideration the characteristics and liquidity profile of our assets.
our approach to asset-liability management includes:
conservatively managing the overall characteristics of our funding book, with a focus on maintaining long-term, diversified sources of funding in
excess of our current requirements. see balance sheet and funding sources funding sources for additional details;
actively managing and monitoring our asset base, with particular focus on the liquidity, holding period and our ability to fund assets on a secured
basis. we assess our funding requirements and our ability to liquidate assets in a stressed environment while appropriately managing risk. this enables us to determine the most appropriate funding products and tenors. see balance sheet and
funding sources balance sheet management for more detail on our balance sheet management process and  funding sources secured funding for more detail on asset classes that may be harder to fund on a
secured basis; and
raising secured and unsecured financing that has a long tenor relative to the liquidity profile of our assets. this reduces the risk that our
liabilities will come due in advance of our ability to generate liquidity from the sale of our assets. because we maintain a highly liquid balance sheet, the holding period of certain of our assets may be materially shorter than their contractual
maturity dates.
our goal is to ensure that we maintain sufficient liquidity to fund our assets and meet our
contractual and contingent obligations in normal times as well as during periods of market stress. through our dynamic balance sheet management process, we use actual and projected asset balances to determine secured and unsecured funding
requirements. funding plans are reviewed and approved by the firmwide finance committee on a quarterly basis. in addition, senior managers in our independent control and support functions regularly analyze, and the firmwide finance committee
reviews, our consolidated total capital position (unsecured long-term borrowings plus total shareholders equity) so that we maintain a level of long-term funding that is sufficient to meet our long-term financing requirements. in a liquidity
crisis, we would first use our gcla in order to avoid reliance on asset sales (other than our gcla). however, we recognize that orderly asset sales may be prudent or necessary in a severe or persistent liquidity crisis.
subsidiary funding policies  the majority of
our unsecured funding is raised by group inc. which lends the necessary funds to its subsidiaries, some of which are regulated, to meet their asset financing, liquidity and capital requirements. in addition, group inc. provides its regulated
subsidiaries with the necessary capital to meet their regulatory requirements. the benefits of this approach to subsidiary funding are enhanced control and greater flexibility to meet the funding requirements of our subsidiaries. funding is also
raised at the subsidiary level through a variety of products, including secured funding, unsecured borrowings and deposits.  our
intercompany funding policies assume that, unless legally provided for, a subsidiarys funds or securities are not freely available to its parent or other subsidiaries. in particular, many of our subsidiaries are subject to laws that authorize
regulatory bodies to block or reduce the flow of funds from those subsidiaries to group inc. regulatory action of that kind could impede access to funds that group inc. needs to make payments on its obligations. accordingly, we assume that the
capital provided to our regulated subsidiaries is not available to group inc. or other subsidiaries and any other financing provided to our regulated subsidiaries is not available until the maturity of such financing.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
group inc. has provided substantial amounts of equity and subordinated indebtedness, directly or
indirectly, to its regulated subsidiaries. for example, as of december2015, group inc. had $28.39billion of equity and subordinated indebtedness invested in gs&co., its principal u.s. registered broker-dealer; $32.88billion
invested in gsi, a regulated u.k. broker-dealer; $2.30billion invested in gsec, a u.s. registered broker-dealer; $2.58billion invested in goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl), a regulated japanese broker-dealer; $25.20billion
invested in gs bank usa, a regulated new york state-chartered bank; and $3.64billion invested in gsib, a regulated u.k. bank. group inc. also provided, directly or indirectly, $91.97billion of unsubordinated loans and $8.81billion
of collateral to these entities, substantially all of which was to gs&co., gsi, gsjcl and gs bank usa, as of december2015. in addition, as of december2015, group inc. had significant amounts of capital invested in and loans to its
other regulated subsidiaries.  contingency funding plan. we maintain a contingency funding plan to provide a framework for analyzing and responding to a liquidity crisis situation or periods of market stress. our contingency funding plan outlines a list of potential
risk factors, key reports and metrics that are reviewed on an ongoing basis to assist in assessing the severity of, and managing through, a liquidity crisis and/or market dislocation. the contingency funding plan also describes in detail our
potential responses if our assessments indicate that we have entered a liquidity crisis, which include pre-funding for what we estimate will be our potential cash and collateral needs as well as utilizing secondary sources of liquidity. mitigants
and action items to address specific risks which may arise are also described and assigned to individuals responsible for execution.
the contingency funding plan identifies key groups of individuals to foster effective coordination, control and distribution of information,
all of which are critical in the management of a crisis or period of market stress. the contingency funding plan also details the responsibilities of these groups and individuals, which include making and disseminating key decisions, coordinating
all contingency activities throughout the duration of the crisis or period of market stress, implementing liquidity maintenance activities and managing internal and external communication.
liquidity stress tests
in order to determine the appropriate size of our gcla, we use an internal liquidity model, referred to as the modeled liquidity outflow, which
captures and quantifies our liquidity risks. we also consider other factors including, but not limited to, an assessment of our potential intraday liquidity needs through an additional internal liquidity model, referred to as the intraday liquidity
model, the results of our long-term stress testing models, applicable regulatory requirements and a qualitative assessment of the condition of the financial markets and the firm. the results of the modeled liquidity outflow, the intraday liquidity
model and the long-term stress testing models are reported to senior management on a regular basis.
modeled liquidity outflow. our modeled liquidity
outflow is based on conducting multiple scenarios that include combinations of market-wide and firm-specific stress. these scenarios are characterized by the following qualitative elements:
severely challenged market environments, including low consumer and corporate confidence, financial and political instability, adverse changes in
market values, including potential declines in equity markets and widening of credit spreads; and
a firm-specific crisis potentially triggered by material losses, reputational damage, litigation, executive departure, and/or a ratings downgrade.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the following are the critical modeling parameters of the modeled liquidity outflow:
liquidity needs over a 30-day scenario;
a two-notch downgrade of our long-term senior unsecured credit ratings;
a combination of contractual outflows, such as upcoming maturities of unsecured debt, and contingent outflows (e.g., actions though not
contractually required, we may deem necessary in a crisis). we assume that most contingent outflows will occur within the initial days and weeks of a crisis;
no issuance of equity or unsecured debt;
no support from additional government funding facilities. although we have access to various central bank funding programs, we do not assume
reliance on additional sources of funding in a liquidity crisis; and
no asset liquidation, other than the gcla.
the potential contractual and contingent cash and collateral outflows covered in our modeled liquidity outflow include:
unsecured funding
contractual: all upcoming maturities of unsecured long-term debt, commercial paper, promissory notes and other unsecured funding products. we
assume that we will be unable to issue new unsecured debt or rollover any maturing debt.
contingent: repurchases of our outstanding long-term debt, commercial paper and hybrid financial instruments in the ordinary course of business as
a market maker.  deposits
contractual: all upcoming maturities of term deposits. we assume that we will be unable to raise new term deposits or rollover any maturing term
deposits.
contingent: withdrawals of bank deposits that have no contractual maturity. the withdrawal assumptions reflect, among other factors, the type of
deposit, whether the deposit is insured or uninsured, and our relationship with the depositor.
secured funding
contractual: a portion of upcoming contractual maturities of secured funding due to either the inability to refinance or the ability to refinance
only at wider haircuts (i.e., on terms which require us to post additional collateral). our assumptions reflect, among other factors, the quality of the underlying collateral, counterparty roll probabilities (our assessment of the
counterpartys likelihood of continuing to provide funding on a secured basis at the maturity of the trade) and counterparty concentration.
contingent: adverse changes in value of financial assets pledged as collateral for financing transactions, which would necessitate additional
collateral postings under those transactions.  otc derivatives
contingent: collateral postings to counterparties due to adverse changes in the value of our otc derivatives, excluding those that are cleared and
settled through central counterparties (otc-cleared).
contingent: other outflows of cash or collateral related to otc derivatives, excluding otc-cleared, including the impact of trade terminations,
collateral substitutions, collateral disputes, loss of rehypothecation rights, collateral calls or termination payments required by a two-notch downgrade in our credit ratings, and collateral that has not been called by counterparties, but is
available to them.  exchange-traded and otc-cleared derivatives
contingent: variation margin postings required due to adverse changes in the value of our outstanding exchange-traded and otc-cleared derivatives.
contingent: an increase in initial margin and guaranty fund requirements by derivative clearing houses.
customer cash and securities
contingent: liquidity outflows associated with our prime brokerage business, including withdrawals of customer credit balances, and a reduction in
customer short positions, which may serve as a funding source for long positions.  firm securities
contingent: liquidity outflows associated with a reduction or composition change in firm short positions, which may serve as a funding source for
long positions.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
unfunded commitments
contingent: draws on our unfunded commitments. draw assumptions reflect, among other things, the type of commitment and counterparty.
other
other upcoming large cash outflows, such as tax payments.
intraday liquidity model. our intraday liquidity model
measures our intraday liquidity needs using a scenario analysis characterized by the same qualitative elements as our modeled liquidity outflow. the model assesses the risk of increased intraday liquidity requirements during a scenario where access
to sources of intraday liquidity may become constrained.  the following are key modeling elements of the intraday liquidity model:
liquidity needs over a one-day settlement period;
delays in receipt of counterparty cash payments;
a reduction in the availability of intraday credit lines at our third-party clearing agents; and
higher settlement volumes due to an increase in activity.
long-term stress testing. we utilize a longer-term
stress test to take a forward view on our liquidity position through a prolonged stress period in which the firm experiences a severe liquidity stress and recovers in an environment that continues to be challenging. we are focused on ensuring
conservative asset-liability management to prepare for a prolonged period of potential stress, seeking to maintain a long-dated and diversified funding profile, taking into consideration the characteristics and liquidity profile of our assets.
we also run stress tests on a regular basis as part of our routine risk management processes and conduct tailored stress tests on
an ad hoc or product-specific basis in response to market developments.
model review and validation
treasury regularly refines our modeled liquidity outflow, intraday liquidity model and our stress testing models to reflect changes in market
or economic conditions and our business mix. any changes, including model assumptions, are assessed and approved by liquidity risk management.
model risk management is responsible for the independent review and validation of our liquidity models. see model risk management
for further information about the review and validation of these models.  limits
we use liquidity limits at various levels and across liquidity risk types to control the size of our liquidity exposures. limits are measured
relative to acceptable levels of risk given the liquidity risk tolerance of the firm. the purpose of the firmwide limits is to assist senior management in monitoring and controlling our overall liquidity profile.
the risk committee of the board and the firmwide finance committee approve liquidity risk limits at the firmwide level. limits are reviewed
frequently and amended, with required approvals, on a permanent and temporary basis, as appropriate, to reflect changing market or business conditions.
our liquidity risk limits are monitored by treasury and liquidity risk management. treasury is responsible for identifying and escalating, on a
timely basis, instances where limits have been exceeded.  gcla and unencumbered metrics
gcla. based on the results of our internal liquidity
risk models, described above, as well as our consideration of other factors including, but not limited to, an assessment of our potential intraday liquidity needs and a qualitative assessment of the condition of the financial markets and the firm,
we believe our liquidity position as of both december2015 and december2014 was appropriate. as of december2015 and december2014, the fair value of the securities and certain overnight cash deposits included in our gcla
totaled $199.12billion and $182.95billion, respectively, and the fair value of these assets averaged $187.75billion for 2015 and $179.63billion for 2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the table below presents the fair value of the securities and certain overnight cash deposits
that are included in our gcla.
average for the
year ended december
$ inmillions
u.s. dollar-denominated
$132,415
$134,223
non-u.s. dollar-denominated
55,333
45,410
total
$187,748
$179,633
the u.s. dollar-denominated gcla is composed of (i)unencumbered u.s. government and federal agency
obligations (including highly liquid u.s. federal agency mortgage-backed obligations), all of which are eligible as collateral in federal reserve open market operations and (ii)certain overnight u.s. dollar cash deposits. the non-u.s.
dollar-denominated gcla is composed of only unencumbered german, french, japanese and united kingdom government obligations and certain overnight cash deposits in highly liquid currencies. we strictly limit our gcla to this narrowly defined list of
securities and cash because they are highly liquid, even in a difficult funding environment. we do not include other potential sources of excess liquidity in our gcla, such as less liquid unencumbered securities or committed credit facilities.
the table below presents the fair value of our gcla by asset class.
average for the
year ended december
$ inmillions
overnight cash deposits
$61,407
$57,177
u.s. government obligations
69,562
62,838
u.s. federal agency obligations, including highly liquid u.s. federal agency mortgage-backed
obligations
11,413
16,722
german, french, japanese and united kingdom government obligations
45,366
42,896
total
$187,748
$179,633
we maintain our gcla to enable us to meet current and potential liquidity requirements of our
parent company, group inc., and its subsidiaries. our modeled liquidity outflow and intraday liquidity model incorporate a consolidated requirement for group inc. as well as a standalone requirement for each of our major broker-dealer and bank
subsidiaries. liquidity held directly in each of these major subsidiaries is intended for use only by that subsidiary to meet its liquidity requirements and is assumed not to be available to group inc. unless (i)legally provided for and
(ii)there are no additional regulatory, tax or other restrictions. in addition, the modeled liquidity outflow and intraday liquidity model also incorporate a broader assessment of standalone liquidity requirements for other subsidiaries and we
hold a portion of our gcla directly at group inc. to support such requirements.  the table below presents the gcla of group inc. and our
major broker-dealer and bank subsidiaries.
average for the
year ended december
$ inmillions
group inc.
$41,284
$37,699
major broker-dealer subsidiaries
89,510
89,549
major bank subsidiaries
56,954
52,385
total
$187,748
$179,633
other unencumbered
assets. in addition to our gcla, we have a significant amount of other unencumbered cash and financial instruments owned, at fair value, including other government obligations,
high-grade money market securities, corporate obligations, marginable equities, loans and cash deposits not included in our gcla. the fair value of these assets averaged $90.36billion for 2015 and $94.52billion for 2014. we do not
consider these assets liquid enough to be eligible for our gcla.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
liquidity regulatory framework
the basel committees international framework for liquidity risk measurement, standards and monitoring calls for a liquidity coverage
ratio (lcr) designed to ensure that banking organizations maintain an adequate level of unencumbered high-quality liquid assets (hqla) based on expected net cash outflows under an acute short-term liquidity stress scenario.
the final rules on minimum liquidity standards approved by the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies are generally consistent with the basel
committees framework as described above, but include accelerated transition provisions and more stringent requirements related to both the range of assets that qualify as hqla and cash outflow assumptions for certain types of funding and other
liquidity risks. our gcla is substantially the same in composition as the assets that qualify as hqla under these rules. under the accelerated transition timeline, the lcr became effective in the united states on january1,2015, with a
phase-in period whereby firms have an 80% minimum in 2015, which will increase by 10%per year until 2017. in november2015, the federal reserve board proposed a rule that would require bank holding companies to disclose their lcr on a
quarterly basis beginning in the quarter ended september2016. these requirements include lcr averages over the prior quarter, detailed information on certain components of the lcr calculation and projected net cash outflows. for the three
months ended december2015, our average lcr exceeded the fully phased-in minimum requirement, based on our interpretation and understanding of the finalized framework, which may evolve as we review our interpretation and application with our
regulators.  the basel committees international framework for liquidity risk measurement, standards and monitoring also calls for a
net stable funding ratio (nsfr) designed to promote more medium- and long-term stable funding of the assets and off-balance-sheet activities of banking organizations over a one-year time horizon. the basel committees nsfr framework requires
banking organizations to maintain a stable funding profile in relation to the composition of their assets and off-balance-sheet activities and will be effective on january1,2018. the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies have not yet
proposed rules implementing the nsfr for u.s. banks and bank holding companies. we are currently evaluating the impact of the basel committees nsfr framework.
the following is information on our subsidiary liquidity regulatory requirements:
gs bank usa. gs bank usa is subject to minimum liquidity standards under the lcr rule approved by the
u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies that became effective on january1,2015, with the same phase-in through 2017 described above.
gsi. the lcr rule issued by the u.k. regulatory authorities became effective in the united kingdom on
october1,2015, with a phase-in period whereby certain financial institutions, including gsi, must have an 80% minimum ratio initially, increasing to 90% on january1,2017 and 100% on january1,2018.
other subsidiaries. we monitor the local regulatory liquidity requirements of our subsidiaries to
ensure compliance. for many of our subsidiaries, these requirements either have changed or are likely to change in the future due to the implementation of the basel committees framework for liquidity risk measurement, standards and monitoring,
as well as other regulatory developments.  the implementation of these rules, and any amendments adopted by the
applicable regulatory authorities, could impact our liquidity and funding requirements and practices in the future.  credit ratings
we rely on the short-term and long-term debt capital markets to fund a significant portion of our day-to-day operations and the cost and
availability of debt financing is influenced by our credit ratings. credit ratings are also important when we are competing in certain markets, such as otc derivatives, and when we seek to engage in longer-term transactions. see risk
factors in parti, item1a of the 2015 form10-k for information about the risks associated with a reduction in our credit ratings.
during the fourth quarter of 2015, standard& poors ratings services (s&p) downgraded the long-term debt ratings of group
inc. from a- to bbb+ and the subordinated debt ratings of group inc. from bbb+ to bbb-, and changed the outlook of group inc. from negative to stable and the outlook for gs bank usa, gsib, gs&co. and gsi
from positive to watch positive. additionally, rating and investment information, inc. (r&i) downgraded the long-term debt ratings of group inc. from a+ to a and the subordinated debt ratings for group inc. from a to a-, and changed the outlook
for group inc. from negative to stable.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the table below presents the unsecured credit ratings and outlook of group inc. by dbrs, inc.
(dbrs), fitch, inc. (fitch), moodys investors service (moodys), s&p, and r&i.
as of december2015
dbrs
fitch
moodys
s&p
r&i
short-term debt
r-1(middle
)
f1
p-2
a-2
a-1
long-term debt1
a (high
)
a
a3
bbb+
a
subordinated debt
a
a-
baa2
bbb-
a-
trust preferred2
a
bbb-
baa3
bb
n/a
preferred stock3
bbb (high
)
bb+
ba1
bb
n/a
ratings outlook
stable
stable
stable
stable
stable
1.
fitch, moodys and s&p include the senior guaranteed trust securities issued by murray street investment trusti and vesey street investment
trust i.
2.
trust preferred securities issued by goldman sachs capitali.
3.
dbrs, fitch, moodys and s&p include the apex issued by goldman sachs capital ii and goldman sachs capitaliii.
the table below presents the unsecured credit ratings and outlook of gs bank usa, gsib, gs&co. and gsi, by fitch, moodys and s&p.
as of december2015
fitch
moodys
s&p
gs bank usa
short-term debt
f1
p-1
a-1
long-term debt
a+
a1
a
short-term bank deposits
f1+
p-1
n/a
long-term bank deposits
aa-
a1
n/a
ratings outlook
stable
stable
watchpositive
gsib
short-term debt
f1
p-1
a-1
long-term debt
a
a1
a
short-term bank deposits
f1
p-1
n/a
long-term bank deposits
a
a1
n/a
ratings outlook
positive
stable
watch positive
gs&co.
short-term debt
f1
n/a
a-1
long-term debt
a+
n/a
a
ratings outlook
stable
n/a
watch positive
gsi
short-term debt
f1
p-1
a-1
long-term debt
a
a1
a
ratings outlook
positive
stable
watch positive
we believe our credit ratings are primarily based on the credit rating agencies assessment
of:
our liquidity, market, credit and operational risk management practices;
the level and variability of our earnings;
our capital base;
our franchise, reputation and management;
our corporate governance; and
the external operating environment, including, in some cases, the assumed level of government or other systemic support.
certain of our derivatives have been transacted under bilateral agreements with counterparties who may require us to post collateral or
terminate the transactions based on changes in our credit ratings. we assess the impact of these bilateral agreements by determining the collateral or termination payments that would occur assuming a downgrade by all rating agencies.a
downgrade by any one rating agency, depending on the agencys relative ratings of us at the time of the downgrade, may have an impact which is comparable to the impact of a downgrade by all rating agencies.we allocate a portion of our
gcla to ensure we would be able to make the additional collateral or termination payments that may be required in the event of a two-notch reduction in our long-term credit ratings, as well as collateral that has not been called by counterparties,
but is available to them. the table below presents the additional collateral or termination payments related to our net derivative liabilities under bilateral agreements that could have been called at the reporting date by counterparties in the
event of a one-notch and two-notch downgrade in our credit ratings.
as of december
$ inmillions
additional collateral or terminationpayments for a one-notch downgrade
$1,061
$1,072
additional collateral or terminationpayments for a two-notch downgrade
2,689
2,815
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
cash flows
as a global financial institution, our cash flows are complex and bear little relation to our net earnings and net assets. consequently, we
believe that traditional cash flow analysis is less meaningful in evaluating our liquidity position than the liquidity and asset-liability management policies described above. cash flow analysis may, however, be helpful in highlighting certain macro
trends and strategic initiatives in our businesses.  year ended december2015. our cash and cash equivalents increased by $17.51billion to $75.11billion at the end of 2015. we used $18.57billion in net cash for investing activities, primarily due to funding of loans
receivable. we generated $36.08billion in net cash from financing activities and operating activities primarily from net issuances of long-term borrowings and bank deposits, partially offset by repurchases of common stock.
year ended december2014. our cash and cash
equivalents decreased by $3.53billion to $57.60billion at the end of 2014. we used $22.53billion in net cash for operating and investing activities, which reflects an initiative to reduce our balance sheet, and the funding of loans
receivable. we generated $19.00billion in net cash from financing activities from an increase in bank deposits and net proceeds from issuances of unsecured long-term borrowings, partially offset by repurchases of common stock.
year ended december2013. our cash and cash
equivalents decreased by $11.54billion to $61.13billion at the end of 2013. we generated $4.54billion in net cash from operating activities. we used net cash of $16.08billion for investing and financing activities, primarily
to fund loans receivable and repurchases of common stock.
market risk management
overview  market risk is the risk of loss in the
value of our inventory, as well as certain other financial assets and financial liabilities, due to changes in market conditions. we employ a variety of risk measures, each described in the respective sections below, to monitor market risk. we hold
inventory primarily for market making for our clients and for our investing and lending activities. our inventory therefore changes based on client demands and our investment opportunities. our inventory is accounted for at fair value and therefore
fluctuates on a daily basis, with the related gains and losses included in market making and other principal transactions. categories of market risk include the following:
interest rate risk: results from exposures to changes in the level, slope and curvature of yield curves, the volatilities of interest rates,
mortgage prepayment speeds and credit spreads;
equity price risk: results from exposures to changes in prices and volatilities of individual equities, baskets of equities and equity indices;
currency rate risk: results from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward prices and volatilities of currency rates; and
commodity price risk: results from exposures to changes in spot prices, forward prices and volatilities of commodities, such as crude oil,
petroleum products, natural gas, electricity, and precious and base metals.  managers in revenue-producing units are
accountable for managing risk within prescribed limits. these managers have in-depth knowledge of their positions, markets and the instruments available to hedge their exposures.
market risk management, which is independent of the revenue-producing units and reports to our chief risk officer, has primary responsibility
for assessing, monitoring and managing market risk at the firm. we monitor and control risks through strong firmwide oversight and independent control and support functions across our global businesses.
managers in revenue-producing units and market risk management discuss market information, positions and estimated risk and loss scenarios on
an ongoing basis.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
market risk management process
we manage our market risk by diversifying exposures, controlling position sizes and establishing economic hedges in related securities or
derivatives. this process includes:
accurate and timely exposure information incorporating multiple risk metrics;
a dynamic limit setting framework; and
constant communication among revenue-producing units, risk managers and senior management.
risk measures. market risk management produces risk
measures and monitors them against market risk limits set by our risk committees. these measures reflect an extensive range of scenarios and the results are aggregated at product, business and firmwide levels.
we use a variety of risk measures to estimate the size of potential losses for both moderate and more extreme market moves over both short-term
and long-term time horizons. our primary risk measures are var, which is used for shorter-term periods, and stress tests. our risk reports detail key risks, drivers and changes for each desk and business, and are distributed daily to senior
management of both our revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions.
value-at-risk. var is the potential loss in value due
to adverse market movements over a defined time horizon with a specified confidence level. for assets and liabilities included in var, see financial statement linkages to market risk measures. we typically employ a one-day time horizon
with a 95% confidence level. we use a single var model which captures risks including interest rates, equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. as such, var facilitates comparison across portfolios of different risk characteristics. var
also captures the diversification of aggregated risk at the firmwide level.  we are aware of the inherent limitations to var and
therefore use a variety of risk measures in our market risk management process. inherent limitations to var include:
var does not estimate potential losses over longer time horizons where moves may be extreme;
var does not take account of the relative liquidity of different risk positions; and
previous moves in market risk factors may not produce accurate predictions of all future market moves.
when calculating var, we use historical simulations with full valuation of approximately 70,000
market factors. var is calculated at a position level based on simultaneously shocking the relevant market risk factors for that position. we sample from five years of historical data to generate the scenarios for our var calculation. the historical
data is weighted so that the relative importance of the data reduces over time. this gives greater importance to more recent observations and reflects current asset volatilities, which improves the accuracy of our estimates of potential loss. as a
result, even if our positions included in var were unchanged, our var would increase with increasing market volatility and vice versa.
given its reliance on historical data, var is most effective in estimating risk exposures in markets in which there are no sudden fundamental
changes or shifts in market conditions.  our var measure does not include:
positions that are best measured and monitored using sensitivity measures; and
the impact of changes in counterparty and our own credit spreads on derivatives, as well as changes in our own credit spreads on unsecured
borrowings for which the fair value option was elected.  we perform daily backtesting of our var model (i.e., comparing
daily trading net revenues to the var measure calculated as of the prior business day) at the firmwide level and for each of our businesses and major regulated subsidiaries.
stress testing. stress testing is a method of
determining the effect of various hypothetical stress scenarios on the firm. we use stress testing to examine risks of specific portfolios as well as the potential impact of significant risk exposures across the firm. we use a variety of stress
testing techniques to calculate the potential loss from a wide range of market moves on our portfolios, including sensitivity analysis, scenario analysis and firmwide stress tests. the results of our various stress tests are analyzed together for
risk management purposes.  sensitivity analysis is used to quantify the impact of a market move in a single risk factor across all
positions (e.g., equity prices or credit spreads) using a variety of defined market shocks, ranging from those that could be expected over a one-day time horizon up to those that could take many months to occur. we also use sensitivity analysis to
quantify the impact of the default of any single entity, which captures the risk of large or concentrated exposures.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
scenario analysis is used to quantify the impact of a specified event, including how the event
impacts multiple risk factors simultaneously. for example, for sovereign stress testing we calculate potential direct exposure associated with our sovereign inventory as well as the corresponding debt, equity and currency exposures associated with
our non-sovereign inventory that may be impacted by the sovereign distress. when conducting scenario analysis, we typically consider a number of possible outcomes for each scenario, ranging from moderate to severely adverse market impacts. in
addition, these stress tests are constructed using both historical events and forward-looking hypothetical scenarios.  firmwide stress
testing combines market, credit, operational and liquidity risks into a single combined scenario. firmwide stress tests are primarily used to assess capital adequacy as part of our capital planning and stress testing process; however, we also ensure
that firmwide stress testing is integrated into our risk governance framework. this includes selecting appropriate scenarios to use for our capital planning and stress testing process. see equity capital management and regulatory
capital equity capital management above for further information.  unlike var measures, which have an implied probability
because they are calculated at a specified confidence level, there is generally no implied probability that our stress test scenarios will occur. instead, stress tests are used to model both moderate and more extreme moves in underlying market
factors. when estimating potential loss, we generally assume that our positions cannot be reduced or hedged (although experience demonstrates that we are generally able to do so).
stress test scenarios are conducted on a regular basis as part of our routine risk management process and on an ad hoc basis in response to
market events or concerns. stress testing is an important part of our risk management process because it allows us to quantify our exposure to tail risks, highlight potential loss concentrations, undertake risk/ reward analysis, and assess and
mitigate our risk positions.
limits.
we use risk limits at various levels in the firm (including firmwide, business and product) to govern risk appetite by controlling the size of our exposures to market risk. limits are set based on var and on a range of stress tests relevant to our
exposures. limits are reviewed frequently and amended on a permanent or temporary basis to reflect changing market conditions, business conditions or tolerance for risk.
the risk committee of the board and the firmwide risk committee approve market risk limits at firmwide and business levels and our divisional
risk committees set sub-limits below the approved business-level risk limits. the purpose of the firmwide limits is to assist senior management in controlling our overall risk profile. sub-limits set the desired maximum amount of exposure that may
be managed by any particular business on a day-to-day basis without additional levels of senior management approval, effectively leaving day-to-day decisions to individual desk managers and traders. accordingly, sub-limits are a management tool
designed to ensure appropriate escalation rather than to establish maximum risk tolerance. sub-limits also distribute risk among various businesses in a manner that is consistent with their level of activity and client demand, taking into account
the relative performance of each area.  our market risk limits are monitored daily by market risk management, which is responsible for
identifying and escalating, on a timely basis, instances where limits have been exceeded. the business-level limits that are set by the divisional risk committees are subject to the same scrutiny and limit escalation policy as the firmwide limits.
when a risk limit has been exceeded (e.g., due to changes in market conditions, such as increased volatilities or changes in
correlations), it is escalated to the appropriate risk committee and remediated by an inventory reduction and/or a temporary or permanent increase to the risk limit.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
model review and validation
our var and stress testing models are regularly reviewed by market risk management and enhanced in order to incorporate changes in the
composition of positions included in our market risk measures, as well as variations in market conditions. prior to implementing significant changes to our assumptions and/or models, model risk management performs model validations. significant
changes to our var and stress testing models are reviewed with our chief risk officer and chief financial officer, and approved by the firmwide risk committee.
see model risk management for further information about the review and validation of these models.
systems  we have made a significant investment in
technology to monitor market risk including:
an independent calculation of var and stress measures;
risk measures calculated at individual position levels;
attribution of risk measures to individual risk factors of each position;
the ability to report many different views of the risk measures (e.g., by desk, business, product type or legal entity); and
the ability to produce ad hoc analyses in a timely manner.
metrics  we analyze var at the firmwide level and a
variety of more detailed levels, including by risk category, business, and region. the tables below present, by risk category, average daily var and period-end var, as well as the high and low var for the period. diversification effect in the tables
below represents the difference between total var and the sum of the vars for the four risk categories. this effect arises because the four market risk categories are not perfectly correlated.
the table below presents average daily var.
$ inmillions
risk categories
year ended december
interest rates
$47
$51
$63
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect
(47
)
(45
)
(51
)
total
$76
$72
$80
our average daily var increased to $76million in 2015 from $72million in 2014, reflecting an
increase in the currency rates category due to higher levels of volatility, partially offset by a decrease in the interest rates category due to decreased exposures.
our average daily var decreased to $72million in 2014 from $80million in 2013, primarily reflecting a decrease in the interest
rates category due to decreased exposures and lower levels of volatility, and a decrease in the equity prices category principally due to lower levels of volatility.these decreases were partially offset by a decrease in the diversification
benefit across risk categories.  the table below presents period-end var, and high and low var.
$ inmillions
risk categories
asofdecember
year endeddecember2015
high
low
interest rates
$43
$53
$62
$38
equity prices
currency rates
commodity prices
diversification effect
(48
)
(42
)
total
$67
$77
$94
$57
our daily var decreased to $67million as of december2015 from $77million as of
december2014, primarily reflecting decreases in the interest rates and commodity prices categories due to decreased exposures, and an increase in the diversification benefit across risk categories. in addition, the currency rates and equity
prices categories increased due to higher levels of volatility.  during 2015, the firmwide var risk limit was temporarily raised on two
occasions in order to facilitate client transactions. separately, in march 2015, the firmwide var risk limit was reduced, reflecting lower risk utilization over the last year.
during 2014, the firmwide var risk limit was not exceeded, raised or reduced.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
the chart below reflects our daily var over the last four quarters.
the chart below presents the frequency distribution of our daily trading net revenues for substantially all
positions included in var for 2015.
daily trading net revenues are compared with var calculated as of the end of the prior business day. trading
losses incurred on a single day did not exceed our 95% one-day var during 2015 (i.e., a var exception). trading losses incurred on a single day exceeded our 95% one-day var on one occasion during 2014.
during periods in which we have significantly more positive net revenue days than net revenue loss days, we expect to have fewer var exceptions
because, under normal conditions, our business model generally produces positive net revenues. in periods in which our franchise revenues are adversely affected, we generally have more loss days, resulting in more var exceptions. the daily
market-making revenues used to determine var exceptions reflect the impact of any intraday activity, including bid/offer net revenues, which are more likely than not to be positive by their nature.
sensitivity measures
certain portfolios and individual positions are not included in var because var is not the most appropriate risk measure. other sensitivity
measures we use to analyze market risk are described below.  10% sensitivity measures. the table below presents market risk for inventory positions that are not included in var. the market risk of these positions is determined by estimating the potential reduction in net revenues of a 10% decline
in the underlying asset value. equity positions below relate to private and restricted public equity securities, including interests in funds that invest in corporate equities and real estate and interests in hedge funds, which are included in
financial instruments owned, at fair value. debt positions include interests in funds that invest in corporate mezzanine and senior debt instruments, loans backed by commercial and residential real estate, corporate bank loans and other
corporate debt, including acquired portfolios of distressed loans. these debt positions are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value. see note6 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about
cash instruments. these measures do not reflect diversification benefits across asset categories or across other market risk measures.
$ inmillions
asset categories
as of december
equity
$2,157
$2,132
debt
1,479
1,686
total
$3,636
$3,818
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
credit spread sensitivity on derivatives and
borrowings. var excludes the impact of changes in counterparty and our own credit spreads on derivatives as well as changes in our own credit spreads on unsecured borrowings for which the fair
value option was elected. the estimated sensitivity to a one basis point increase in credit spreads (counterparty and our own) on derivatives was a gain of $3million (including hedges) as of both december2015 and december2014. in
addition, the estimated sensitivity to a one basis point increase in our own credit spreads on unsecured borrowings for which the fair value option was elected was a gain of $17million and $10million (including hedges) as of
december2015 and december2014, respectively. however, the actual net impact of a change in our own credit spreads is also affected by the liquidity, duration and convexity (as the sensitivity is not linear to changes in yields) of those
unsecured borrowings for which the fair value option was elected, as well as the relative performance of any hedges undertaken.  interest rate sensitivity. loans receivable as of december2015 and december2014 were $45.41billion and $28.94billion, respectively,
substantially all of which had floating interest rates. as of december2015 and december2014, the estimated sensitivity to a 100 basis point increase in interest rates on such loans was $396million and $254million,
respectively, of additional interest income over a twelve-month period, which does not take into account the potential impact of an increase in costs to fund such loans. see note9 to the consolidated financial statements for further
information about loans receivable.  other market risk considerations
in addition, as of december2015 and december2014, we had commitments and held loans for which we have obtained credit loss
protection from sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. see note18 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about such lending commitments.
additionally, we make investments accounted for under the equity method and we also make direct investments in real estate, both of which are
included in other assets. direct investments in real estate are accounted for at cost less accumulated depreciation. see note13 to the consolidated financial statements for information about other assets.
financial statement linkages to market risk measures
we employ a variety of risk measures, each described in the respective sections above, to monitor market risk across the consolidated
statements of financial condition and consolidated statements of earnings. the related gains and losses on these positions are included in market making, other principal transactions, interest income and
interest expense.  the table below presents certain categories in our consolidated statements of financial condition and the
market risk measures used to assess those assets and liabilities. certain categories on the consolidated statements of financial condition are incorporated in more than one risk measure.
categories on the consolidatedstatements of financialcondition included in marketrisk measures
market risk measures
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes, at fair value
var
collateralized agreements
securities purchased under agreements to resell, at fair
value
securities borrowed, at fair value
var
receivables
certain secured loans, at fair value
var
loans
receivable
interest rate sensitivity
financial instruments owned, at fair value
var
10% sensitivity measures
credit spread sensitivity derivatives
collateralized financings
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, at fair
value
securities loaned, at fair value
other secured financings, at fair value
var
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
var
credit spread sensitivity derivatives
unsecured short-term borrowings and unsecured long-term borrowings, at fair value
var
credit spread sensitivityborrowings
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
credit risk management
overview
credit risk represents the potential for loss due to the default or deterioration in credit quality of a counterparty (e.g., an otc derivatives
counterparty or a borrower) or an issuer of securities or other instruments we hold. our exposure to credit risk comes mostly from client transactions in otc derivatives and loans and lending commitments. credit risk also comes from cash placed with
banks, securities financing transactions (i.e., resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowing and lending activities) and receivables from brokers, dealers, clearing organizations, customers and counterparties.
credit risk management, which is independent of the revenue-producing units and reports to our chief risk officer, has primary responsibility
for assessing, monitoring and managing credit risk at the firm. the credit policy committee and the firmwide risk committee establish and review credit policies and parameters. in addition, we hold other positions that give rise to credit risk
(e.g., bonds held in our inventory and secondary bank loans). these credit risks are captured as a component of market risk measures, which are monitored and managed by market risk management, consistent with other inventory positions. we also enter
into derivatives to manage market risk exposures. such derivatives also give rise to credit risk, which is monitored and managed by credit risk management.
credit risk management process  effective management
of credit risk requires accurate and timely information, a high level of communication and knowledge of customers, countries, industries and products. our process for managing credit risk includes:
approving transactions and setting and communicating credit exposure limits;
monitoring compliance with established credit exposure limits;
assessing the likelihood that a counterparty will default on its payment obligations;
measuring our current and potential credit exposure and losses resulting from counterparty default;
reporting of credit exposures to senior management, the board and regulators;
use of credit risk mitigants, including collateral and hedging; and
communication and collaboration with other independent control and support functions such as operations, legal and compliance.
as part of the risk assessment process, credit risk management performs credit reviews which
include initial and ongoing analyses of our counterparties. for substantially all of our credit exposures, the core of our process is an annual counterparty credit review. a credit review is an independent analysis of the capacity and willingness of
a counterparty to meet its financial obligations, resulting in an internal credit rating. the determination of internal credit ratings also incorporates assumptions with respect to the nature of and outlook for the counterpartys industry, and
the economic environment. senior personnel within credit risk management, with expertise in specific industries, inspect and approve credit reviews and internal credit ratings.
our global credit risk management systems capture credit exposure to individual counterparties and on an aggregate basis to counterparties and
their subsidiaries (economic groups). these systems also provide management with comprehensive information on our aggregate credit risk by product, internal credit rating, industry, country and region.
risk measures and limits  we measure our credit risk
based on the potential loss in the event of non-payment by a counterparty using current and potential exposure. for derivatives and securities financing transactions, current exposure represents the amount presently owed to us after taking into
account applicable netting and collateral arrangements while potential exposure represents our estimate of the future exposure that could arise over the life of a transaction based on market movements within a specified confidence level. potential
exposure also takes into account netting and collateral arrangements. for loans and lending commitments, the primary measure is a function of the notional amount of the position.
we use credit limits at various levels (counterparty, economic group, industry, country) to control the size of our credit exposures. limits
for counterparties and economic groups are reviewed regularly and revised to reflect changing risk appetites for a given counterparty or group of counterparties. limits for industries and countries are based on our risk tolerance and are designed to
allow for regular monitoring, review, escalation and management of credit risk concentrations. the risk committee of the board and the firmwide risk committee approve credit risk limits at the firmwide and business levels. credit risk management
sets credit limits for individual counterparties, economic groups, industries and countries. policies authorized by the firmwide risk committee and the credit policy committee prescribe the level of formal approval required for us to assume credit
exposure to a counterparty across all product areas, taking into account any applicable netting provisions, collateral or other credit risk mitigants.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
stress tests
we use regular stress tests to calculate the credit exposures, including potential concentrations that would result from applying shocks to
counterparty credit ratings or credit risk factors (e.g., currency rates, interest rates, equity prices). these shocks include a wide range of moderate and more extreme market movements. some of our stress tests include shocks to multiple risk
factors, consistent with the occurrence of a severe market or economic event. in the case of sovereign default, we estimate the direct impact of the default on our sovereign credit exposures, changes to our credit exposures arising from potential
market moves in response to the default, and the impact of credit market deterioration on corporate borrowers and counterparties that may result from the sovereign default. unlike potential exposure, which is calculated within a specified confidence
level, with a stress test there is generally no assumed probability of these events occurring.  we run stress tests on a regular basis as
part of our routine risk management processes and conduct tailored stress tests on an ad hoc basis in response to market developments. stress tests are regularly conducted jointly with our market and liquidity risk functions.
model review and validation  our potential credit
exposure and stress testing models, and any changes to such models or assumptions, are reviewed by model risk management. see model risk management for further information about the review and validation of these models.
risk mitigants  to reduce our credit exposures on
derivatives and securities financing transactions, we may enter into netting agreements with counterparties that permit us to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties. we may also reduce credit risk with counterparties by entering
into agreements that enable us to obtain collateral from them on an upfront or contingent basis and/or to terminate transactions if the counterpartys credit rating falls below a specified level. we monitor the fair value of the collateral on a
daily basis to ensure that our credit exposures are appropriately collateralized. we seek to minimize exposures where there is a significant positive correlation between the creditworthiness of our counterparties and the market value of collateral
we receive.
for loans and lending commitments, depending on the credit quality of the borrower and other
characteristics of the transaction, we employ a variety of potential risk mitigants. risk mitigants include: collateral provisions, guarantees, covenants, structural seniority of the bank loan claims and, for certain lending commitments, provisions
in the legal documentation that allow us to adjust loan amounts, pricing, structure and other terms as market conditions change. the type and structure of risk mitigants employed can significantly influence the degree of credit risk involved in a
loan or lending commitment.  when we do not have sufficient visibility into a counterpartys financial strength or when we believe a
counterparty requires support from its parent, we may obtain third-party guarantees of the counterpartys obligations. we may also mitigate our credit risk using credit derivatives or participation agreements.
credit exposures  as of december2015, our
credit exposures increased as compared with december2014, primarily reflecting increases in loans and lending commitments. the percentage of our credit exposure arising from non-investment-grade counterparties (based on our internally
determined public rating agency equivalents) increased as compared with december2014, primarily reflecting an increase in loans and lending commitments. during 2015, the number of counterparty defaults decreased as compared with 2014, and such
defaults primarily occurred within loans and lending commitments. the total number of counterparty defaults remained low, representing less than 0.5% of all counterparties. estimated losses associated with counterparty defaults were lower compared
with the prior year and were not material to the firm. our credit exposures are described further below.
cash and cash equivalents. cash and cash equivalents
include both interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits. to mitigate the risk of credit loss, we place substantially all of our deposits with highly-rated banks and central banks.
otc derivatives. our credit exposure on otc derivatives
arises primarily from our market-making activities. as a market maker, we enter into derivative transactions to provide liquidity to clients and to facilitate the transfer and hedging of their risks. we also enter into derivatives to manage market
risk exposures. we manage our credit exposure on otc derivatives using the credit risk process, measures, limits and risk mitigants described above.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
derivatives are reported on a net-by-counterparty basis (i.e., the net payable or receivable for
derivative assets and liabilities for a given counterparty) when a legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable netting agreement. derivatives are accounted for at fair value, net of cash collateral received or posted under enforceable credit
support agreements. we generally enter into otc derivatives transactions under bilateral collateral arrangements with daily exchange of collateral. as credit risk is an essential component of fair value, we include a credit valuation adjustment
(cva) in the fair value of derivatives to reflect counterparty credit risk, as described in note7 to the consolidated financial statements. cva is a function of the present value of expected exposure, the probability of counterparty default
and the assumed recovery upon default.  the table below presents the distribution of our exposure to otc derivatives by tenor, both before
and after the effect of collateral and netting agreements. in the table below:
tenor is based on expected duration for mortgage-related credit derivatives and generally on remaining contractual maturity for other derivatives.
receivable and payable balances for the same counterparty across tenor categories are netted under enforceable netting agreements, and cash
collateral received is netted under enforceable credit support agreements.
receivable and payable balances with the same counterparty in the same tenor category are netted within such tenor category.
net credit exposure represents otc derivative assets, all of which are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value, less
cash collateral and the fair value of securities collateral, primarily u.s. government and federal agency obligations and non-u.s. government and agency obligations, received under credit support agreements, which management considers when
determining credit risk, but such collateral is not eligible for netting under u.s. gaap.
$ inmillions
investment-grade
non-investment-grade / unrated
total
as of december2015
less than 1year
$23,950
$3,965
$27,915
1 - 5years
35,249
6,749
41,998
greater than 5years
85,394
4,713
90,107
total
144,593
15,427
160,020
netting
(103,087
)
(6,507
)
(109,594
)
otc derivative assets
$41,506
$8,920
$50,426
net credit exposure
$27,001
$7,368
$34,369
as of december2014
less than 1year
$30,147
$5,038
$35,185
1 - 5years
40,787
6,589
47,376
greater than 5years
96,679
5,820
102,499
total
167,613
17,447
185,060
netting
(117,144
)
(7,179
)
(124,323
)
otc derivative assets
$50,469
$10,268
$60,737
net credit exposure
$34,658
$8,694
$43,352
the tables below present the distribution of our exposure to otc derivatives by tenor and our
internally determined public rating agency equivalents.
$ inmillions
investment-grade
aaa/aaa
aa/ aa2
a/ a2
bbb/baa2
total
asofdecember2015
lessthan1year
$411
$6,059
$10,051
$7,429
$23,950
1 - 5years
1,214
10,374
16,995
6,666
35,249
greater than 5years
3,205
40,879
20,507
20,803
85,394
total
4,830
57,312
47,553
34,898
144,593
netting
(2,202
)
(40,872
)
(36,847
)
(23,166
)
(103,087
)
otcderivativeassets
$2,628
$16,440
$10,706
$11,732
$41,506
net credit exposure
$2,427
$10,269
$6,652
$7,653
$27,001
asofdecember2014
lessthan1year
$1,119
$8,260
$13,719
$7,049
$30,147
1 - 5years
12,182
18,949
8,758
40,787
greater than 5years
3,500
40,443
26,649
26,087
96,679
total
5,517
60,885
59,317
41,894
167,613
netting
(2,163
)
(42,513
)
(44,147
)
(28,321
)
(117,144
)
otcderivativeassets
$3,354
$18,372
$15,170
$13,573
$50,469
net credit exposure
$3,135
$12,453
$9,493
$9,577
$34,658
$ inmillions
non-investment-grade/unrated
bb/ba2orlower
unrated
total
as of december2015
less than 1year
$3,657
$308
$3,965
1 - 5years
6,505
6,749
greater than 5years
4,434
4,713
total
14,596
15,427
netting
(6,472
)
(35
)
(6,507
)
otc derivative assets
$8,124
$796
$8,920
net credit exposure
$6,769
$599
$7,368
as of
december2014
less than 1year
$4,959
$79
$5,038
1 - 5years
6,226
6,589
greater than 5years
5,660
5,820
total
16,845
17,447
netting
(7,062
)
(117
)
(7,179
)
otc derivative assets
$9,783
$485
$10,268
net credit exposure
$8,506
$188
$8,694
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
lending and financing activities. we manage our lending and financing activities using the credit risk process, measures, limits and risk mitigants described above. other lending positions, including secondary trading positions, are risk-managed
as a component of market risk.
lending activities. our lending activities include lending to investment-grade and
non-investment-grade corporate borrowers. loans and lending commitments associated with these activities are principally used for operating liquidity and general corporate purposes or in connection with contingent acquisitions. our lending
activities also include extending loans to borrowers that are secured by commercial and other real estate. see the tables below for further information about our credit exposures associated with these lending activities.
securities financing transactions. we enter into securities financing transactions in order to, among
other things, facilitate client activities, invest excess cash, acquire securities to cover short positions and finance certain firm activities. we bear credit risk related to resale agreements and securities borrowed only to the extent that cash
advanced or the value of securities pledged or delivered to the counterparty exceeds the value of the collateral received. we also have credit exposure on repurchase agreements and securities loaned to the extent that the value of securities pledged
or delivered to the counterparty for these transactions exceeds the amount of cash or collateral received. securities collateral obtained for securities financing transactions primarily includes u.s. government and federal agency obligations and
non-u.s. government and agency obligations. we had approximately $27billion and $36billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, of credit exposure related to securities financing transactions reflecting both
netting agreements and collateral that management considers when determining credit risk. as of both december2015 and december2014, substantially all of our credit exposure related to securities financing transactions was with
investment-grade financial institutions, funds and governments, primarily located in the americas and emea.
other credit exposures. we are exposed to credit risk from our receivables from brokers, dealers and
clearing organizations and customers and counterparties. receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations are primarily comprised of initial margin placed with clearing organizations and receivables related to sales of securities which
have traded, but not yet settled. these receivables generally have minimal credit risk due to the low probability of clearing organization default and the short-term nature of receivables related to securities settlements. receivables from customers
and counterparties are generally comprised of collateralized receivables related to customer securities transactions and generally have minimal credit risk due to both the value of the collateral received and the short-term nature of these
receivables. our net credit exposure related to these activities was approximately $33billion and $26billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, and was primarily comprised of initial margin (both cash and
securities) placed with investment-grade clearing organizations. the regional breakdown of our net credit exposure related to these activities was approximately 44% and 48% in the americas, approximately 45% and 39% in emea, and approximately 11%
and 13% in asia as of december2015 and december2014, respectively.
in addition, we extend other loans and lending commitments to our private wealth management clients that are primarily secured by residential real estate,
securities or other assets. we also purchase performing and distressed loans backed by residential real estate and consumer loans. the gross exposure related to such loans and lending commitments was approximately $28billion and
$17billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, and was substantially all concentrated in the americas region. the fair value of the collateral received against such loans and lending commitments generally exceeded
the gross exposure as of both december2015 and december2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
credit exposure by industry, region and credit quality
the tables below present our credit exposure related to cash, otc derivatives, and loans and
lending commitments (excluding credit exposures described above in securities financing transactions and other credit exposures) broken down by industry, region and credit quality.
cash
as of december
$ inmillions
credit exposure by industry
funds
$176
$96
financial institutions
12,799
12,469
sovereign
62,130
45,029
real estate
total
$75,105
$57,600
credit exposure by region
americas
$54,846
$45,599
emea
8,496
1,666
asia
11,763
10,335
total
$75,105
$57,600
credit exposure by credit
quality (credit rating equivalent)
aaa/aaa
$55,626
$38,778
aa/aa2
4,286
4,598
a/a2
14,243
13,346
bbb/baa2
bb/ba2 or lower
total
$75,105
$57,600
otc derivatives
as of december
$ inmillions
credit exposure by industry
funds
$10,899
$13,114
financial institutions
13,148
15,051
consumer, retail& healthcare
1,553
3,325
sovereign
7,566
10,004
municipalities& nonprofit
3,984
4,303
natural resources& utilities
4,846
5,741
real estate
technology, media& telecommunications
1,839
2,995
diversified industrials
5,008
4,321
other
1,378
1,476
total
$50,426
$60,737
credit exposure by region
americas
$17,724
$22,032
emea
27,113
31,295
asia
5,589
7,410
total
$50,426
$60,737
credit exposure by credit
quality (credit rating equivalent)
aaa/aaa
$2,628
$3,354
aa/aa2
16,440
18,372
a/a2
10,706
15,170
bbb/baa2
11,732
13,573
bb/ba2 or lower
8,124
9,783
unrated
total
$50,426
$60,737
loans and lendingcommitments
as of december
$ inmillions
credit exposure by industry
funds
$2,595
$1,706
financial institutions
14,063
11,316
consumer, retail& healthcare
31,944
30,216
sovereign
municipalities& nonprofit
natural resources& utilities
24,476
24,275
real estate
15,045
12,366
technology, media& telecommunications
36,444
20,633
diversified industrials
20,047
16,392
other
13,941
11,998
total
$159,602
$129,893
credit exposure by region
americas
$121,271
$91,378
emea
33,061
34,397
asia
5,270
4,118
total
$159,602
$129,893
credit exposure by credit
quality (credit rating equivalent)
aaa/aaa
$4,148
$3,969
aa/aa2
7,716
8,097
a/a2
27,212
22,623
bbb/baa2
43,937
35,706
bb/ba2 or lower
76,049
58,670
unrated
total
$159,602
$129,893
selected exposures
the section below provides information about our credit and market exposure to certain jurisdictions and industries that have had heightened
focus due to recent events and broad market concerns. credit exposure represents the potential for loss due to the default or deterioration in credit quality of a counterparty or borrower. market exposure represents the potential for loss in value
of our long and short inventory due to changes in market prices. there is no overlap between the credit and market exposures in the amounts below.
country exposures. the decline in oil prices continues
to raise concerns about venezuela and nigeria, and their sovereign debt. the political situations in iraq and russia, as well as the decline in oil prices, have led to continued concerns about their economic and financial stability. in addition,
argentinas default on its sovereign debt coupled with its contracting economy has raised concerns about its long term financial stability. separately, signs of slowing growth in china and deteriorating macroeconomic conditions in brazil have
led to heightened focus and broad market concerns relating to these countries.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
as of december2015, our total credit exposure to russia was $292million and
primarily related to loans and lending commitments. such exposure was substantially all with non-sovereign counterparties or borrowers. in addition, our total market exposure to russia as of december2015 was $791million, which was
primarily with non-sovereign issuers or underliers and was primarily related to equities and credit derivatives.  as of december2015,
our total credit exposure to china was $3.7billion and primarily related to deposits with banks and loans and lending commitments. such exposure was primarily with non-sovereign counterparties or borrowers. in addition, our total market
exposure to china as of december2015 was $2.5billion and was primarily related to equities.  as of december2015, our
total credit exposure to brazil was $3.2billion and primarily related to secured receivables and initial margin placed with clearing organizations. substantially all of such exposure was with non-sovereign counterparties or borrowers. in
addition, our total market exposure to brazil as of december2015 was $1.9billion and was primarily related to sovereign debt.
our total credit and market exposure to each of argentina, iraq, venezuela and nigeria as of december2015 was not material.
we have a comprehensive framework to monitor, measure and assess our country exposures and to determine our risk appetite. we determine the
country of risk by the location of the counterparty, issuer or underliers assets, where they generate revenue, the country in which they are headquartered, the jurisdiction where a claim against them could be enforced, and/or the government
whose policies affect their ability to repay their obligations. we monitor our credit exposure to a specific country both at the individual counterparty level as well as at the aggregate country level.
we use regular stress tests, described above, to calculate the credit exposures, including
potential concentrations that would result from applying shocks to counterparty credit ratings or credit risk factors. to supplement these regular stress tests, we also conduct tailored stress tests on an ad hoc basis in response to specific market
events that we deem significant. these stress tests are designed to estimate the direct impact of the event on our credit and market exposures resulting from shocks to risk factors including, but not limited to, currency rates, interest rates, and
equity prices. we also utilize these stress tests to estimate the indirect impact of certain hypothetical events on our country exposures, such as the impact of credit market deterioration on corporate borrowers and counterparties along with the
shocks to the risk factors described above. the parameters of these shocks vary based on the scenario reflected in each stress test. we review estimated losses produced by the stress tests in order to understand their magnitude, highlight potential
loss concentrations, and assess and mitigate our exposures where necessary.  see stress tests above, liquidity risk
management liquidity stress tests and market risk management stress testing for further information about stress tests.
industry exposures. significant declines in the price
of oil have led to market concerns regarding the creditworthiness of certain companies in the oil and gas industry. as of december2015, our credit exposure to oil and gas companies related to loans and lending commitments was
$10.6billion ($1.8billion of loans and $8.8billion of lending commitments). such exposure included $4.2billion of exposure to non-investment-grade counterparties ($1.5billion related to loans and $2.7billion
related to lending commitments). in addition, we have exposure to our clients in the oil and gas industry arising from derivatives. as of december2015, our credit exposure related to derivatives and receivables with oil and gas companies was
$1.9billion, primarily with investment-grade counterparties. as of december2015, our market exposure related to oil and gas companies was $(677)million, which was primarily to investment-grade issuers or underliers.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
operational risk management
overview
operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events. our
exposure to operational risk arises from routine processing errors as well as extraordinary incidents, such as major systems failures or legal and regulatory matters. potential types of loss events related to internal and external operational risk
include:
clients, products and business practices;
execution, delivery and process management;
business disruption and system failures;
employment practices and workplace safety;
damage to physical assets;
internal fraud; and
external fraud.  we
maintain a comprehensive control framework designed to provide a well-controlled environment to minimize operational risks. the firmwide operational risk committee provides oversight of the ongoing development and implementation of our operational
risk policies and framework. operational risk management is a risk management function independent of our revenue-producing units, reports to our chief risk officer, and is responsible for developing and implementing policies, methodologies and a
formalized framework for operational risk management with the goal of minimizing our exposure to operational risk.
operational risk management process
managing operational risk requires timely and accurate information as well as a strong control culture. we seek to manage our operational risk
through:
training, supervision and development of our people;
active participation of senior management in identifying and mitigating key operational risks across the firm;
independent control and support functions that monitor operational risk on a daily basis, and implementation of extensive policies and procedures,
and controls designed to prevent the occurrence of operational risk events;
proactive communication between our revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions; and
a network of systems throughout the firm to facilitate the collection of data used to analyze and assess our operational risk exposure.
we combine top-down and bottom-up approaches to manage and measure operational risk. from a top-down perspective, our
senior management assesses firmwide and business-level operational risk profiles. from a bottom-up perspective, revenue-producing units and independent control and support functions are responsible for risk management on a day-to-day basis,
including identifying, mitigating, and escalating operational risks to senior management.  our operational risk framework is in part
designed to comply with the operational risk measurement rules under the revised capital framework and has evolved based on the changing needs of our businesses and regulatory guidance. our framework comprises the following practices:
risk identification and reporting;
risk measurement; and
risk monitoring.
internal audit performs an independent review of our operational risk framework, including our key controls, processes and applications, on an
annual basis to assess the effectiveness of our framework.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
risk identification and reporting
the core of our operational risk management framework is risk identification and reporting. we have a comprehensive data collection process,
including firmwide policies and procedures, for operational risk events.  we have established policies that require managers in our
revenue-producing units and our independent control and support functions to escalate operational risk events. when operational risk events are identified, our policies require that the events be documented and analyzed to determine whether changes
are required in our systems and/or processes to further mitigate the risk of future events.  we have established thresholds to monitor the
impact of an operational risk event, including single loss events and cumulative losses over a twelve-month period, as well as escalation protocols. we also provide periodic operational risk reports, which include incidents that breach escalation
thresholds, to senior management, firmwide and divisional risk committees and the risk committee of the board.  in addition, our firmwide
systems capture internal operational risk event data, key metrics such as transaction volumes, and statistical information such as performance trends. we use an internally-developed operational risk management application to aggregate and organize
this information. managers from both revenue-producing units and independent control and support functions analyze the information to evaluate operational risk exposures and identify businesses, activities or products with heightened levels of
operational risk. we also provide periodic operational risk reports to senior management, risk committees and the board.
risk measurement
we measure our operational risk exposure over a twelve-month time horizon using both statistical modeling and scenario analyses, which involve
qualitative assessments of the potential frequency and extent of potential operational risk losses, for each of our businesses. operational risk measurement incorporates qualitative and quantitative assessments of factors including:
internal and external operational risk event data;
assessments of our internal controls;
evaluations of the complexity of our business activities;
the degree of and potential for automation in our processes;
new product information;
the legal and regulatory environment;
changes in the markets for our products and services, including the diversity and sophistication of our customers and counterparties; and
liquidity of the capital markets and the reliability of the infrastructure that supports the capital markets.
the results from these scenario analyses are used to monitor changes in operational risk and to determine business lines that may have
heightened exposure to operational risk. these analyses ultimately are used in the determination of the appropriate level of operational risk capital to hold.
risk monitoring  we evaluate changes in the
operational risk profile of the firm and its businesses, including changes in business mix or jurisdictions in which we operate, by monitoring the factors noted above at a firmwide level. we have both detective and preventive internal controls,
which are designed to reduce the frequency and severity of operational risk losses and the probability of operational risk events. we monitor the results of assessments and independent internal audits of these internal controls.
model review and validation  the statistical models
utilized by operational risk management are subject to independent review and validation by model risk management. see model risk management for further information about the review and validation of these models.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
managements discussion and analysis
model risk management
overview
model risk is the potential for adverse consequences from decisions made based on model outputs that may be incorrect or used inappropriately.
we rely on quantitative models across our business activities primarily to value certain financial assets and liabilities, to monitor and manage our risk, and to measure and monitor our regulatory capital.
our model risk management framework is managed through a governance structure and risk management controls, which encompass standards designed
to ensure we maintain a comprehensive model inventory, including risk assessment and classification, sound model development practices, independent review and model-specific usage controls. the firmwide risk committee and the firmwide model risk
control committee oversee our model risk management framework. model risk management, which is independent of model developers, model owners and model users, reports to our chief risk officer, is responsible for identifying and reporting significant
risks associated with models, and provides periodic updates to senior management, risk committees and the risk committee of the board.  model review and
validation  model risk management consists of quantitative professionals who perform an independent review, validation and approval of
our models. this review includes an analysis of the model documentation, independent testing, an assessment of the appropriateness of the methodology used, and verification of compliance with model development and implementation standards. model
risk management reviews all existing models on an annual basis, as well as new models or significant changes to models.
the model validation process incorporates a review of models and trade and risk parameters
across a broad range of scenarios (including extreme conditions) in order to critically evaluate and verify:
the models conceptual soundness, including the reasonableness of model assumptions, and suitability for intended use;
the testing strategy utilized by the model developers to ensure that the models function as intended;
the suitability of the calculation techniques incorporated in the model;
the models accuracy in reflecting the characteristics of the related product and its significant risks;
the models consistency with models for similar products; and
the models sensitivity to input parameters and assumptions.
see critical accounting policies fair value review of valuation models, liquidity risk
management, market risk management, credit risk management and operational risk management for further information about our use of models within these areas.
item7a.quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk are set forth under managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations overview and structure of risk management in partii, item7 of the 2015 form10-k.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
item8.financial statements and supplementary data
index
pageno.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
report of independent registered public accounting firm
consolidated financial statements
consolidated statements of earnings
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
consolidated statements of financial condition
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
consolidated statements of cash flows
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1.description of business
note2.basis of presentation
note3.significant accounting policies
note4.
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet
purchased, at fair value
note5.fair value measurements
note6.cash instruments
note7.derivatives and hedging activities
note8.fair value option
note9.loans receivable
note10.collateralized agreements and financings
note11.securitization activities
note12.variable interest entities
note13.other assets
note14.deposits
note15.short-term borrowings
note16.long-term borrowings
note17.other liabilities and accrued expenses
note18.commitments, contingencies and guarantees
note19.shareholders equity
note20.regulation and capital adequacy
note21.earnings per common share
note22.transactions with affiliated funds
note23.interest income and interest expense
note24.income taxes
note25.business segments
note26.credit concentrations
note27.legal proceedings
note28.employee benefit plans
note29.employee incentive plans
note30.parent company
supplemental financial information
quarterly results
common stock price range
common stock performance
selected financial data
statistical disclosures
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
managements report on internal control over financial reporting
management of the goldman sachs group, inc., together with its consolidated subsidiaries (the
firm), is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. the firms internal control over financial reporting is a process designed under the supervision of the firms principal executive
and principal financial officers to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of the firms financial statements for external reporting purposes in accordance with u.s. generally accepted
accounting principles.  as of december31,2015, management conducted an assessment of the firms internal control over
financial reporting based on the framework established in internal control integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). based on this assessment, management has
determined that the firms internal control over financial reporting as of december31,2015 was effective.
our internal control over financial reporting includes policies and procedures that pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect transactions and dispositions of assets; provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and the directors of the firm; and provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the firms assets that could have a material effect on our financial statements.
the firms internal control over financial reporting as of december31,2015 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing on page 115, which expresses an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the firms internal control over financial reporting as of
december31,2015.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm
to the board of directors and the shareholders of
the goldman sachs group, inc.:
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the accompanying index present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the goldman sachs group, inc. and its subsidiaries (the company) at december31,2015 and 2014, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended december31,2015, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america. also in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over
financial reporting as of december31,2015, based on criteria established in internal control integrated framework (2013) issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso). the
companys management is responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in
managements report on internal control over financial reporting appearing on page 114. our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements and on the companys internal control over financial reporting based on our
integrated audits. we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. our audit of internal control
over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control
based on the assessed risk. our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)provide
reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that could
have a material effect on the financial statements.  because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies
or procedures may deteriorate.  /s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february19,2016
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of earnings
year ended december
inmillions, except per share amounts
revenues
investment banking
$7,027
$6,464
$6,004
investment management
5,868
5,748
5,194
commissions and fees
3,320
3,316
3,255
market making
9,523
8,365
9,368
other principal transactions
5,018
6,588
6,993
total non-interest revenues
30,756
30,481
30,814
interest income
8,452
9,604
10,060
interest expense
5,388
5,557
6,668
net interest income
3,064
4,047
3,392
net revenues, including net interest income
33,820
34,528
34,206
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
12,678
12,691
12,613
brokerage, clearing, exchange and
distribution fees
2,576
2,501
2,341
market development
communications and technology
depreciation and amortization
1,337
1,322
occupancy
professional fees
insurance reserves
other expenses
5,699
2,585
2,931
total non-compensation expenses
12,364
9,480
9,856
total operating expenses
25,042
22,171
22,469
pre-tax earnings
8,778
12,357
11,737
provision for taxes
2,695
3,880
3,697
net earnings
6,083
8,477
8,040
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$5,568
$8,077
$7,726
earnings per common share
basic
$12.35
$17.55
$16.34
diluted
12.14
17.07
15.46
average common shares
outstanding
basic
448.9
458.9
471.3
diluted
458.6
473.2
499.6
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial
statements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of comprehensive income
year ended december
$ inmillions
net earnings
$6,083
$8,477
$8,040
other comprehensive income/(loss) adjustments, net of tax:
currency translation
(114
)
(109
)
(50
)
pension and postretirement liabilities
(102
)
available-for-sale securities
(327
)
cash flow hedges
(8
)
other comprehensive income/(loss)
(219
)
(331
)
comprehensive income
$6,108
$8,258
$7,709
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial
statements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of financial condition
as of december
$ inmillions, except per share amounts
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$75,105
$57,600
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes (includes $38,504 and $34,291 at fair value as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively)
56,838
51,716
collateralized agreements:
securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds sold (includes $119,450 and $126,036 at fair value as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively)
120,905
127,938
securities borrowed (includes $69,801 and $66,769 at fair value as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
172,099
160,722
receivables:
brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
25,453
30,671
customers and counterparties (includes $4,992 and $6,944 at fair value as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
46,430
63,808
loans receivable
45,407
28,938
financial instruments owned, at fair value (includes $54,426 and $64,473 pledged as collateral as of december2015 and december2014,
respectively)
293,940
312,248
other assets
25,218
22,201
total assets
$861,395
$855,842
liabilities and shareholders
equity
deposits (includes $14,680 and $13,523 at fair value as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
$97,519
$82,880
collateralized financings:
securities sold under agreements to repurchase, at fair value
86,069
88,215
securities loaned (includes $466 and $765 at fair value as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
3,614
5,570
other secured financings (includes $23,207 and $21,450 at fair value as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
24,753
22,809
payables:
brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
5,406
6,636
customers and counterparties
204,956
206,936
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
115,248
132,083
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings (includes $17,743 and $18,826 at fair value as of
december2015 and december2014, respectively)
42,787
44,539
unsecured long-term borrowings (includes $22,273 and $16,005 at fair value as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
175,422
167,302
other liabilities and accrued expenses (includes $1,253 and $831 at fair value as of december2015
and december2014, respectively)
18,893
16,075
total liabilities
774,667
773,045
commitments, contingencies and
guarantees
shareholders equity
preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share; aggregate liquidation preference of $11,200 and $9,200 as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively
11,200
9,200
common stock, par value $0.01 per share; 4,000,000,000 shares authorized, 863,976,731 and 852,784,764 shares issued as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively, and 419,480,736 and 430,259,102 shares outstanding as of december2015 and december2014, respectively
share-based awards
4,151
3,766
nonvoting common stock, par value $0.01 per share; 200,000,000 shares authorized, no shares issued and outstanding
additional paid-in capital
51,340
50,049
retained earnings
83,386
78,984
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(718
)
(743
)
stock held in treasury, at cost, par value $0.01 per share; 444,495,997 and 422,525,664 shares as of
december2015 and december2014, respectively
(62,640
)
(58,468
)
total shareholders equity
86,728
82,797
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$861,395
$855,842
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of changes in shareholders equity
year ended december
$ inmillions
preferred stock
balance, beginning of year
$9,200
$7,200
$6,200
issued
2,000
2,000
1,000
balance, end of year
11,200
9,200
7,200
common stock
balance, beginning of year
issued
balance, end of year
share-based awards
balance, beginning of year
3,766
3,839
3,298
issuance and amortization of share-based awards
2,308
2,079
2,017
delivery of common stock underlying share-based awards
(1,742
)
(1,725
)
(1,378
)
forfeiture of share-based awards
(72
)
(92
)
(79
)
exercise of share-based awards
(109
)
(335
)
(19
)
balance, end of year
4,151
3,766
3,839
additional paid-in capital
balance, beginning of year
50,049
48,998
48,030
delivery of common stock underlying share-based awards
2,092
2,206
1,483
cancellation of share-based awards in satisfaction of withholding tax requirements
(1,198
)
(1,922
)
(599
)
preferred stock issuance costs
(7
)
(20
)
(9
)
excess net tax benefit related to share-based awards
cash settlement of share-based awards
(2
)
(1
)
(1
)
balance, end of year
51,340
50,049
48,998
retained earnings
balance, beginning of year
78,984
71,961
65,223
net earnings
6,083
8,477
8,040
dividends and dividend equivalents declared on common stock and share-based awards
(1,166
)
(1,054
)
(988
)
dividends declared on preferred stock
(515
)
(400
)
(314
)
balance, end of year
83,386
78,984
71,961
accumulated other comprehensive loss
balance, beginning of year
(743
)
(524
)
(193
)
other comprehensive income/(loss)
(219
)
(331
)
balance, end of year
(718
)
(743
)
(524
)
stock held in treasury, at cost
balance, beginning of year
(58,468
)
(53,015
)
(46,850
)
repurchased
(4,195
)
(5,469
)
(6,175
)
reissued
other
(9
)
(33
)
(30
)
balance, end of year
(62,640
)
(58,468
)
(53,015
)
total shareholders equity
$86,728
$82,797
$78,467
the accompanying notes are an integral part of
these consolidated financial statements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
consolidated statements of cash flows
year ended december
$ inmillions
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$6,083
$8,477
$8,040
adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by/(used for) operating activities
depreciation and amortization
1,337
1,322
deferred income taxes
share-based compensation
2,272
2,085
2,015
gain on sale of european insurance business
(211
)
gain related to extinguishment of junior subordinated debt
(34
)
(289
)
changes in operating assets and liabilities
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
(5,123
)
(2,046
)
(143
)
receivables and payables (excluding loans receivable), net
19,132
12,328
(3,682
)
collateralized transactions (excluding other secured financings), net
(9,005
)
(52,104
)
(51,669
)
financial instruments owned, at fair value
14,472
27,547
51,079
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
(16,835
)
4,642
other, net
(5,417
)
(10,095
)
(3,170
)
net cash provided by/(used for) operating activities
6,961
(7,623
)
4,543
cash flows from investing activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(1,833
)
(678
)
(706
)
proceeds from sales of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
business acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(1,808
)
(1,732
)
(2,274
)
proceeds from sales of investments
1,019
1,514
2,503
purchase of available-for-sale securities
(738
)
proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities
loans receivable, net
(16,180
)
(14,043
)
(8,392
)
net cash used for investing activities
(18,574
)
(14,909
)
(8,728
)
cash flows from financing activities
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
(369
)
1,659
1,336
other secured financings (short-term), net
(867
)
(837
)
(7,272
)
proceeds from issuance of other secured financings (long-term)
10,349
6,900
6,604
repayment of other secured financings (long-term), including the current portion
(6,502
)
(7,636
)
(3,630
)
proceeds from issuance of unsecured long-term borrowings
44,595
39,857
30,851
repayment of unsecured long-term borrowings, including the current portion
(29,520
)
(28,138
)
(30,473
)
purchase of trust preferred securities
(1
)
(1,611
)
derivative contracts with a financing element, net
(47
)
deposits, net
14,639
12,201
common stock repurchased
(4,135
)
(5,469
)
(6,175
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock, preferred stock and share-based awards
(1,681
)
(1,454
)
(1,302
)
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
1,993
1,980
proceeds from issuance of common stock, including exercise of share-based awards
excess tax benefit related to share-based awards
cash settlement of share-based awards
(2
)
(1
)
(1
)
net cash provided by/(used for) financing activities
29,118
18,999
(7,351
)
net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
17,505
(3,533
)
(11,536
)
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
57,600
61,133
72,669
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$75,105
$57,600
$61,133
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $4.82billion, $6.43billion and $5.69billion for 2015,2014 and 2013,
respectively.  cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $2.65billion, $3.05billion and $4.07billion for 2015,2014
and 2013, respectively.  non-cash activities:
during 2015, the firm exchanged $262million of trust preferred securities and common beneficial interests held by the firm for $296million of
the firms junior subordinated debt held by the issuing trust. following the exchange, this junior subordinated debt was extinguished.  during
2015, the firm repurchased $60million of its common stock for which settlement occurred and cash was paid in 2016.  during 2014, the firm
exchanged $1.58billion of trust preferred securities, common beneficial interests and senior guaranteed trust securities held by the firm for $1.87billion of the firms junior subordinated debt held by the issuing trusts. following
the exchange, this junior subordinated debt was extinguished.  during 2014, the firm sold certain consolidated investments and provided seller
financing, which resulted in a non-cash increase to loans receivable of $115million.
the accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note1.
description of business  the goldman sachs group,
inc. (group inc. or parent company), a delaware corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the firm), is a leading global investment banking, securities and investment management firm that provides a wide range of
financial services to a substantial and diversified client base that includes corporations, financial institutions, governments and individuals. founded in 1869, the firm is headquartered in new york and maintains offices in all major financial
centers around the world.  the firm reports its activities in the following four business segments:
investment banking  the firm provides a broad range
of investment banking services to a diverse group of corporations, financial institutions, investment funds and governments. services include strategic advisory assignments with respect to mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, corporate defense
activities, restructurings, spin-offs and risk management, and debt and equity underwriting of public offerings and private placements, including local and cross-border transactions and acquisition financing, as well as derivative transactions
directly related to these activities.  institutional client services
the firm facilitates client transactions and makes markets in fixed income, equity, currency and commodity products, primarily with
institutional clients such as corporations, financial institutions, investment funds and governments. the firm also makes markets in and clears client transactions on major stock, options and futures exchanges worldwide and provides financing,
securities lending and other prime brokerage services to institutional clients.
investing& lending
the firm invests in and originates loans to provide financing to clients. these investments and loans are typically longer-term in nature. the
firm makes investments, some of which are consolidated, directly and indirectly through funds and separate accounts that the firm manages, in debt securities and loans, public and private equity securities, and real estate entities.
investment management  the firm provides investment
management services and offers investment products (primarily through separately managed accounts and commingled vehicles, such as mutual funds and private investment funds) across all major asset classes to a diverse set of institutional and
individual clients. the firm also offers wealth advisory services, including portfolio management and financial counseling, and brokerage and other transaction services to high-net-worth individuals and families.
note2.  basis of presentation
these consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states (u.s.
gaap) and include the accounts of group inc. and all other entities in which the firm has a controlling financial interest. intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated.
all references to 2015,2014 and 2013 refer to the firms years ended, or the dates, as the context requires,
december31,2015, december31,2014 and december31,2013, respectively. any reference to a future year refers to a year ending on december31 of that year. certain reclassifications have been made to previously
reported amounts to conform to the current presentation.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note3.
significant accounting policies
the firms significant accounting policies include when and how to measure the fair value
of assets and liabilities, accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, and when to consolidate an entity. see notes5 through 8 for policies on fair value measurements, note13 for policies on goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets, and below and note12 for policies on consolidation accounting. all other significant accounting policies are either described below or included in the following footnotes:
financial instruments owned, at fair value and
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased,
at fair value
note 4
fair value measurements
note 5
cash instruments
note 6
derivatives and hedging activities
note 7
fair value option
note 8
loans receivable
note 9
collateralized agreements and financings
note 10
securitization activities
note 11
variable interest entities
note 12
other assets, including goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets
note 13
deposits
note 14
short-term borrowings
note 15
long-term borrowings
note 16
other liabilities and accrued expenses
note 17
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
note 18
shareholders equity
note 19
regulation and capital adequacy
note 20
earnings per common share
note 21
transactions with affiliated funds
note 22
interest income and interest expense
note 23
income taxes
note 24
business segments
note 25
credit concentrations
note 26
legal proceedings
note 27
employee benefit plans
note 28
employee incentive plans
note 29
parent company
note30
consolidation
the firm consolidates entities in which the firm has a controlling financial interest. the firm determines whether it has a controlling
financial interest in an entity by first evaluating whether the entity is a voting interest entity or a variable interest entity (vie).  voting interest entities. voting interest entities are entities in which (i)the total equity investment at risk is sufficient to enable the entity to finance its
activities independently and (ii)the equity holders have the power to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly impact its economic performance, the obligation to absorb the losses of the entity and the right to receive the
residual returns of the entity. the usual condition for a controlling financial interest in a voting interest entity is ownership of a majority voting interest. if the firm has a majority voting interest in a voting interest entity, the entity is
consolidated.  variable interest entities. a
vie is an entity that lacks one or more of the characteristics of a voting interest entity. the firm has a controlling financial interest in a vie when the firm has a variable interest or interests that provide it with (i)the power to direct
the activities of the vie that most significantly impact the vies economic performance and (ii)the obligation to absorb losses of the vie or the right to receive benefits from the vie that could potentially be significant to the vie. see
note12 for further information about vies.  equity-method investments. when the firm does not have a controlling financial interest in an entity but can exert significant influence over the entitys operating and financial policies, the investment is accounted for either
(i)under the equity method of accounting or (ii)at fair value by electing the fair value option available under u.s. gaap. significant influence generally exists when the firm owns 20% to 50% of the entitys common stock or
in-substance common stock.  in general, the firm accounts for investments acquired after the fair value option became available, at
fair value. in certain cases, the firm applies the equity method of accounting to new investments that are strategic in nature or closely related to the firms principal business activities, when the firm has a significant degree of involvement
in the cash flows or operations of the investee or when cost-benefit considerations are less significant. see note13 for further information about equity-method investments.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
investment funds. the firm has formed numerous investment funds with third-party investors. these funds are typically organized as limited partnerships or limited liability companies for which the firm acts as general partner or
manager. generally, the firm does not hold a majority of the economic interests in these funds. these funds are usually voting interest entities and generally are not consolidated because third-party investors typically have rights to terminate the
funds or to remove the firm as general partner or manager. investments in these funds are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value. see notes6, 18 and 22 for further information about investments in funds.
use of estimates  preparation of these consolidated
financial statements requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions, the most important of which relate to fair value measurements, accounting for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, the provisions for losses that may arise
from litigation, regulatory proceedings and tax audits, and the allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments held for investment. these estimates and assumptions are based on the best available information but actual results could be
materially different.  revenue recognition  financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value. financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair
value are recorded at fair value either under the fair value option or in accordance with other u.s. gaap. in addition, the firm has elected to account for certain of its other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value by electing the
fair value option. the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. financial assets are
marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked to offer prices. fair value measurements do not include transaction costs. fair value gains or losses are generally included in market making for positions in institutional client
services and other principal transactions for positions in investing& lending. see notes5 through 8 for further information about fair value measurements.
investment banking. fees from financial advisory assignments and underwriting revenues are recognized in earnings when the services related to the underlying transaction are completed under the terms of the assignment. expenses
associated with such transactions are deferred until the related revenue is recognized or the assignment is otherwise concluded. expenses associated with financial advisory assignments are recorded as non-compensation expenses, net of client
reimbursements. underwriting revenues are presented net of related expenses.  investment
management. the firm earns management fees and incentive fees for investment management services. management fees for mutual funds are calculated as a percentage of daily net asset value and are
received monthly. management fees for hedge funds and separately managed accounts are calculated as a percentage of month-end net asset value and are generally received quarterly. management fees for private equity funds are calculated as a
percentage of monthly invested capital or commitments and are received quarterly, semi-annually or annually, depending on the fund. all management fees are recognized over the period that the related service is provided. incentive fees are
calculated as a percentage of a funds or separately managed accounts return, or excess return above a specified benchmark or other performance target. incentive fees are generally based on investment performance over a 12-month period or
over the life of a fund. fees that are based on performance over a 12-month period are subject to adjustment prior to the end of the measurement period. for fees that are based on investment performance over the life of the fund, future investment
underperformance may require fees previously distributed to the firm to be returned to the fund. incentive fees are recognized only when all material contingencies have been resolved. management and incentive fee revenues are included in
investment management revenues.  the firm makes payments to brokers and advisors related to the placement of the
firms investment funds. these payments are computed based on either a percentage of the management fee or the investment funds net asset value. where the firm is principal to the arrangement, such costs are recorded on a gross basis and
included in brokerage, clearing, exchange and distribution fees, and where the firm is agent to the arrangement, such costs are recorded on a net basis in investment management revenues.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
commissions and fees. the firm earns commissions and fees from executing and clearing client transactions on stock, options and futures markets, as well as over-the-counter (otc) transactions. commissions and fees are
recognized on the day the trade is executed.  transfers of assets
transfers of assets are accounted for as sales when the firm has relinquished control over the assets transferred. for transfers of assets
accounted for as sales, any gains or losses are recognized in net revenues. assets or liabilities that arise from the firms continuing involvement with transferred assets are recognized at fair value. for transfers of assets that are not
accounted for as sales, the assets remain in financial instruments owned, at fair value and the transfer is accounted for as a collateralized financing, with the related interest expense recognized over the life of the transaction. see
note10 for further information about transfers of assets accounted for as collateralized financings and note11 for further information about transfers of assets accounted for as sales.
cash and cash equivalents  the firm defines cash
equivalents as highly liquid overnight deposits held in the ordinary course of business. as of december2015 and december2014, cash and cash equivalents included $6.47billion and $5.79billion, respectively, of cash
and due from banks, and $68.64billion and $51.81billion, respectively, of interest-bearing deposits with banks.  receivables from and payables to
brokers, dealers and clearing organizations  receivables from and payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations are accounted
for at cost plus accrued interest, which generally approximates fair value. while these receivables and payables are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair
value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6 through 8. had these receivables and payables been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all
would have been classified in level2 as of december2015 and december2014.
receivables from customers and counterparties
receivables from customers and counterparties generally relate to collateralized transactions. such receivables are primarily comprised of
customer margin loans, certain transfers of assets accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases at fair value and collateral posted in connection with certain derivative transactions. substantially all of these receivables are accounted for
at amortized cost net of estimated uncollectible amounts. certain of the firms receivables from customers and counterparties are accounted for at fair value under the fair value option, with changes in fair value generally included in
market making revenues. see note8 for further information about receivables from customers and counterparties accounted for at fair value under the fair value option. in addition, as of december2015 and december2014,
the firms receivables from customers and counterparties included $2.35billion and $400million, respectively, of loans held for sale, accounted for at the lower of cost or fair value. see note5 for an overview of the
firms fair value measurement policies.  as of december2015 and december2014, the carrying value of receivables not
accounted for at fair value generally approximated fair value. while these items are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s.
gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6 through 8. had these items been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of
december2015 and december2014. interest on receivables from customers and counterparties is recognized over the life of the transaction and included in interest income.
payables to customers and counterparties  payables
to customers and counterparties primarily consist of customer credit balances related to the firms prime brokerage activities. payables to customers and counterparties are accounted for at cost plus accrued interest, which generally
approximates fair value. while these payables are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included
in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6 through 8. had these payables been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of december2015 and
december2014. interest on payables to customers and counterparties is recognized over the life of the transaction and included in interest expense.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
offsetting assets and liabilities
to reduce credit exposures on derivatives and securities financing transactions, the firm may enter into master netting agreements or similar
arrangements (collectively, netting agreements) with counterparties that permit it to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties. a netting agreement is a contract with a counterparty that permits net settlement of multiple
transactions with that counterparty, including upon the exercise of termination rights by a non-defaulting party. upon exercise of such termination rights, all transactions governed by the netting agreement are terminated and a net settlement amount
is calculated. in addition, the firm receives and posts cash and securities collateral with respect to its derivatives and securities financing transactions, subject to the terms of the related credit support agreements or similar arrangements
(collectively, credit support agreements). an enforceable credit support agreement grants the non-defaulting party exercising termination rights the right to liquidate the collateral and apply the proceeds to any amounts owed. in order to assess
enforceability of the firms right of setoff under netting and credit support agreements, the firm evaluates various factors including applicable bankruptcy laws, local statutes and regulatory provisions in the jurisdiction of the parties to
the agreement.  derivatives are reported on a net-by-counterparty basis (i.e., the net payable or receivable for derivative assets and
liabilities for a given counterparty) in the consolidated statements of financial condition when a legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable netting agreement. resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loaned transactions
with the same term and currency are presented on a net-by-counterparty basis in the consolidated statements of financial condition when such transactions meet certain settlement criteria and are subject to netting agreements.
in the consolidated statements of financial condition, derivatives are reported net of cash collateral received and posted under enforceable
credit support agreements, when transacted under an enforceable netting agreement.in the consolidated statements of financial condition, resale and repurchase agreements, and securities borrowed and loaned, are not reported net of the related
cash and securities received or posted as collateral. see note10 for further information about collateral received and pledged, including rights to deliver or repledge collateral. see notes7 and 10 for further information about
offsetting.
foreign currency translation
assets and liabilities denominated in non-u.s. currencies are translated at rates of exchange prevailing on the date of the consolidated
statements of financial condition and revenues and expenses are translated at average rates of exchange for the period. foreign currency remeasurement gains or losses on transactions in nonfunctional currencies are recognized in earnings. gains or
losses on translation of the financial statements of a non-u.s. operation, when the functional currency is other than the u.s. dollar, are included, net of hedges and taxes, in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
recent accounting developments  reporting discontinued operations and disclosures of disposals of components of an entity (asc205 and asc360). in april2014, the fasb issued asu
no.2014-08, presentation of financial statements (topic205) and property, plant, and equipment (topic360) reporting discontinued operations and disclosures of disposals of components of an entity. asu
no.2014-08 limits discontinued operations reporting to disposals of components of an entity that represent strategic shifts that have (or will have) a major effect on an entitys operations and financial results. the asu requires expanded
disclosures for discontinued operations and disposals of individually significant components of an entity that do not qualify for discontinued operations reporting. the asu was effective for disposals and components classified as held for sale that
occurred within annual periods beginning on or after december15,2014, and interim periods within those years. early adoption was permitted. the firm early adopted asu no.2014-08 in 2014 and adoption did not materially affect the
firms financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.  revenue from contracts
with customers (asc606). in may2014, the fasb issued asu no.2014-09, revenue from contracts with customers (topic606). asu no.2014-09 provides
comprehensive guidance on the recognition of revenue from customers arising from the transfer of goods and services. the asu also provides guidance on accounting for certain contract costs, and requires new disclosures. asu no.2014-09, as
amended in august2015 by asu no.2015-14, is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after december15,2017, including interim periods within that reporting period. early adoption is permitted for annual reporting
periods beginning after december15,2016. the firm is still evaluating the effect of the asu on its financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
repurchase-to-maturity transactions, repurchase financings,
and disclosures (asc860). in june2014, the fasb issued asu no.2014-11, transfers and servicing (topic860) repurchase-to-maturity transactions, repurchase
financings, and disclosures. asu no.2014-11 changes the accounting for repurchase- and resale-to-maturity agreements by requiring that such agreements be recognized as financing arrangements, and requires that a transfer of a financial
asset and a repurchase agreement entered into contemporaneously be accounted for separately. asu no.2014-11 also requires additional disclosures about certain transferred financial assets accounted for as sales and certain securities financing
transactions. the accounting changes and additional disclosures about certain transferred financial assets accounted for as sales were effective for the first interim and annual reporting periods beginning after december15,2014. the
additional disclosures for certain securities financing transactions were required for annual reporting periods beginning after december15,2014 and for interim reporting periods beginning after march15,2015. adoption of asu
no.2014-11 did not materially affect the firms financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.  measuring the financial assets and the financial liabilities of a consolidated collateralized financing entity (asc810). in august2014, the fasb issued asu
no.2014-13, consolidation (topic810) measuring the financial assets and the financial liabilities of a consolidated collateralized financing entity (cfe). asu no.2014-13 provides an alternative to reflect
changes in the fair value of the financial assets and the financial liabilities of the cfe by measuring either the fair value of the assets or liabilities, whichever is more observable.asu no.2014-13 provides new disclosure requirements
for those electing this approach, and was effective for interim and annual periods beginning after december15,2015.adoption of asu no.2014-13 in the first quarter of 2016 did not materially affect the firms financial
condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
amendments to the consolidation analysis
(asc810).in february2015, the fasb issued asu no.2015-02, consolidation (topic810) amendments to the consolidation analysis.asu
no.2015-02 eliminates the deferral of the requirements of asu no.2009-17, consolidations (topic810) improvements to financial reporting by enterprises involved with variable interest entities for certain
interests in investment funds and provides a scope exception from topic810 for certain investments in money market funds. the asu also makes several modifications to the consolidation guidance for vies and general partners investments in
limited partnerships, as well as modifications to the evaluation of whether limited partnerships are vies or voting interest entities.asu no.2015-02 is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after
december15,2015.asu no.2015-02 is required to be adopted under a modified retrospective approach or retrospectively to all periods presented. early adoption was permitted. the firm adopted asu no.2015-02 effective
january1,2016, using a modified retrospective approach. the impact of adoption was not material (approximately $200million on the firms statement of financial condition).
simplifying the presentation of debt issuance costs (asc835). in april2015, the fasb issued asu no.2015-03, interest imputation of interest (subtopic 835-30) simplifying the presentation of debt issuance costs. asu
no.2015-03 simplifies the presentation of debt issuance costs by requiring that these costs related to a recognized debt liability be presented in the statement of financial condition as a direct reduction from the carrying amount of that
liability. asu no.2015-03 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after december15,2015, including interim periods within that reporting period. asu no.2015-03 is required to be applied retrospectively to all
periods presented beginning in the year of adoption. early adoption was permitted. the firm early adopted asu no.2015-03 in september2015 and upon adoption the impact was a reduction to both total assets and total liabilities of
$444million. in accordance with asu no.2015-03, previously reported amounts have been conformed to the current presentation, as reflected in notes13 through 16. the impact as of december2014 was a reduction to both total
assets and total liabilities of $398million.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
disclosures for investments in certain entities that
calculate net asset value (nav) per share (or its equivalent) (asc820). in may2015, the fasb issued asu no.201507, fair value measurement (topic820)
disclosures for investments in certain entities that calculate net asset value per share (or its equivalent). asu no.201507 requires that investments for which the fair value is measured at nav using the practical expedient
(investments in funds measured at nav) under fair value measurements and disclosures (topic820) be excluded from the fair value hierarchy. asu no.201507 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after
december15,2015, including interim periods within that reporting period. asu no.201507 is required to be applied retrospectively to all periods presented beginning in the period of adoption. early adoption was permitted. the
firm early adopted asu no.201507 in june2015 and adoption did not affect the firms financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. in accordance with asu no.2015-07, previously reported amounts have been
conformed to the current presentation. see notes4 through 6 for the disclosures required by asu no.2015-07.  simplifying the accounting for measurement-period adjustments (asc805). in september2015, the fasb issued asu no.2015-16, business combinations
(topic805) simplifying the accounting for measurement-period adjustments. asu no.2015-16 eliminates the requirement for an acquirer in a business combination to account for measurement-period adjustments
retrospectively. asu no.2015-16 was effective for annual reporting periods beginning after december15,2015, including interim periods within that reporting period. adoption of asu no.2015-16 in the first quarter of 2016 did
not materially affect the firms financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
recognition and measurement of financial assets and financial
liabilities (asc825). in january2016, the fasb issued asu no.2016-01, financial instruments (topic825) recognition and measurement of financial assets and
financial liabilities. asu no.2016-01 amends certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of financial instruments. this guidance includes a requirement to present separately in other comprehensive income
changes in fair value attributable to a firms own credit spreads (debt valuation adjustments or dva), net of tax, on financial liabilities for which the fair value option was elected. asu no.2016-01 is effective for annual reporting
periods beginning after december15,2017, including interim periods within that reporting period. early adoption is permitted under a modified retrospective approach for the requirements related to dva. the cumulative dva gain, net of
tax, of approximately $300million as of december2015, will be reclassified from retained earnings to accumulated other comprehensive loss if asu no.2016-01 is early adopted by the firm in 2016. in addition, any dva recorded during
2016 would be classified as other comprehensive income/(loss).  note4.
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value are accounted for at fair value
either under the fair value option or in accordance with other u.s. gaap. see note8 for further information about other financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value primarily under the fair value option.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the tables below present the firms financial instruments owned, at fair value, and
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
financial instruments
owned
financial instruments
sold, but not yet
purchased
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$2,583
$
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
46,382
15,516
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
31,772
14,973
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
4,975
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
13,183
bank loans and bridge loans
12,164
corporate debt securities
16,640
6,123
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
1,595
equities and convertible debentures
98,072
31,394
commodities
3,935
investments in funds measured at nav
7,757
subtotal
240,050
68,477
derivatives
53,890
46,771
total
$293,940
$115,248
as of december2014
$ inmillions
financial instruments
owned
financial instruments
sold, but not yet
purchased
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$3,654
$
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
48,002
12,762
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
37,059
20,500
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
7,140
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
11,717
bank loans and bridge loans
14,171
corporate debt securities
21,419
5,800
state and municipal obligations
1,203
other debt obligations
3,257
equities and convertible debentures
87,900
28,314
commodities
3,846
1,224
investments in funds measured at nav
9,610
subtotal
248,978
69,067
derivatives
63,270
63,016
total
$312,248
$132,083
1.
includes $3.11billion and $4.97billion of loans backed by commercial real estate as of december2015 and december2014, respectively.
2.
includes $10.22billion and $6.43billion of loans backed by residential real estate as of december2015 and december2014, respectively.
3.
includes $272million and $618million of loans backed by consumer loans and other assets as of december2015 and december2014,
respectively.
gains and losses from market making and other principal transactions
the table below presents market making revenues by major product type, as well as other principal transactions
revenues. these gains/(losses) include both realized and unrealized gains and losses, and are primarily related to the firms financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value,
including both derivative and non-derivative financial instruments. these gains/(losses) exclude related interest income and interest expense. see note23 for further information about interest income and interest expense.
the gains/(losses) in the table below are not representative of the manner in which the firm manages its business activities because many of
the firms market-making and client facilitation strategies utilize financial instruments across various product types. accordingly, gains or losses in one product type frequently offset gains or losses in other product types. for example, most
of the firms longer-term derivatives across product types are sensitive to changes in interest rates and may be economically hedged with interest rate swaps. similarly, a significant portion of the firms cash instruments and derivatives
across product types has exposure to foreign currencies and may be economically hedged with foreign currency contracts.
$ inmillions
product type
year ended december
interest rates
$(1,360
)
$(5,316
)
$930
credit
2,982
1,845
currencies
3,345
6,566
2,446
equities
5,515
2,683
2,655
commodities
1,103
1,450
other
market making
9,523
8,365
9,368
other principal transactions1
5,018
6,588
6,993
total
$14,541
$14,953
$16,361
1.
other principal transactions are included in the firms investing& lending segment. see note25 for net revenues, including net interest
income, by product type for investing& lending, as well as the amount of net interest income included in investing& lending.
2.
includes a gain of $211million on the sale of a majority stake in the firms european insurance business.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note5.
fair value measurements
the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received to sell an asset
or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. financial assets are marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked to offer prices. fair value measurements do not include
transaction costs. the firm measures certain financial assets and financial liabilities as a portfolio (i.e., based on its net exposure to market and/or credit risks).
the best evidence of fair value is a quoted price in an active market. if quoted prices in active markets are not available, fair value is
determined by reference to prices for similar instruments, quoted prices or recent transactions in less active markets, or internally developed models that primarily use market-based or independently sourced parameters as inputs including, but not
limited to, interest rates, volatilities, equity or debt prices, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, credit spreads and funding spreads (i.e., the spread, or difference, between the interest rate at which a borrower could finance a given
financial instrument relative to a benchmark interest rate).  u.s. gaap has a three-level fair value hierarchy for disclosure of fair value
measurements. the fair value hierarchy prioritizes inputs to the valuation techniques used to measure fair value, giving the highest priority to level1 inputs and the lowest priority to level3 inputs. a financial instruments level
in the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to its fair value measurement. the fair value hierarchy is as follows:
level1. inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets to which the firm had access
at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
level2. inputs to valuation techniques are observable, either directly or indirectly.
level3. one or more inputs to valuation techniques are significant and unobservable.
the fair values for substantially all of the firms financial assets and financial liabilities are based on observable prices and inputs
and are classified in levels1 and 2 of the fair value hierarchy. certain level2 and level3 financial assets and financial liabilities may require appropriate valuation adjustments that a market participant would require to arrive
at fair value for factors such as counterparty and the firms credit quality, funding risk, transfer restrictions, liquidity and bid/offer spreads. valuation adjustments are generally based on market evidence.
see notes6 through 8 for further information about fair value measurements of cash
instruments, derivatives and other financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value primarily under the fair value option (including information about unrealized gains and losses related to level3 financial assets and
financial liabilities, and transfers in and out of level3), respectively.  the table below presents financial assets and financial
liabilities accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or in accordance with other u.s. gaap. counterparty and cash collateral netting represents the impact on derivatives of netting across levels of the fair value hierarchy. netting
among positions classified in the same level is included in that level.
as of december
$ inmillions
total level1 financial assets
$153,051
$139,484
total level2 financial assets
432,445
466,030
total level3 financial assets
24,046
35,780
investments in funds measured at nav
7,757
9,610
counterparty and cash collateral netting
(90,612
)
(104,616
)
total financial assets at fair value
$526,687
$546,288
total assets1
$861,395
$855,842
total level3 financial assets as a percentage oftotal assets
2.8%
4.2%
total level3 financial assets as a percentage oftotal financial assets at fair value
4.6%
6.5%
total level1 financial liabilities
$59,798
$59,697
total level2 financial liabilities
245,759
253,364
total level3 financial liabilities
16,812
15,904
counterparty and cash collateral netting
(41,430
)
(37,267
)
total financial liabilities at fair value
$280,939
$291,698
total level3 financial liabilities as a percentage of total financial liabilities at fair
value
6.0%
5.5%
1.
includes $836billion and $834billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, that is carried at fair value or at amounts
that generally approximate fair value.  the table below presents a summary of level3 financial assets. see
notes6 through 8 for further information about level3 financial assets.
level3financialassets
as of december
$ inmillions
cash instruments
$18,131
$28,650
derivatives
5,870
7,074
other financial assets
total
$24,046
$35,780
level3 financial assets as of december2015 decreased compared with december2014, primarily
reflecting a decrease in level3 cash instruments. see note6 for further information about changes in level3 cash instruments.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note6.
cash instruments
cash instruments include u.s. government and federal agency obligations, non-u.s. government and
agency obligations, mortgage-backed loans and securities, bank loans and bridge loans, corporate debt securities, equities and convertible debentures, investments in funds measured at nav, and other non-derivative financial instruments owned and
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased. see below for the types of cash instruments included in each level of the fair value hierarchy and the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine their fair values. see
note5 for an overview of the firms fair value measurement policies.  level1 cash instruments
level1 cash instruments include u.s. government obligations and most non-u.s. government obligations, actively traded listed equities,
certain government agency obligations and money market instruments. these instruments are valued using quoted prices for identical unrestricted instruments in active markets.
the firm defines active markets for equity instruments based on the average daily trading volume both in absolute terms and relative to the
market capitalization for the instrument. the firm defines active markets for debt instruments based on both the average daily trading volume and the number of days with trading activity.
level2 cash instruments
level2 cash instruments include commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits, most government agency obligations, certain
non-u.s. government obligations, most corporate debt securities, commodities, certain mortgage-backed loans and securities, certain bank loans and bridge loans, restricted or less liquid listed equities, most state and municipal obligations and
certain lending commitments.  valuations of level2 cash instruments can be verified to quoted prices, recent trading activity for
identical or similar instruments, broker or dealer quotations or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. consideration is given to the nature of the quotations (e.g., indicative or firm) and the relationship of
recent market activity to the prices provided from alternative pricing sources.  valuation adjustments are typically made to level2
cash instruments (i)if the cash instrument is subject to transfer restrictions and/or (ii)for other premiums and liquidity discounts that a market participant would require to arrive at fair value. valuation adjustments are generally
based on market evidence.  level3 cash instruments
level3 cash instruments have one or more significant valuation inputs that are not observable. absent evidence to the contrary,
level3 cash instruments are initially valued at transaction price, which is considered to be the best initial estimate of fair value. subsequently, the firm uses other methodologies to determine fair value, which vary based on the type of
instrument. valuation inputs and assumptions are changed when corroborated by substantive observable evidence, including values realized on sales of financial assets.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
valuation techniques and significant inputs
the table below presents the valuation techniques and the nature of significant inputs. these
valuation techniques and
significant inputs are generally used to determine the fair values of each type of level3 cash instrument.
level3 cash instruments
valuation techniques and significant inputs
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
directly or indirectly collateralized by a single commercial
real estate property or a portfolio of properties  mayinclude tranches of varying levels of subordination
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value
analyses and include:
transaction prices in both the underlying collateral and
instruments with the same or similar underlying collateral and the basis, or price difference, to such prices
market yields implied by transactions of similar or related
assets and/or current levels and changes in market indices such as the cmbx (an index that tracks the performance of commercial mortgage bonds)
a measure of expected future cash flows in a default scenario
(recovery rates) implied by the value of the underlying collateral, which is mainly driven by current performance of the underlying collateral, capitalization rates and multiples. recovery rates are expressed as a percentage of notional or face
value of the instrument and reflect the benefit of credit enhancements on certain instruments
timing of expected future cash flows (duration) which, in certain cases, may incorporate the impact of other unobservable inputs (e.g., prepayment speeds)
loans and securities backed by residential realestate
directly or indirectly collateralized by portfolios of
residential real estate  mayinclude tranches of varying levels of subordination
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value
analyses, which incorporate comparisons to instruments with similar collateral and risk profiles. significant inputs include:
transaction prices in both the underlying collateral and
instruments with the same or similar underlying collateral
market yields implied by transactions of similar or related
assets
cumulative loss expectations, driven by default rates, home
price projections, residential property liquidation timelines, related costs and subsequent recoveries
duration, driven by underlying loan prepayment speeds and residential property liquidation timelines
bank loans and bridge loans
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value
analyses, which incorporate comparisons both to prices of credit default swaps that reference the same or similar underlying instrument or entity and to other debt instruments for the same issuer for which observable prices or broker quotations are
available. significant inputs include:
market yields implied by transactions of similar or related
assets and/or current levels and trends of market indices such as cdx and lcdx (indices that track the performance of corporate credit and loans, respectively)
current performance and recovery assumptions and, where the
firm uses credit default swaps to value the related cash instrument, the cost of borrowing the underlying reference obligation
duration
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
corporate debt securities
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
valuation techniques vary by instrument, but are generally based on discounted cash flow techniques.
significant inputs are generally determined based on relative value
analyses, which incorporate comparisons both to prices of credit default swaps that reference the same or similar underlying instrument or entity and to other debt instruments for the same issuer for which observable prices or broker quotations are
available. significant inputs include:
market yields implied by transactions of similar or related
assets and/or current levels and trends of market indices such as cdx and lcdx
current performance and recovery assumptions and, where the
firm uses credit default swaps to value the related cash instrument, the cost of borrowing the underlying reference obligation
duration
equities and convertible debentures (including private equity investments and investments in real estate entities)
recent
third-party completed or pending transactions (e.g., merger proposals, tender offers, debt restructurings) are considered to be the best evidence for any change in fair value. when these are not available, the following valuation methodologies are
used, as appropriate:
industry multiples (primarily ebitda multiples) and public
comparables
transactions in similar instruments
discounted cash flow techniques
third-party appraisals
the firm also considers changes in the outlook for the relevant industry
and financial performance of the issuer as compared to projected performance. significant inputs include:
market and transaction multiples
discount rates, long-term growth rates, earnings compound
annual growth rates and capitalization rates
for equity instruments with debt-like features: market yields implied by transactions of similar or related assets, current performance and recovery assumptions, and duration
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
significant unobservable inputs
the table below presents the ranges and weighted averages of significant unobservable inputs
used to value the firms level3 cash instruments. in the table below:
ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the valuation of each type of cash instrument.
weighted averages are calculated by weighting each input by the relative fair value of the financial instruments.
the ranges and weighted averages of these inputs are not representative of the appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one
cash instrument. for example, the highest multiple presented in the tables below for private equity investments is appropriate for valuing a specific private equity investment but may not be appropriate for valuing any other private equity
investment. accordingly, the ranges of inputs presented below do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair value measurements of the firms level3 cash instruments.
increases in yield, discount rate, capitalization rate, duration or cumulative loss rate used in the valuation of the firms level3 cash
instruments would result in a lower fair value measurement, while increases in recovery rate, basis, multiples, long-term growth rate or compound annual growth rate would result in a higher fair value measurement. due to the distinctive nature of
each of the firms level3 cash instruments, the interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform within each product type.
the fair value of any one instrument may be determined using multiple valuation techniques. for example, market comparables and discounted cash
flows may be used together to determine fair value. therefore, the level3 balance encompasses both of these techniques.
level3
cash instruments
valuation techniques and
significantunobservableinputs
rangeofsignificantunobservable inputs (weighted average)
as of december2015
as of december2014
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
directly or indirectly collateralized by a single commercial real
estate property or a portfolio of properties  mayinclude tranches of varying levels of subordination
($1.92billion and $3.28billion of level3 assets as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
discounted cash flows:
yield
3.5% to 22.0% (11.8%)
3.2% to 20.0%
(10.5%)
recovery rate
19.6% to 96.5% (59.4%)
24.9% to 100.0%
(68.3%)
duration (years)
0.3 to 5.3 (2.3)
0.3 to 4.7
(2.0)
basis
(11)pointsto4points((2)points)
(8)pointsto13points(2points)
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
directly or indirectly collateralized by portfolios of residential
real estate
mayinclude tranches of varying levels of subordination
($1.77billion and $2.55billion of level3 assets as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively)
discounted
cash flows:
yield
3.2% to 17.0% (7.9%)
1.9% to 17.5%
(7.6%)
cumulative loss rate
4.6% to 44.2% (27.3%)
0.0% to 95.1%
(24.4%)
duration (years)
1.5 to 13.8 (7.0)
0.5 to 13.0 (4.3)
bank loans and bridge loans
($3.15billion and $6.97billion of level3 assets as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
discounted cash flows:
yield
1.9% to 36.6% (10.2%)
1.4% to 29.5%
(8.7%)
recovery rate
14.5% to 85.6% (51.2%)
26.6% to 92.5%
(60.6%)
duration (years)
0.7 to 6.1 (2.2)
0.3 to 7.8 (2.5)
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
corporate debt securities
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
($2.74billion and $4.75billion of level3 assets as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
discounted cash flows:
yield
0.9% to 25.6% (10.9%)
0.9% to 24.4%
(9.2%)
recovery rate
0.0% to 70.0% (59.7%)
0.0% to 71.9%
(59.2%)
duration (years)
1.1 to 11.4 (4.5)
0.5 to 19.6 (3.7)
equities and convertible debentures (including private equity investments and investments in real estate entities)
($8.55billion and $11.11billion of level3 assets as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively)
market comparables anddiscounted cash flows:
multiples
0.7x to 21.4x (6.4x)
0.8x to 16.6x
(6.5x)
discount rate/yield
7.1% to 20.0% (14.8%)
3.7% to 30.0%
(14.4%)
long-termgrowthrate/
compoundannualgrowthrate
3.0% to 5.2% (4.5%)
1.0% to 10.0%
(6.0%)
capitalization rate
5.5% to 12.5% (7.6%)
3.8% to 13.0% (7.6%)
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
fair value of cash instruments by level
the tables below present cash instrument assets and liabilities at fair value by level within
the fair value hierarchy. in the tables below:
cash instrument assets and liabilities are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold,
but not yet purchased, at fair value, respectively.
cash instrument assets are shown as positive amounts and cash instrument liabilities are shown as negative amounts.
cash instruments at fair value
as of december2015
$ inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
assets
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$625
$1,958
$
$2,583
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
24,844
21,538
46,382
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
26,500
5,260
31,772
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
3,051
1,924
4,975
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
11,418
1,765
13,183
bank loans and bridge loans
9,014
3,150
12,164
corporate debt securities
14,330
2,092
16,640
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
1,057
1,595
equities and convertible debentures
81,252
8,271
8,549
98,072
commodities
3,935
3,935
subtotal
$133,439
$80,723
$18,131
$232,293
investments in funds measured at nav
7,757
total cash instrument assets
$240,050
liabilities
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
$(15,455
)
$(61
)
$
$(15,516
)
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
(13,522
)
(1,451
)
(14,973
)
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
(4
)
(4
)
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
(2
)
(2
)
bankloansandbridgeloans
(337
)
(124
)
(461
)
corporate debt securities
(2
)
(6,119
)
(2
)
(6,123
)
state and municipal obligations
(2
)
(2
)
other debt obligations
(1
)
(1
)
(2
)
equities and convertible debentures
(30,790
)
(538
)
(66
)
(31,394
)
total cash instrument liabilities
$(59,769
)
$(8,515
)
$(193
)
$(68,477
)
cash instruments at fair value
as of december2014
$ inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
assets
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$
$3,654
$
$3,654
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
18,540
29,462
48,002
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
30,255
6,668
37,059
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
3,865
3,275
7,140
loans and securities backed by residential real estate
9,172
2,545
11,717
bankloansandbridgeloans
7,198
6,973
14,171
corporate debt securities
17,537
3,633
21,419
state and municipal obligations
1,093
1,203
other debt obligations
2,387
3,257
equities and convertible debentures
68,974
7,818
11,108
87,900
commodities
3,846
3,846
subtotal
$118,018
$92,700
$28,650
$239,368
investments in funds measured at nav
9,610
total cash instrument assets
$248,978
liabilities
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
$(12,746
)
$(16
)
$
$(12,762
)
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
(19,256
)
(1,244
)
(20,500
)
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate
(1
)
(1
)
bank loans and bridge loans
(286
)
(178
)
(464
)
corporate debt securities
(5,741
)
(59
)
(5,800
)
other debt obligations
(2
)
(2
)
equities and convertible debentures
(27,587
)
(722
)
(5
)
(28,314
)
commodities
(1,224
)
(1,224
)
total cash instrument liabilities
$(59,589
)
$(9,234
)
$(244
)
$(69,067
)
in the tables above:
total cash instrument assets includes collateralized debt obligations (cdos) and collateralized loan obligations (clos) backed by real estate and
corporate obligations of $405million in level2 and $774million in level3 as of december2015, and $234million in level2 and $1.34billion in level3 as of december2014, respectively.
level3 equities and convertible debentures includes $7.69billion of private equity investments, $308million of investments in
real estate entities and $552million of convertible debentures as of december2015, and $10.25billion of private equity investments, $294million of investments in real estate entities and $562million of convertible
debentures as of december2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
transfers between levels of the fair valuehierarchy
transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the beginning of the reporting period in which they occur.
during 2015:
transfers into level2 from level1 of cash instruments were $260million, reflecting transfers of public equity securities
primarily due to decreased market activity in these instruments.
transfers into level1 from level2 of cash instruments were $283million, reflecting transfers of public equity securities due to
increased market activity in these instruments.  during 2014:
transfers into level2 from level1 of cash instruments were $60million, including $47million of public equity securities and
$13million of u.s. government and federal agency obligations due to decreased market activity in these instruments.
transfers into level1 from level2 of cash instruments were $92million, reflecting transfers of public equity securities due to
increased market activity in these instruments.  see level3 rollforward below for information about transfers
between level2 and level3.
level3 rollforward
the table below presents changes in fair value for all cash instrument assets and liabilities categorized as level3 as of the end of the
year. in the table below:
if a cash instrument asset or liability was transferred to level3 during a reporting period, its entire gain or loss for the period is
included in level3. for level3 cash instrument assets, increases are shown as positive amounts, while decreases are shown as negative amounts. for level3 cash instrument liabilities, increases are shown as negative amounts, while
decreases are shown as positive amounts.
level3 cash instruments are frequently economically hedged with level1 and level2 cash instruments and/or level1,
level2 or level3 derivatives. accordingly, gains or losses that are reported in level3 can be partially offset by gains or losses attributable to level1 or level2 cash instruments and/or level1, level2 or
level3 derivatives. as a result, gains or losses included in the level3 rollforward below do not necessarily represent the overall impact on the firms results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
purchases include both originations and secondary market purchases.
net unrealized gains/(losses) relate to instruments that were still held at year-end.
for the year ended december2015, the net realized and unrealized gains on level3 cash instrument assets of $1.66billion
(reflecting $957million of realized gains and $701million of unrealized gains) include gains/(losses) of approximately $(142)million, $1.08billion and $718million reported in market making, other
principal transactions and interest income, respectively.
for the year ended december2014, the net realized and unrealized gains on level3 cash instrument assets of $3.20billion
(reflecting $1.33billion of realized gains and $1.87billion of unrealized gains) include gains of approximately $247million, $1.95billion and $1.00billion reported in market making, other principal
transactions and interest income, respectively.
see level3 rollforward commentary below for an explanation of the net unrealized gains/(losses) on level3 cash instruments
and the activity related to transfers into and out of level3.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 cash instrument assets and liabilities at fair value
$ inmillions
balance,beginningof year
netrealizedgains/(losses)
netunrealizedgains/(losses)
purchases
sales
settlements
transfersintolevel3
transfersout oflevel3
balance,end of year
year ended
december2015
non-u.s. government and agency
obligations
$136
$7
$
$11
$(35
)
$(23
)
$
$(84
)
$12
loans and securities backed by commercial realestate
3,275
(598
)
(1,569
)
(265
)
1,924
loans and securities backed by residential realestate
2,545
(609
)
(327
)
(780
)
1,765
bank loans and bridge loans
6,973
(156
)
(1,027
)
(2,170
)
(1,847
)
3,150
corporate debt securities
3,633
(78
)
(641
)
(982
)
(900
)
2,092
state and municipal obligations
(24
)
(2
)
(22
)
other debt obligations
(164
)
(206
)
(125
)
equities and convertible debentures
11,108
1,295
(744
)
(1,193
)
(3,478
)
8,549
total cash instrument assets
$28,650
$957
$701
$3,840
$(3,842
)
$(6,472
)
$1,798
$(7,501
)
$18,131
total cash instrument liabilities
$(244
)
$(28
)
$(21
)
$205
$(38
)
$(14
)
$(116
)
$63
$(193
)
year ended
december2014
non-u.s. government and agency
obligations
$40
$7
$3
$103
$(20
)
$(5
)
$8
$
$136
loans and securities backed by commercial realestate
2,515
1,877
(436
)
(890
)
(189
)
3,275
loans and securities backed by residential realestate
1,961
1,008
(363
)
(497
)
(146
)
2,545
bank loans and bridge loans
6,071
(222
)
4,512
(709
)
(3,166
)
(418
)
6,973
corporate debt securities
2,744
(16
)
2,635
(1,023
)
(929
)
(416
)
3,633
state and municipal obligations
(112
)
(2
)
(77
)
other debt obligations
(212
)
(164
)
(95
)
equities and convertible debentures
8,671
1,788
2,670
(1,128
)
(1,016
)
1,250
(1,259
)
11,108
total cash instrument assets
$23,066
$1,328
$1,870
$13,265
$(4,003
)
$(6,669
)
$2,393
$(2,600
)
$28,650
total cash instrument liabilities
$(297
)
$12
$(1
)
$223
$(121
)
$(23
)
$(49
)
$12
$(244
)
level3 rollforward commentary
year ended december2015. the net unrealized gain on level3 cash instruments of $680million (reflecting a $701million gain on cash instrument assets and a $21million loss on cash instrument liabilities) for 2015
primarily reflected gains on private equity investments, principally driven by company-specific events and strong corporate performance.
transfers into level3 during 2015 primarily reflected transfers of certain bank loans and bridge loans, private equity investments and
loans and securities backed by commercial real estate from level2, principally due to reduced price transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence, including fewer market transactions in these instruments.
transfers out of level3 during 2015 primarily reflected transfers of certain private equity investments, corporate debt securities and
loans and securities backed by residential real estate to level2, principally due to increased price transparency as a result of market evidence, including market transactions in these instruments, and transfers of certain bank loans and
bridge loans to level2 principally due to certain unobservable yield and duration inputs not being significant to the valuation of these instruments.
year ended december2014. the net unrealized gain on level3 cash instruments of $1.87billion (reflecting a $1.87billion gain on cash instrument assets and a $1million loss on cash instrument liabilities) for 2014
primarily reflected gains on private equity investments principally driven by company-specific events and strong corporate performance.
transfers into level3 during 2014 primarily reflected transfers of certain private equity investments and corporate debt securities from
level2 principally due to reduced price transparency as a result of a lack of market evidence, including fewer market transactions in these instruments.
transfers out of level3 during 2014 primarily reflected transfers of certain private equity investments, bank loan and bridge loans and
corporate debt securities to level2 principally due to increased price transparency as a result of market evidence, including market transactions in these instruments.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
investments in funds that are measured at net asset value per share
cash instruments at fair value include investments in funds that are measured at nav of the
investment fund. the firm uses nav to measure the fair value of its fund investments when (i)the fund investment does not have a readily determinable fair value and (ii)the nav of the investment fund is calculated in a manner consistent
with the measurement principles of investment company accounting, including measurement of the underlying investments at fair value. the firm early adopted asu no.2015-07 in june2015 and, as required, disclosures in the paragraphs and
tables below are limited to only those investments in funds that are measured at nav. in accordance with asu no.2015-07, previously reported amounts have been conformed to the current presentation.
the firms investments in funds measured at nav primarily consist of investments in firm-sponsored private equity, credit, real estate and
hedge funds where the firm co-invests with third-party investors.  private equity funds primarily invest in a broad range of industries
worldwide in a variety of situations, including leveraged buyouts, recapitalizations, growth investments and distressed investments. credit funds generally invest in loans and other fixed income instruments and are focused on providing private
high-yield capital for mid- to large-sized leveraged and management buyout transactions, recapitalizations, financings, refinancings, acquisitions and restructurings for private equity firms, private family companies and corporate issuers. real
estate funds invest globally, primarily in real estate companies, loan portfolios, debt recapitalizations and property. the private equity, credit and real estate funds are primarily closed-end funds in which the firms investments are
generally not eligible for redemption. distributions will be received from these funds as the underlying assets are liquidated or distributed.
the firm also invests in hedge funds, primarily multi-disciplinary hedge funds that employ a fundamental bottom-up investment approach across
various asset classes and strategies including long/short equity, credit, convertibles, risk arbitrage, special situations and capital structure arbitrage. the firms investments in hedge funds primarily include interests where the underlying
assets are illiquid in nature, and proceeds from redemptions will not be received until the underlying assets are liquidated or distributed.
many of the funds described above are covered funds as defined by the volcker rule
of the u.s. dodd-frank wall street reform and consumer protection act (dodd-frank act). the board of governors of the federal reserve system (federal reserve board) extended the conformance period through july2016 for investments in, and
relationships with, covered funds that were in place prior to december2013, and indicated that it intends to further extend the conformance period through july2017. the firm currently expects to be able to exit the majority of such
interests in these funds in orderly transactions prior to july2017, subject to market conditions. however, to the extent that the underlying investments of particular funds are not sold, the firm may be required to sell its interests in such
funds. if that occurs, the firm may receive a value for its interests that is less than the then carrying value as there could be a limited secondary market for these investments and the firm may be unable to sell them in orderly transactions. the
firm continues to manage its existing interests in such funds, taking into account the conformance period outlined above. in order to be compliant with the volcker rule, the firm will be required to reduce most of its interests in the funds in the
table below by the end of the conformance period.  the tables below present the fair value of the firms investments in, and unfunded
commitments to, funds that are measured at nav.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
fairvalueofinvestments
unfundedcommitments
private equity funds
$5,414
$2,057
credit funds
hedge funds
real estate funds
1,172
total
$7,757
$2,697
as of december2014
$ inmillions
fair value ofinvestments
unfundedcommitments
private equity funds
$6,307
$2,175
credit funds
1,008
hedge funds
real estate funds
1,432
total
$9,610
$2,868
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note7.
derivatives and hedging activities  derivative activities
derivatives are instruments that derive their value from underlying asset prices, indices,
reference rates and other inputs, or a combination of these factors. derivatives may be traded on an exchange (exchange-traded) or they may be privately negotiated contracts, which are usually referred to as otc derivatives. certain of the
firms otc derivatives are cleared and settled through central clearing counterparties (otc-cleared), while others are bilateral contracts between two counterparties (bilateral otc).
market-making. as a market maker, the firm enters into
derivative transactions to provide liquidity to clients and to facilitate the transfer and hedging of their risks. in this capacity, the firm typically acts as principal and is consequently required to commit capital to provide execution. as a
market maker, it is essential to maintain an inventory of financial instruments sufficient to meet expected client and market demands.
risk management. the firm also enters into derivatives
to actively manage risk exposures that arise from its market-making and investing and lending activities in derivative and cash instruments. the firms holdings and exposures are hedged, in many cases, on either a portfolio or risk-specific
basis, as opposed to an instrument-by-instrument basis. the offsetting impact of this economic hedging is reflected in the same business segment as the related revenues. in addition, the firm may enter into derivatives designated as hedges under
u.s. gaap. these derivatives are used to manage interest rate exposure in certain fixed-rate unsecured long-term and short-term borrowings, and deposits, and to manage foreign currency exposure on the net investment in certain non-u.s. operations.
the firm enters into various types of derivatives, including:
futures and forwards. contracts that commit counterparties to purchase or sell financial instruments,
commodities or currencies in the future.
swaps. contracts that require counterparties to exchange cash flows such as currency or interest
payment streams. the amounts exchanged are based on the specific terms of the contract with reference to specified rates, financial instruments, commodities, currencies or indices.
options. contracts in which the option purchaser has the right, but not the obligation, to purchase
from or sell to the option writer financial instruments, commodities or currencies within a defined time period for a specified price.
derivatives are reported on a net-by-counterparty basis (i.e., the net payable or receivable for derivative assets and liabilities for a given
counterparty) when a legal right of setoff exists under an enforceable netting agreement (counterparty netting). derivatives are accounted for at fair value, net of cash collateral received or posted under enforceable credit support agreements (cash
collateral netting). derivative assets and liabilities are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, respectively. realized and unrealized
gains and losses on derivatives not designated as hedges under asc815 are included in market making and other principal transactions in note4.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents the gross fair value and the notional amount of derivative contracts by
major product type, the amounts of counterparty and cash collateral netting in the consolidated statements of financial condition, as well as cash and securities collateral posted and received under enforceable credit support agreements that do not
meet the criteria for netting under u.s. gaap.
in the table below:
gross fair values exclude the effects of both counterparty netting and collateral, and therefore are not representative of the firms
exposure.
where the firm has received or posted collateral under credit support agreements, but has not yet determined such agreements are enforceable, the
related collateral has not been netted.
notional amounts, which represent the sum of gross long and short derivative contracts, provide an indication of the volume of the firms
derivative activity and do not represent anticipated losses.
as of december2015
as of december2014
$ inmillions
derivativeassets
derivativeliabilities
notionalamount
derivativeassets
derivativeliabilities
notionalamount
derivatives not accounted for as hedges
exchange-traded
$310
$280
$4,402,843
$228
$238
$3,151,865
otc-cleared
211,272
192,401
20,738,687
351,801
330,298
30,408,636
bilateral otc
345,516
321,458
12,953,830
434,333
409,071
13,552,017
total interest rates
557,098
514,139
38,095,360
786,362
739,607
47,112,518
otc-cleared
5,203
5,596
339,244
5,812
5,663
378,099
bilateral otc
35,679
31,179
1,552,806
49,036
44,491
2,122,859
total credit
40,882
36,775
1,892,050
54,848
50,154
2,500,958
exchange-traded
13,073
17,214
otc-cleared
14,617
13,304
bilateral otc
96,660
99,235
5,461,940
109,747
108,442
5,535,685
total currencies
97,008
99,567
5,489,630
109,916
108,607
5,566,203
exchange-traded
2,997
3,623
203,465
7,683
7,166
321,378
otc-cleared
2,839
3,036
bilateral otc
17,445
17,215
230,750
20,994
21,065
345,065
total commodities
20,674
21,071
437,054
28,990
28,546
669,479
exchange-traded
9,372
7,908
528,419
9,592
9,636
541,711
bilateral otc
37,788
38,290
927,078
49,339
49,013
983,784
total equities
47,160
46,198
1,455,497
58,931
58,649
1,525,495
subtotal
762,822
717,750
47,369,591
1,039,047
985,563
57,374,653
derivatives accounted for as hedges
otc-cleared
4,567
51,446
2,713
31,109
bilateral otc
6,660
62,022
11,559
95,389
total interest rates
11,227
113,468
14,272
126,498
otc-cleared
1,333
1,205
bilateral otc
8,615
8,431
total currencies
9,948
9,636
subtotal
11,367
123,416
14,397
136,134
total gross fair value/notional amount of derivatives
$774,189
$717,888
$47,493,007
$1,053,444
$985,841
$57,510,787
amounts that have been offset in the consolidated statementsoffinancial condition
exchange-traded
$(9,398
)
$(9,398
)
$(15,039
)
$(15,039
)
otc-cleared
(194,928
)
(194,928
)
(335,792
)
(335,792
)
bilateral otc
(426,841
)
(426,841
)
(535,839
)
(535,839
)
total counterparty netting
(631,167
)
(631,167
)
(886,670
)
(886,670
)
otc-cleared
(26,151
)
(3,305
)
(24,801
)
(738
)
bilateral otc
(62,981
)
(36,645
)
(78,703
)
(35,417
)
total cash collateral netting
(89,132
)
(39,950
)
(103,504
)
(36,155
)
total counterparty and cash collateral netting
$(720,299
)
$(671,117
)
$(990,174
)
$(922,825
)
amounts included in financial instruments owned/financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased
exchange-traded
$3,464
$2,617
$2,533
$2,070
otc-cleared
bilateral otc
50,042
43,938
60,579
60,873
total amounts included in the consolidated statements offinancialcondition
$53,890
$46,771
$63,270
$63,016
amounts that have not been offset in the consolidated statementsoffinancialcondition
cash collateral received/posted
$(498
)
$(1,935
)
$(980
)
$(2,940
)
securities collateral received/posted
(14,008
)
(10,044
)
(14,742
)
(18,159
)
total
$39,384
$34,792
$47,548
$41,917
1.
includes derivative assets and derivative liabilities of $17.09billion and $18.16billion, respectively, as of december2015, and derivative
assets and derivative liabilities of $25.93billion and $26.19billion, respectively, as of december2014, which are not subject to an enforceable netting agreement or are subject to a netting agreement that the firm has not yet
determined to be enforceable.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
valuation techniques for derivatives
the firms level2 and level3 derivatives are valued using derivative pricing models (e.g., discounted cash flow models,
correlation models, and models that incorporate option pricing methodologies, such as monte carlo simulations). price transparency of derivatives can generally be characterized by product type, as described below.
interest rate. in general, the key inputs used to value interest rate derivatives are transparent,
even for most long-dated contracts. interest rate swaps and options denominated in the currencies of leading industrialized nations are characterized by high trading volumes and tight bid/offer spreads. interest rate derivatives that reference
indices, such as an inflation index, or the shape of the yield curve (e.g., 10-year swap rate vs. 2-year swap rate) are more complex, but the key inputs are generally observable.
credit. price transparency for credit default swaps, including both single names and baskets of
credits, varies by market and underlying reference entity or obligation. credit default swaps that reference indices, large corporates and major sovereigns generally exhibit the most price transparency. for credit default swaps with other
underliers, price transparency varies based on credit rating, the cost of borrowing the underlying reference obligations, and the availability of the underlying reference obligations for delivery upon the default of the issuer. credit default swaps
that reference loans, asset-backed securities and emerging market debt instruments tend to have less price transparency than those that reference corporate bonds. in addition, more complex credit derivatives, such as those sensitive to the
correlation between two or more underlying reference obligations, generally have less price transparency.
currency. prices for currency derivatives based on the exchange rates of leading industrialized
nations, including those with longer tenors, are generally transparent. the primary difference between the price transparency of developed and emerging market currency derivatives is that emerging markets tend to be observable for contracts with
shorter tenors.
commodity. commodity derivatives include transactions referenced to energy (e.g., oil and natural
gas), metals (e.g., precious and base) and soft commodities (e.g., agricultural). price transparency varies based on the underlying commodity, delivery location, tenor and product quality (e.g., diesel fuel compared to unleaded gasoline). in
general, price transparency for commodity derivatives is greater for contracts with shorter tenors and contracts that are more closely aligned with major and/or benchmark commodity indices.
equity. price transparency for equity derivatives varies by market and underlier. options on indices
and the common stock of corporates included in major equity indices exhibit the most price transparency. equity derivatives generally have observable market prices, except for contracts with long tenors or reference prices that differ significantly
from current market prices. more complex equity derivatives, such as those sensitive to the correlation between two or more individual stocks, generally have less price transparency.
liquidity is essential to observability of all product types. if transaction volumes decline, previously transparent prices and other inputs
may become unobservable. conversely, even highly structured products may at times have trading volumes large enough to provide observability of prices and other inputs. see note5 for an overview of the firms fair value measurement
policies.  level1 derivatives
level1 derivatives include short-term contracts for future delivery of securities when the underlying security is a level1
instrument, and exchange-traded derivatives if they are actively traded and are valued at their quoted market price.  level2 derivatives
level2 derivatives include otc derivatives for which all significant valuation inputs are corroborated by market evidence and
exchange-traded derivatives that are not actively traded and/or that are valued using models that calibrate to market-clearing levels of otc derivatives. in evaluating the significance of a valuation input, the firm considers, among other factors, a
portfolios net risk exposure to that input.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the selection of a particular model to value a derivative depends on the contractual terms of
and specific risks inherent in the instrument, as well as the availability of pricing information in the market. for derivatives that trade in liquid markets, model selection does not involve significant management judgment because outputs of models
can be calibrated to market-clearing levels.  valuation models require a variety of inputs, such as contractual terms, market prices, yield
curves, discount rates (including those derived from interest rates on collateral received and posted as specified in credit support agreements for collateralized derivatives), credit curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates, loss severity
rates and correlations of such inputs. significant inputs to the valuations of level2 derivatives can be verified to market transactions, broker or dealer quotations or other alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price
transparency. consideration is given to the nature of the quotations (e.g., indicative or firm) and the relationship of recent market activity to the prices provided from alternative pricing sources.
level3 derivatives  level3 derivatives
are valued using models which utilize observable level1 and/or level2 inputs, as well as unobservable level3 inputs. the significant unobservable inputs used to value the firms level 3 derivatives are described below.
for the majority of the firms interest rate and currency derivatives classified within level3, significant unobservable inputs include
correlations of certain currencies and interest rates (e.g., the correlation between euro inflation and euro interest rates) and specific interest rate volatilities.
for level3 credit derivatives, significant unobservable inputs include illiquid credit spreads and upfront credit points, which are unique to
specific reference obligations and reference entities, recovery rates and certain correlations required to value credit and mortgage derivatives (e.g., the likelihood of default of the underlying reference obligation relative to one another).
for level3 commodity derivatives, significant unobservable inputs include volatilities for options with strike prices that differ
significantly from current market prices and prices or spreads for certain products for which the product quality or physical location of the commodity is not aligned with benchmark indices.
for level3 equity derivatives, significant unobservable inputs generally include equity volatility inputs for options that are long-dated
and/or have strike prices that differ significantly from current market prices. in addition, the valuation of certain structured trades requires the use of level3 correlation inputs, such as the correlation of the price performance of two or
more individual stocks or the correlation of the price performance for a basket of stocks to another asset class such as commodities.
subsequent to the initial valuation of a level3 derivative, the firm updates the level1 and level2 inputs to reflect
observable market changes and any resulting gains and losses are recorded in level3. level3 inputs are changed when corroborated by evidence such as similar market transactions, third-party pricing services and/or broker or dealer
quotations or other empirical market data. in circumstances where the firm cannot verify the model value by reference to market transactions, it is possible that a different valuation model could produce a materially different estimate of fair
value. see below for further information about significant unobservable inputs used in the valuation of level3 derivatives.  valuation adjustments
valuation adjustments are integral to determining the fair value of derivative portfolios and are used to adjust the mid-market valuations
produced by derivative pricing models to the appropriate exit price valuation. these adjustments incorporate bid/offer spreads, the cost of liquidity, credit valuation adjustments and funding valuation adjustments, which account for the credit and
funding risk inherent in the uncollateralized portion of derivative portfolios. the firm also makes funding valuation adjustments to collateralized derivatives where the terms of the agreement do not permit the firm to deliver or repledge collateral
received. market-based inputs are generally used when calibrating valuation adjustments to market-clearing levels.  in addition, for
derivatives that include significant unobservable inputs, the firm makes model or exit price adjustments to account for the valuation uncertainty present in the transaction.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
significant unobservable inputs
the table below presents the ranges, averages and medians of significant unobservable inputs
used to value the firms level3 derivatives. in the table below:
ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the valuation of each type of derivative.
averages represent the arithmetic average of the inputs and are not weighted by the relative fair value or notional of the respective financial
instruments. an average greater than the median indicates that the majority of inputs are below the average.
the ranges, averages and medians of these inputs are not representative of the appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one
derivative. for example, the highest correlation presented in the tables below for interest rate derivatives is appropriate for valuing a specific interest rate derivative but may not be appropriate for valuing any other interest rate derivative.
accordingly, the ranges of inputs presented below do not represent uncertainty in, or possible ranges of, fair value measurements of the firms level3 derivatives.
the fair value of any one instrument may be determined using multiple valuation techniques. for example, option pricing models and discounted cash
flows models are typically used together to determine fair value. therefore, the level3 balance encompasses both of these techniques.
level3 derivative product type
valuation techniques and
significantunobservableinputs
rangeofsignificantunobservable inputs (average /
median)
as of december 2015
as of december 2014
interest rates
($398million and $40million of net level3 liabilities as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
option pricing models:
correlation
volatility
(25)% to 92% (53% / 55%)
31basispointsperannum(bpa) to152bpa (84 bpa / 57 bpa)
(16)% to 84% (37% / 40%)
36basispointsperannum(bpa) to156bpa (100 bpa / 115 bpa)
credit
($2.79billion and $3.53billion of net level3 assets as of december2015and december2014, respectively)
option pricing models, correlation models
and discountedcash flows models:  correlation
credit spreads
upfront credit points
recovery rates
46% to 99% (68% / 66%)
1basispoints(bps)to1,019bps
(129bps/86bps)1
0pointsto100points(41points/40points)
2% to 97% (58% / 70%)
5% to 99% (71% / 72%)
1basispoints(bps)to700bps (116bps/79bps)1
0pointsto99points(40points/30points)
14% to 87% (44% / 40%)
currencies
($34million and $267million of net level3 liabilities as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
option pricing models:
correlation (including
cross-product correlation)
25% to 70% (50% / 51%)
22% to 80% (47% / 50%)
commodities
($262million and $1.14billion of netlevel3 liabilities as of december2015 and december2014, respectively)
option pricing models and discounted cash
flows models:
volatility
spread permillion british thermal units (mmbtu) of
natural gas
spread per metric tonne (mt) of coal
spread per barrel of oil and refined products
11% to 77% (35% / 34%)
$(1.32) to $4.15 ($(0.05) / $(0.01))
n/a
$(10.64) to $65.29 ($3.34
/$(3.31))1
16% to 68% (33% / 32%)
$(1.66) to $4.45 ($(0.13) / $(0.03))
$(10.50) to $3.00 ($(4.04) /
$(6.74))  $(15.35) to $80.55 ($22.32 /
$13.50)1
equities
($1.60 billion and $1.38billion ofnet level3 liabilities as of december2015and december2014, respectively)
option pricing models:
correlation (including
cross-product correlation)
volatility
(65)% to 94% (42% / 48%)
5% to 76% (24% / 23%)
(34)% to 99% (47% / 49%)
5% to 90% (23% / 21%)
1.
the difference between the average and the median for these spread inputs indicates that the majority of the inputs fall in the lower end of the range.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
range of significant unobservable inputs
the following is information about the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value the firms level3 derivative
instruments:
correlation.ranges for correlation cover a variety of underliers both within one market (e.g.,
equity index and equity single stock names) and across markets (e.g., correlation of an interest rate and a foreign exchange rate), as well as across regions.generally, cross-product correlation inputs are used to value more complex
instruments and are lower than correlation inputs on assets within the same derivative product type.
volatility.ranges for volatility cover numerous underliers across a variety of markets,
maturities and strike prices. for example, volatility of equity indices is generally lower than volatility of single stocks.
credit spreads, upfront credit points and recovery rates. the ranges for credit spreads, upfront
credit points and recovery rates cover a variety of underliers (index and single names), regions, sectors, maturities and credit qualities (high-yield and investment-grade). the broad range of this population gives rise to the width of the ranges of
significant unobservable inputs.
commodity prices and spreads. the ranges for commodity prices and spreads cover variability in
products, maturities and locations.
sensitivity of fair value measurement to changes in significant unobservable inputs
the following is a description of the directional sensitivity of the firms level3 fair value measurements to changes in significant
unobservable inputs, in isolation:
correlation. in general, for contracts where the holder benefits from the convergence of the
underlying asset or index prices (e.g., interest rates, credit spreads, foreign exchange rates, inflation rates and equity prices), an increase in correlation results in a higher fair value measurement.
volatility. in general, for purchased options, an increase in volatility results in a higher fair
value measurement.
credit spreads, upfront credit points and recovery rates. in general, the fair value of purchased
credit protection increases as credit spreads or upfront credit points increase or recovery rates decrease. credit spreads, upfront credit points and recovery rates are strongly related to distinctive risk factors of the underlying reference
obligations, which include reference entity-specific factors such as leverage, volatility and industry, market-based risk factors, such as borrowing costs or liquidity of the underlying reference obligation, and macroeconomic conditions.
commodity prices and spreads. in general, for contracts where the holder is receiving a commodity, an
increase in the spread (price difference from a benchmark index due to differences in quality or delivery location) or price results in a higher fair value measurement.
due to the distinctive nature of each of the firms level3 derivatives, the interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform
within each product type.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
fair value of derivatives by level
the tables below present the fair value of derivatives on a gross basis by level and major
product type as well as the impact of netting. in the tables below:
the gross fair values exclude the effects of both counterparty netting and collateral netting, and therefore are not representative of the
firms exposure.
counterparty netting is reflected in each level to the extent that receivable and payable balances are netted within the same level and is included
in counterparty netting within levels. where the counterparty netting is across levels, the netting is reflected in cross-level counterparty netting.
derivative assets are shown as positive amounts and derivative liabilities are shown as negative amounts.
derivatives at fair value as of december2015
$ inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
assets
interest rates
$4
$567,761
$560
$568,325
credit
34,832
6,050
40,882
currencies
96,959
97,148
commodities
20,087
20,674
equities
46,491
47,160
gross fair value of derivative assets
766,130
8,009
774,189
counterparty netting within levels
(627,548
)
(2,139
)
(629,687
)
subtotal
$50
$138,582
$5,870
$144,502
cross-level counterparty netting
(1,480
)
cashcollateralnetting
(89,132
)
fair value included in financialinstruments owned
$53,890
liabilities
interest rates
$(11
)
$(513,275
)
$(958
)
$(514,244
)
credit
(33,518
)
(3,257
)
(36,775
)
currencies
(99,377
)
(223
)
(99,600
)
commodities
(20,222
)
(849
)
(21,071
)
equities
(18
)
(43,953
)
(2,227
)
(46,198
)
gross fair value of derivative liabilities
(29
)
(710,345
)
(7,514
)
(717,888
)
counterparty netting within levels
627,548
2,139
629,687
subtotal
$(29
)
$(82,797
)
$(5,375
)
$(88,201
)
cross-levelcounterparty netting
1,480
cash collateral netting
39,950
fair value included in financialinstruments sold, but not yet
purchased
$(46,771
)
derivativesatfairvalueasofdecember2014
$ inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
assets
interest rates
$123
$800,028
$483
$800,634
credit
47,190
7,658
54,848
currencies
109,891
110,041
commodities
28,124
28,990
equities
58,122
58,931
gross fair value of derivativeassets
1,043,355
9,791
1,053,444
counterparty netting within levels
(882,841
)
(2,717
)
(885,558
)
subtotal
$298
$160,514
$7,074
$167,886
cross-level counterparty netting
(1,112
)
cash collateral netting
(103,504
)
fair value included in financial instruments owned
$63,270
liabilities
interest rates
$(14
)
$(739,332
)
$(523
)
$(739,869
)
credit
(46,026
)
(4,128
)
(50,154
)
currencies
(108,206
)
(417
)
(108,623
)
commodities
(26,538
)
(2,008
)
(28,546
)
equities
(94
)
(56,546
)
(2,009
)
(58,649
)
gross fair value of derivativeliabilities
(108
)
(976,648
)
(9,085
)
(985,841
)
counterparty netting withinlevels
882,841
2,717
885,558
subtotal
$(108
)
$(93,807
)
$(6,368
)
$(100,283
)
cross-level counterparty netting
1,112
cash collateral netting
36,155
fair value included in financialinstrumentssold, but not yet purchased
$(63,016
)
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 rollforward
the table below presents changes in fair value for all derivatives categorized as level3
as of the end of the year. in the table below:
if a derivative was transferred to level3 during a reporting period, its entire gain or loss for the period is included in level3.
transfers between levels are reported at the beginning of the reporting period in which they occur.
positive amounts for transfers into level3 and negative amounts for transfers out of level3 represent net transfers of derivative
assets. negative amounts for transfers into level3 and positive amounts for transfers out of level3 represent net transfers of derivative liabilities.
a derivative with level1 and/or level2 inputs is classified in level3 in its entirety if it has at least one significant
level3 input.
if there is one significant level3 input, the entire gain or loss from adjusting only observable inputs (i.e., level1 and level2
inputs) is classified as level3.
gains or losses that have been reported in level3 resulting from changes in level1 or level2 inputs are frequently offset by
gains or losses attributable to level1 or level2 derivatives and/or level1, level2 and level3 cash instruments. as a result, gains/(losses) included in the level3 rollforward below do not necessarily represent the
overall impact on the firms results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
net unrealized gains/(losses) relate to instruments that were still held at year-end.
for the year ended december2015, the net realized and unrealized gains on level3 derivative assets and liabilities of $746million
(reflecting $67million of realized gains and $679million of unrealized gains) include gains of approximately $518million and $228million reported in market making and other principal transactions
respectively.
for the year ended december2014, the net realized and unrealized losses on level3 derivative assets and liabilities of
$306million (reflecting $123million of realized losses and $183million of unrealized losses) include losses of approximately $276million and $30million reported in market making and other principal
transactions respectively.
see level3 rollforward commentary below for an explanation of the net unrealized gains/(losses) on level3 derivative assets
and liabilities and the activity related to transfers into and out of level3.
level3 derivative assets and liabilities at fair value
$ inmillions
asset/ (liability)
balance, beginning
of year
net realized
gains/ (losses)
netunrealized gains/(losses)
purchases
sales
settlements
transfers into
level3
transfers out of
level3
asset/ (liability)
balance, end of
year
year ended
december2015
interest rates net
$(40
)
$(53
)
$66
$3
$(31
)
$(144
)
$(149
)
$(50
)
$(398
)
credit net
3,530
(237
)
(640
)
(1,042
)
2,793
currencies net
(267
)
(49
)
(10
)
(1
)
(34
)
commodities net
(1,142
)
(52
)
(234
)
1,034
(35
)
(262
)
equities net
(1,375
)
(179
)
(1,352
)
1,086
(25
)
(1,604
)
total derivatives net
$706
$67
$679
$240
$(1,864
)
$1,498
$(4
)
$(827
)
$495
year ended
december2014
interest rates net
$(86
)
$(50
)
$(101
)
$97
$(2
)
$92
$14
$(4
)
$(40
)
credit net
4,176
1,625
(138
)
(1,693
)
(194
)
(461
)
3,530
currencies net
(200
)
(70
)
(175
)
(9
)
(4
)
(267
)
commodities net
(19
)
(1,096
)
(272
)
(32
)
(1,142
)
equities net
(959
)
(48
)
(436
)
(979
)
(115
)
(1,375
)
total derivatives net
$2,991
$(123
)
$(183
)
$649
$(1,391
)
$(1,064
)
$(220
)
$47
$706
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 rollforward commentary
year ended december2015. the net unrealized gain
on level3 derivatives of $679million for 2015 was primarily attributable to gains on certain credit derivatives, reflecting the impact of wider credit spreads, and changes in foreign exchange and interest rates.
transfers into level3 derivatives during 2015 primarily reflected transfers of certain credit derivative assets from level2,
primarily due to unobservable credit spread inputs becoming significant to the valuations of these derivatives, and transfers of certain interest rate derivative liabilities from level2, primarily due to certain unobservable inputs becoming
significant to the valuations of these derivatives.  transfers out of level3 derivatives during 2015 primarily reflected transfers of
certain credit derivative assets to level2, principally due to increased transparency and reduced significance of certain unobservable credit spread inputs used to value these derivatives.
year ended december2014. the net unrealized loss
on level3 derivatives of $183million for 2014 was primarily attributable to the impact of a decrease in commodity prices on certain commodity derivatives, a decrease in equity prices on certain equity derivatives, and the impact of
changes in foreign exchange rates on certain currency derivatives, largely offset by the impact of tighter credit spreads and a decrease in interest rates on certain credit derivatives.
transfers into level3 derivatives during 2014 primarily reflected transfers of certain credit derivative liabilities from level2,
principally due to unobservable credit spread inputs becoming significant to the valuation of these derivatives and transfers of certain equity derivative liabilities from level2, primarily due to reduced transparency of volatility inputs used
to value these derivatives.  transfers out of level3 derivatives during 2014 primarily reflected transfers of certain equity
derivative liabilities to level2, principally due to unobservable correlation inputs no longer being significant to the valuation of these derivatives, and transfers of certain credit derivative assets to level2, principally due to
unobservable credit spread inputs no longer being significant to the net risk of certain portfolios.
otc derivatives
the tables below present the fair values of otc derivative assets and liabilities by tenor and major product type.
otc derivatives as of december2015
$ inmillions
lessthan 1year
1-5 years
greaterthan 5years
total
assets
interest rates
$4,231
$23,278
$81,401
$108,910
credit
1,664
4,547
5,842
12,053
currencies
14,646
8,936
6,353
29,935
commodities
6,228
3,897
10,356
equities
4,806
7,091
1,550
13,447
counterparty netting within tenors
(3,660
)
(5,751
)
(5,270
)
(14,681
)
subtotal
$27,915
$41,998
$90,107
$160,020
cross-tenorcounterparty netting
(20,462
)
cash collateral netting
(89,132
)
total
$50,426
liabilities
interest rates
$5,323
$13,945
$35,592
$54,860
credit
1,804
4,704
1,437
7,945
currencies
12,378
9,940
10,048
32,366
commodities
4,464
3,136
2,526
10,126
equities
5,154
5,802
2,994
13,950
counterparty netting within tenors
(3,660
)
(5,751
)
(5,270
)
(14,681
)
subtotal
$25,463
$31,776
$47,327
$104,566
cross-tenor counterparty netting
(20,462
)
cash collateral netting
(39,950
)
total
$44,154
otc derivatives as of december2014
$ inmillions
lessthan 1year
1-5 years
greaterthan 5years
total
assets
interest rates
$7,064
$25,049
$90,553
$122,666
credit
1,696
6,093
5,707
13,496
currencies
17,835
9,897
6,386
34,118
commodities
8,298
4,068
12,527
equities
4,771
9,285
3,750
17,806
counterparty netting within tenors
(4,479
)
(7,016
)
(4,058
)
(15,553
)
subtotal
$35,185
$47,376
$102,499
$185,060
cross-tenor counterparty netting
(20,819
)
cash collateral netting
(103,504
)
total
$60,737
liabilities
interest rates
$7,001
$17,649
$37,242
$61,892
credit
2,154
4,942
1,706
8,802
currencies
18,549
7,667
6,482
32,698
commodities
5,686
4,105
2,810
12,601
equities
7,064
6,845
3,571
17,480
counterparty netting within tenors
(4,479
)
(7,016
)
(4,058
)
(15,553
)
subtotal
$35,975
$34,192
$47,753
$117,920
cross-tenor counterparty netting
(20,819
)
cash collateral netting
(36,155
)
total
$60,946
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
in the tables above:
tenor is based on expected duration for mortgage-related credit derivatives and generally on remaining contractual maturity for other derivatives.
counterparty netting within the same product type and tenor category is included within such product type and tenor category.
counterparty netting across product types within the same tenor category is included in counterparty netting within tenors. where the
counterparty netting is across tenor categories, the netting is reflected in cross-tenor counterparty netting.  credit derivatives
the firm enters into a broad array of credit derivatives in locations around the world to facilitate client transactions and to manage
the credit risk associated with market-making and investing and lending activities. credit derivatives are actively managed based on the firms net risk position.
credit derivatives are individually negotiated contracts and can have various settlement and payment conventions. credit events include failure
to pay, bankruptcy, acceleration of indebtedness, restructuring, repudiation and dissolution of the reference entity.  the firm enters into
the following types of credit derivatives:
credit default swaps. single-name credit default swaps protect the buyer against the loss of
principal on one or more bonds, loans or mortgages (reference obligations) in the event the issuer (reference entity) of the reference obligations suffers a credit event. the buyer of protection pays an initial or periodic premium to the seller and
receives protection for the period of the contract. if there is no credit event, as defined in the contract, the seller of protection makes no payments to the buyer of protection. however, if a credit event occurs, the seller of protection is
required to make a payment to the buyer of protection, which is calculated in accordance with the terms of the contract.
credit indices, baskets and tranches. credit derivatives may reference a basket of single-name credit
default swaps or a broad-based index. if a credit event occurs in one of the underlying reference obligations, the protection seller pays the protection buyer. the payment is typically a pro-rata portion of the transactions total notional
amount based on the underlying defaulted reference obligation. in certain transactions, the credit risk of a basket or index is separated into various portions (tranches), each having different levels of subordination. the most junior tranches cover
initial defaults and once losses exceed the notional amount of these junior tranches, any excess loss is covered by the next most senior tranche in the capital structure.
total return swaps. a total return swap transfers the risks relating to economic performance of a
reference obligation from the protection buyer to the protection seller. typically, the protection buyer receives from the protection seller a floating rate of interest and protection against any reduction in fair value of the reference obligation,
and in return the protection seller receives the cash flows associated with the reference obligation, plus any increase in the fair value of the reference obligation.
credit options. in a credit option, the option writer assumes the obligation to purchase or sell a
reference obligation at a specified price or credit spread. the option purchaser buys the right, but does not assume the obligation, to sell the reference obligation to, or purchase it from, the option writer. the payments on credit options depend
either on a particular credit spread or the price of the reference obligation.  the firm economically hedges its exposure
to written credit derivatives primarily by entering into offsetting purchased credit derivatives with identical underliers. substantially all of the firms purchased credit derivative transactions are with financial institutions and are subject
to stringent collateral thresholds. in addition, upon the occurrence of a specified trigger event, the firm may take possession of the reference obligations underlying a particular written credit derivative, and consequently may, upon liquidation of
the reference obligations, recover amounts on the underlying reference obligations in the event of default.  as of december2015,
written and purchased credit derivatives had total gross notional amounts of $923.48billion and $968.68billion, respectively, for total net notional purchased protection of $45.20billion. as of december2014, written and
purchased credit derivatives had total gross notional amounts of $1.22trillion and $1.28trillion, respectively, for total net notional purchased protection of $59.35billion. substantially all of the firms written and
purchased credit derivatives are credit default swaps.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the tables below present certain information about credit derivatives. in the tables below:
fair values exclude the effects of both netting of receivable balances with payable balances under enforceable netting agreements, and netting of
cash received or posted under enforceable credit support agreements, and therefore are not representative of the firms credit exposure.
tenor is based on expected duration for mortgage-related credit derivatives and on remaining contractual maturity for other credit derivatives.
the credit spread on the underlier, together with the tenor of the contract, are indicators of payment/performance risk. the firm is less likely to
pay or otherwise be required to perform where the credit spread and the tenor are lower.
offsetting purchased credit derivatives represent the notional amount of purchased credit derivatives that economically hedge written credit
derivatives with identical underliers and are included in offsetting.
other purchased credit derivatives represent the notional amount of all other purchased credit derivatives not included in offsetting.
as of december2015
credit spread on underlier (basis points)
$ inmillions
0-250
251- 500
501 - 1,000
greater than
1,000
total
maximum payout/notional
amount of written credit derivatives by tenor
less than 1year
$240,468
$2,859
$2,881
$10,533
$256,741
15years
514,986
42,399
16,327
26,271
599,983
greater than 5years
57,054
6,481
1,567
1,651
66,753
total
$812,508
$51,739
$20,775
$38,455
$923,477
maximum payout/notional
amount of purchased credit derivatives
offsetting
$722,436
$46,313
$19,556
$33,266
$821,571
other
132,757
6,383
3,372
4,598
147,110
fair value of written
credit derivatives
asset
$17,110
$924
$108
$190
$18,332
liability
2,756
2,596
1,942
12,485
19,779
netasset/(liability)
$14,354
$(1,672
)
$(1,834
)
$(12,295
)
$(1,447
)
as of december2014
credit spread on underlier (basis points)
$ inmillions
0-250
251- 500
501- 1,000
greater than
1,000
total
maximum payout/notional
amount of written credit derivatives by tenor
less than 1year
$261,591
$7,726
$8,449
$8,728
$286,494
15years
775,784
37,255
18,046
26,834
857,919
greater than 5years
68,830
5,042
1,309
1,279
76,460
total
$1,106,205
$50,023
$27,804
$36,841
$1,220,873
maximum payout/notional
amount of purchased credit derivatives
offsetting
$1,012,874
$41,657
$26,240
$33,112
$1,113,883
other
152,465
8,426
1,949
3,499
166,339
fair value of written
credit derivatives
asset
$28,004
$1,542
$112
$82
$29,740
liability
3,629
2,266
1,909
13,943
21,747
net asset/(liability)
$24,375
$(724
)
$(1,797
)
$(13,861
)
$7,993
impact of credit spreads on derivatives
on an ongoing basis, the firm realizes gains or losses relating to changes in credit risk through the unwind of derivative contracts and
changes in credit mitigants.  the net gain/(loss), including hedges, attributable to the impact of changes in credit exposure and credit
spreads (counterparty and the firms) on derivatives was $9million for 2015, $135million for 2014 and $(66)million for 2013.  bifurcated
embedded derivatives  the table below presents the fair value and the notional amount of derivatives that have been bifurcated from
their related borrowings. these derivatives, which are recorded at fair value, primarily consist of interest rate, equity and commodity products and are included in unsecured short-term borrowings and unsecured long-term
borrowings with the related borrowings. see note8 for further information.
as of december
$ inmillions
fair value of assets
$466
$390
fair value of liabilities
net liability
$328
$300
notional amount
$7,869
$7,735
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
derivatives with credit-related contingent features
certain of the firms derivatives have been transacted under bilateral agreements with counterparties who may require the firm to post
collateral or terminate the transactions based on changes in the firms credit ratings. the firm assesses the impact of these bilateral agreements by determining the collateral or termination payments that would occur assuming a downgrade by
all rating agencies. a downgrade by any one rating agency, depending on the agencys relative ratings of the firm at the time of the downgrade, may have an impact which is comparable to the impact of a downgrade by all rating agencies.
the table below presents the aggregate fair value of net derivative liabilities under such agreements (excluding application of collateral
posted to reduce these liabilities), the related aggregate fair value of the assets posted as collateral and the additional collateral or termination payments that could have been called at the reporting date by counterparties in the event of a
one-notch and two-notch downgrade in the firms credit ratings.
as of december
$ inmillions
net derivative liabilities under bilateral agreements
$29,836
$35,764
collateral posted
26,075
30,824
additional collateral or termination payments for a one-notch downgrade
1,061
1,072
additional collateral or termination payments for a two-notch downgrade
2,689
2,815
hedge accounting
the firm applies hedge accounting for (i)certain interest rate swaps used to manage the interest rate exposure of certain fixed-rate
unsecured long-term and short-term borrowings and certain fixed-rate certificates of deposit and (ii)certain foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency-denominated debt used to manage foreign currency exposures on the firms
net investment in certain non-u.s. operations.  to qualify for hedge accounting, the hedging instrument must be highly effective at
reducing the risk from the exposure being hedged. additionally, the firm must formally document the hedging relationship at inception and test the hedging relationship at least on a quarterly basis to ensure the hedging instrument continues to be
highly effective over the life of the hedging relationship.
fair value hedges
the firm designates certain interest rate swaps as fair value hedges. these interest rate swaps hedge changes in fair value attributable to the
designated benchmark interest rate (e.g., london interbank offered rate (libor) or overnight index swap rate (ois)), effectively converting a substantial portion of fixed-rate obligations into floating-rate obligations.
the firm applies a statistical method that utilizes regression analysis when assessing the effectiveness of its fair value hedging
relationships in achieving offsetting changes in the fair values of the hedging instrument and the risk being hedged (i.e., interest rate risk). an interest rate swap is considered highly effective in offsetting changes in fair value attributable to
changes in the hedged risk when the regression analysis results in a coefficient of determination of 80% or greater and a slope between 80% and 125%.
for qualifying fair value hedges, gains or losses on derivatives are included in interest expense. the change in fair value of the
hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged is reported as an adjustment to its carrying value and is subsequently amortized into interest expense over its remaining life. gains or losses resulting from hedge ineffectiveness are included in
interest expense. when a derivative is no longer designated as a hedge, any remaining difference between the carrying value and par value of the hedged item is amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the hedged item
using the effective interest method. see note23 for further information about interest income and interest expense.  the table below
presents the gains/(losses) from interest rate derivatives accounted for as hedges, the related hedged borrowings and bank deposits, and the hedge ineffectiveness on these derivatives, which primarily consists of amortization of prepaid credit
spreads resulting from the passage of time.
year ended december
$ inmillions
interest rate hedges
$(1,613
)
$1,936
$(8,683
)
hedged borrowings and bank deposits
(2,451
)
6,999
hedge ineffectiveness
$(715
)
$(515
)
$(1,684
)
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
net investment hedges
the firm seeks to reduce the impact of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates on its net investments in certain non-u.s. operations through the
use of foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency-denominated debt. for foreign currency forward contracts designated as hedges, the effectiveness of the hedge is assessed based on the overall changes in the fair value of the forward
contracts (i.e., based on changes in forward rates). for foreign currency-denominated debt designated as a hedge, the effectiveness of the hedge is assessed based on changes in spot rates.
for qualifying net investment hedges, the gains or losses on the hedging instruments, to the extent effective, are included in currency
translation within the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.  the table below presents the gains/(losses) from net
investment hedging.
year ended december
$ inmillions
foreign currency forward contract hedges
$695
$576
$150
foreign currency-denominated debt hedges
(9
)
the gain/(loss) related to ineffectiveness and the gain/(loss) reclassified to earnings from accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss) were not material for 2015,2014 or 2013.  as of december2015 and december2014, the firm had
designated $2.20billion and $1.36billion, respectively, of foreign currency-denominated debt, included in unsecured long-term borrowings and unsecured short-term borrowings, as hedges of net investments in
non-u.s. subsidiaries.
cash flow hedges
during 2013, the firm designated certain commodities-related swap and forward contracts as cash flow hedges. these swap and forward contracts
hedged the firms exposure to the variability in cash flows associated with the forecasted sales of certain energy commodities by one of the firms consolidated investments. during the fourth quarter of 2014, the firm de-designated these
swaps and forward contracts as cash flow hedges as it became probable that the hedged forecasted sales would not occur.  prior to
de-designation, the firm applied a statistical method that utilized regression analysis of changes in forecasted cash flows when assessing hedge effectiveness, subject to the same quantitative criteria as the firms fair value hedging
relationships described above.  the effective portion of the gains/(losses) recognized on these cash flow hedges were included in
cash flow hedges within the consolidated statements of comprehensive income, and gains/(losses) reclassified to earnings from accumulated other comprehensive income and gains/(losses) related to hedge ineffectiveness were included in
other principal transactions within the consolidated statements of earnings. such gains/(losses) were not material for 2014 and 2013. there were no gains/(losses) excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness for 2014 and 2013.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note8.
fair value option
other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value
in addition to all cash and derivative instruments included in financial instruments
owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value, the firm accounts for certain of its other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value primarily under the fair value option.
the primary reasons for electing the fair value option are to:
reflect economic events in earnings on a timely basis;
mitigate volatility in earnings from using different measurement attributes (e.g., transfers of financial instruments owned accounted for as
financings are recorded at fair value whereas the related secured financing would be recorded on an accrual basis absent electing the fair value option); and
address simplification and cost-benefit considerations (e.g., accounting for hybrid financial instruments at fair value in their entirety versus
bifurcation of embedded derivatives and hedge accounting for debt hosts).  hybrid financial instruments are instruments
that contain bifurcatable embedded derivatives and do not require settlement by physical delivery of non-financial assets (e.g., physical commodities). if the firm elects to bifurcate the embedded derivative from the associated debt, the derivative
is accounted for at fair value and the host contract is accounted for at amortized cost, adjusted for the effective portion of any fair value hedges. if the firm does not elect to bifurcate, the entire hybrid financial instrument is accounted for at
fair value under the fair value option.  other financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value under the fair value
option include:
repurchase agreements and substantially all resale agreements;
securities borrowed and loaned within fixed income, currency and commodities client execution;
substantially all other secured financings, including transfers of assets accounted for as financings rather than sales;
certain unsecured short-term borrowings, consisting of all promissory notes and commercial paper, and certain hybrid financial instruments;
certain unsecured long-term borrowings, including certain prepaid commodity transactions and certain hybrid financial instruments;
certain receivables from customers and counterparties, including transfers of assets accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases and
certain margin loans;
certain time deposits issued by the firms bank subsidiaries (deposits with no stated maturity are not eligible for a fair value option
election), including structured certificates of deposit, which are hybrid financial instruments; and
certain subordinated liabilities issued by consolidated vies.
these financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value are generally valued based on discounted cash flow techniques, which incorporate
inputs with reasonable levels of price transparency, and are generally classified as level2 because the inputs are observable. valuation adjustments may be made for liquidity and for counterparty and the firms credit quality.
see below for information about the significant inputs used to value other financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value, including
the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value the level3 instruments within these categories. these ranges represent the significant unobservable inputs that were used in the valuation of each type of other financial assets and
financial liabilities at fair value. the ranges and weighted averages of these inputs are not representative of the appropriate inputs to use when calculating the fair value of any one instrument. for example, the highest yield presented below for
other secured financings is appropriate for valuing a specific agreement in that category but may not be appropriate for valuing any other agreements in that category. accordingly, the ranges of inputs presented below do not represent uncertainty
in, or possible ranges of, fair value measurements of the firms level3 other financial assets and financial liabilities.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and
loaned. the significant inputs to the valuation of resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loaned are funding spreads, the amount and timing of expected future cash flows and
interest rates. as of both december2015 and december2014, the firm had no level3 resale agreements, securities borrowed or securities loaned. as of both december2015 and december2014, the firms level3
repurchase agreements were not material. see note10 for further information about collateralized agreements and financings.  other secured financings. the significant inputs to the valuation of other secured financings at fair value are the amount and timing of expected future cash flows,
interest rates, funding spreads, the fair value of the collateral delivered by the firm (which is determined using the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, market prices, market yields and recovery assumptions) and the frequency of
additional collateral calls. the ranges of significant unobservable inputs used to value level3 other secured financings are as follows:
as of december2015:
yield: 0.6% to 10.0% (weighted average: 2.7%)
duration: 1.6 to 8.8years (weighted average: 2.8years)
as of december2014:
funding spreads: 210bps to 325bps (weighted average: 278bps)
yield: 1.1% to 10.0% (weighted average: 3.1%)
duration: 0.7 to 3.8years (weighted average: 2.6years)
generally, increases in funding spreads, yield or duration, in isolation, would result in a lower fair value measurement. due to the
distinctive nature of each of the firms level3 other secured financings, the interrelationship of inputs is not necessarily uniform across such financings. see note10 for further information about collateralized agreements and
financings.
unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings. the significant inputs to the valuation of unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings at fair value are the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, interest rates, the credit spreads of the firm, as
well as commodity prices in the case of prepaid commodity transactions. the inputs used to value the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments are consistent with the inputs used to value the firms other derivative
instruments. see note7 for further information about derivatives. see notes15 and 16 for further information about unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings, respectively.
certain of the firms unsecured short-term and long-term instruments are included in level3, substantially all of which are hybrid
financial instruments. as the significant unobservable inputs used to value hybrid financial instruments primarily relate to the embedded derivative component of these borrowings, these inputs are incorporated in the firms derivative
disclosures related to unobservable inputs in note7.  receivables from customers and
counterparties. receivables from customers and counterparties at fair value are primarily comprised of transfers of assets accounted for as secured loans rather than purchases. the significant
inputs to the valuation of such receivables are commodity prices, interest rates, the amount and timing of expected future cash flows and funding spreads. as of both december2015 and december2014, the firms level3 receivables
from customers and counterparties were not material.  deposits. the significant inputs to the valuation of time deposits are interest rates and the amount and timing of future cash flows. the inputs used to value the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial
instruments are consistent with the inputs used to value the firms other derivative instruments. see note7 for further information about derivatives. see note14 for further information about deposits.
the firms deposits that are included in level3 are hybrid financial instruments. as the significant unobservable inputs used to
value hybrid financial instruments primarily relate to the embedded derivative component of these deposits, these inputs are incorporated in the firms derivative disclosures related to unobservable inputs in note7.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
fair value of other financial assets and financial liabilities by level
the tables below present, by level within the fair value hierarchy, other financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair
value primarily under the fair value option. in the tables below:
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes include segregated securities accounted for at fair value under the fair value option and
consists of securities borrowed and resale agreements.
level1 other financial assets at fair value include u.s. treasury securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes accounted for at
fair value under other u.s. gaap.
other financial assets are shown as positive amounts and other financial liabilities are shown as negative amounts.
other financial assets and liabilities
at fair value as of december2015
$ inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
assets
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
$19,562
$18,942
$
$38,504
securities purchased under agreements to resell
119,450
119,450
securities borrowed
69,801
69,801
receivables from customers and counterparties
4,947
4,992
total
$19,562
$213,140
$45
$232,747
liabilities
deposits
$
$(12,465
)
$(2,215
)
$(14,680
)
securities sold under agreements to repurchase
(85,998
)
(71
)
(86,069
)
securities loaned
(466
)
(466
)
other secured financings
(22,658
)
(549
)
(23,207
)
unsecured short-term borrowings
(13,610
)
(4,133
)
(17,743
)
unsecured long-term borrowings
(18,049
)
(4,224
)
(22,273
)
other liabilities and accrued expenses
(1,201
)
(52
)
(1,253
)
total
$
$(154,447
)
$(11,244
)
$(165,691
)
other financial assets and liabilities
at fair value as of december2014
$ inmillions
level1
level2
level3
total
assets
securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
$21,168
$13,123
$
$34,291
securities purchased under agreements to resell
126,036
126,036
securities borrowed
66,769
66,769
receivables from customers and counterparties
6,888
6,944
total
$21,168
$212,816
$56
$234,040
liabilities
deposits
$
$(12,458
)
$(1,065
)
$(13,523
)
securities sold under agreements to repurchase
(88,091
)
(124
)
(88,215
)
securities loaned
(765
)
(765
)
other secured financings
(20,359
)
(1,091
)
(21,450
)
unsecured short-term borrowings
(15,114
)
(3,712
)
(18,826
)
unsecured long-term borrowings
(13,420
)
(2,585
)
(16,005
)
other liabilities and accrued expenses
(116
)
(715
)
(831
)
total
$
$(150,323
)
$(9,292
)
$(159,615
)
transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy
transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are reported at the beginning of the reporting period in which they occur. there were no
transfers of other financial assets and financial liabilities between level1 and level2 during 2015 or 2014. the table below presents information about transfers between level2 and level3.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 rollforward
the table below presents changes in fair value for other financial assets and financial
liabilities accounted for at fair value categorized as level3 as of the end of the year. in the table below:
if a financial asset or financial liability was transferred to level3 during a reporting period, its entire gain or loss for the period is
included in level3. for level3 other financial assets, increases are shown as positive amounts, while decreases are shown as negative amounts. for level3 other financial liabilities, increases are shown as negative amounts, while
decreases are shown as positive amounts.
level3 other financial assets and liabilities are frequently economically hedged with cash instruments and derivatives. accordingly, gains or
losses that are reported in level3 can be partially offset by gains or losses attributable to level1, 2 or 3 cash instruments or derivatives. as a result, gains or losses included in the level3 rollforward below do not necessarily
represent the overall impact on the firms results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
net unrealized gains/(losses) relate to instruments that were still held at year-end.
for the year ended december2015, the net realized and unrealized gains on level3 other financial liabilities of $858million
(reflecting $75million of realized gains and $783million of unrealized gains) include gains/(losses) of approximately $841million, $28million and $(11)million reported in market making, other principal
transactions and interest expense, respectively.
for the year ended december2014, the net realized and unrealized losses on level3 other financial liabilities of $716million
(reflecting $93million of realized losses and $623million of unrealized losses) include gains/(losses) of approximately $150million, $(833)million and $(33)million reported in market making, other
principal transactions and interest expense, respectively.
see level3 rollforward commentary below for an explanation of the net unrealized gains/(losses) on level3 other financial
assets and liabilities and the activity related to transfers into and out of level3.
level3 other financial assets and liabilities at fair value
$ inmillions
balance, beginning
of year
net realized
gains/ (losses)
netunrealized gains/(losses)
purchases
sales
issuances
settlements
transfers into
level3
transfers out of
level3
balance, end of
year
yearendeddecember2015
receivables from customers andcounterparties
$56
$2
$2
$8
$
$
$(22
)
$
$(1
)
$45
total other financial assets
$56
$2
$2
$8
$
$
$(22
)
$
$(1
)
$45
deposits
$(1,065
)
$(9
)
$56
$
$
$(1,252
)
$55
$
$
$(2,215
)
securities sold under agreementsto repurchase
(124
)
(2
)
(71
)
other secured financings
(1,091
)
(10
)
(1
)
(504
)
(85
)
(549
)
unsecured short-term borrowings
(3,712
)
(3,377
)
2,275
(641
)
(4,133
)
unsecured long-term borrowings
(2,585
)
(7
)
(2,888
)
(464
)
(4,224
)
other liabilities and accrued expenses
(715
)
(12
)
(3
)
(23
)
(52
)
total other financial liabilities
$(9,292
)
$75
$783
$(1
)
$
$(8,024
)
$3,604
$(1,213
)
$2,824
$(11,244
)
year ended
december2014
securities purchased under agreements to resell
$63
$
$
$
$
$
$(63
)
$
$
$
receivables from customers andcounterparties
(33
)
(180
)
total other financial assets
$298
$3
$2
$29
$
$
$(96
)
$
$(180
)
$56
deposits
$(385
)
$
$(21
)
$5
$
$(442
)
$6
$(280
)
$52
$(1,065
)
securities sold under agreementsto repurchase
(1,010
)
(124
)
other secured financings
(1,019
)
(31
)
(20
)
(402
)
(364
)
(1,091
)
unsecured short-term borrowings
(3,387
)
(11
)
(251
)
(5
)
(2,246
)
1,828
(981
)
1,341
(3,712
)
unsecured long-term borrowings
(1,837
)
(46
)
(1,221
)
(1,344
)
1,358
(2,585
)
other liabilities and accrued expenses
(26
)
(5
)
(434
)
(19
)
(301
)
(715
)
total other financial liabilities
$(7,664
)
$(93
)
$(623
)
$(17
)
$(19
)
$(4,311
)
$3,707
$(3,270
)
$2,998
$(9,292
)
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
level3 rollforward commentary
year ended december2015. the net unrealized gain on level3 other financial assets and liabilities of $785million (reflecting $2million of gains on other financial assets and $783million of gains on other financial
liabilities) for 2015 primarily reflected gains on certain hybrid financial instruments included in unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings, principally due to a decrease in global equity prices, the impact of wider credit spreads, and changes
in interest and foreign exchange rates.  transfers into level3 of other financial liabilities during 2015 primarily reflected
transfers of certain hybrid financial instruments included in unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings from level2, principally due to reduced transparency of certain correlation and volatility inputs used to value these instruments, and
transfers from level3 unsecured long-term borrowings to level3 unsecured short-term borrowings, as these borrowings neared maturity.
transfers out of level3 of other financial liabilities during 2015 primarily reflected transfers of certain hybrid financial instruments
included in unsecured short-term and long-term borrowings and certain other secured financings to level2, principally due to increased transparency of certain correlation, volatility and funding spread inputs used to value these instruments,
transfers to level3 unsecured short-term borrowings from level3 unsecured long-term borrowings, as these borrowings neared maturity, and transfers of certain subordinated liabilities included in other liabilities and accrued expenses to
level2, principally due to increased price transparency as a result of market transactions in the related underlying investments.
year ended december2014. the net unrealized loss on level3 other financial assets and liabilities of $621million (reflecting $2million of gains on other financial assets and $623million of losses on other
financial liabilities) for 2014 primarily reflected losses on certain subordinated liabilities included in other liabilities and accrued expenses, principally due to changes in the market value of the related underlying investments, and certain
hybrid financial instruments included in unsecured short-term borrowings, principally due to an increase in global equity prices.
transfers out of level3 of other financial assets during 2014 primarily reflected transfers of certain secured loans included in
receivables from customers and counterparties to level2, principally due to unobservable inputs not being significant to the net risk of the portfolio.
transfers into level3 of other financial liabilities during 2014 primarily reflected transfers of certain hybrid financial instruments
included in unsecured long-term and short-term borrowings from level2, principally due to unobservable inputs being significant to the valuation of these instruments, and transfers from level3 unsecured long-term borrowings to
level3 unsecured short-term borrowings, as these borrowings neared maturity.  transfers out of level3 of other financial
liabilities during 2014 primarily reflected transfers of certain hybrid financial instruments included in unsecured long-term and short-term borrowings to level2, principally due to increased transparency of certain correlation and volatility
inputs used to value these instruments, transfers of certain other hybrid financial instruments included in unsecured short-term borrowings to level2, principally due to certain unobservable inputs not being significant to the valuation of
these hybrid financial instruments, and transfers to level3 unsecured short-term borrowings from level3 unsecured long-term borrowings, as these borrowings neared maturity.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
gains and losses on financial assets and financial liabilities accounted for at fair value under the
fair value option  the table below presents the gains and losses recognized as a result of the firm electing to apply the fair value
option to certain financial assets and financial liabilities. these gains and losses are included in market making and other principal transactions. the table below also includes gains and losses on the embedded derivative
component of hybrid financial instruments included in unsecured short-term borrowings, unsecured long-term borrowings and deposits. these gains and losses would have been recognized under other u.s. gaap even if the firm had not elected to account
for the entire hybrid financial instrument at fair value.  the amounts in the table exclude contractual interest, which is included in
interest income and interest expense, for all instruments other than hybrid financial instruments. see note23 for further information about interest income and interest expense.
gains/(losses)onfinancialassetsandfinancialliabilitiesat
fairvalueunderthefairvalueoption
year ended december
$ inmillions
unsecured short-term borrowings1
$346
$(1,180
)
$(1,145
)
unsecured long-term borrowings2
(592
)
other liabilities and accrued expenses3
(684
)
(441
)
(167
)
other4
(217
)
(366
)
(443
)
total
$216
$(2,579
)
$(1,072
)
1.
includes gains/(losses) on the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments of $339million for 2015, $(1.22)billion for 2014 and
$(1.04)billion for 2013, respectively.
2.
includes gains/(losses) on the embedded derivative component of hybrid financial instruments of $653million for 2015, $(697)million for 2014 and
$902million for 2013, respectively.
3.
includes gains/(losses) on certain subordinated liabilities issued by consolidated vies. gains/(losses) for 2013 also includes gains on certain insurance
contracts.
4.
primarily consists of gains/(losses) on resale and repurchase agreements, securities borrowed, receivables from customers and counterparties, deposits and
other secured financings.  excluding the gains and losses on the instruments accounted for under the fair value option
described above, market making and other principal transactions primarily represent gains and losses on financial instruments owned, at fair value and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at
fair value.
loans and lending commitments
the table below presents the difference between the aggregate fair value and the aggregate contractual principal amount for loans and long-term
receivables for which the fair value option was elected.
as of december
$ inmillions
performing loans and long-term receivables
aggregate contractual principal in excess of the related fair value
$1,330
$1,699
loans on nonaccrual status and/or more than 90days past due1
aggregate contractual principal in excess of the related fair value (excluding loans carried at zero fair value and considered
uncollectible)
9,600
13,106
aggregate fair value of loans on nonaccrual status and/or more than 90days past due
2,391
3,333
1.
the aggregate contractual principal amount of these loans exceeds the related fair value primarily because the firm regularly purchases loans, such as
distressed loans, at values significantly below contractual principal amounts.  as of december2015 and
december2014, the fair value of unfunded lending commitments for which the fair value option was elected was a liability of $211million and $402million, respectively, and the related total contractual amount of these lending
commitments was $14.01billion and $26.19billion, respectively. see note18 for further information about lending commitments.  long-term debt
instruments  the aggregate contractual principal amount of long-term other secured financings for which the fair value option was
elected exceeded the related fair value by $362million and $203million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. the aggregate contractual principal amount of unsecured long-term borrowings for which the fair value
option was elected exceeded the related fair value by $1.12billion and $163million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. the amounts above include both principal and non-principal-protected long-term borrowings.
impact of credit spreads on loans and lending commitments
the estimated net gain attributable to changes in instrument-specific credit spreads on loans and lending commitments for which the fair value
option was elected was $751million for 2015, $1.83billion for 2014 and $2.69billion for 2013, respectively. changes in the fair value of loans and lending commitments are primarily attributable to changes in instrument-specific
credit spreads. substantially all of the firms performing loans and lending commitments are floating-rate.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
impact of credit spreads on borrowings
the table below presents the net gains/(losses) attributable to the impact of changes in the firms own credit spreads on borrowings for
which the fair value option was elected. the firm calculates the fair value of borrowings by discounting future cash flows at a rate which incorporates the firms credit spreads.
year ended december
$ inmillions
net gains/(losses) including hedges
$255
$144
$(296
)
net gains/(losses) excluding hedges
(317
)
note9.
loans receivable  loans receivable is comprised of
loans held for investment that are accounted for at amortized cost net of allowance for loan losses. interest on loans receivable is recognized over the life of the loan and is recorded on an accrual basis.
the table below presents details about loans receivable.
as of december
$ inmillions
corporate loans
$20,740
$14,310
loans to private wealth management clients
13,961
11,289
loans backed by commercial real estate
5,271
2,425
loans backed by residential real estate
2,316
other loans
3,533
total loans receivable, gross
45,821
29,166
allowance for loan losses
(414
)
(228
)
total loans receivable
$45,407
$28,938
as of december2015 and december2014, the fair value of loans receivable was $45.19billion and
$28.90billion, respectively. as of december2015, had these loans been carried at fair value and included in the fair value hierarchy, $23.91billion and $21.28billion would have been classified in level2 and
level3, respectively. as of december2014, had these loans been carried at fair value and included in the fair value hierarchy, $13.75billion and $15.15billion would have been classified in level2 and level3,
respectively.
the firm also extends lending commitments that are held for investment and accounted for on an
accrual basis. as of december2015 and december2014, such lending commitments were $93.92billion and $66.22billion, respectively, substantially all of which were extended to corporate borrowers. the carrying value and the
estimated fair value of such lending commitments were liabilities of $291million and $3.32billion, respectively, as of december2015, and $199million and $1.86billion, respectively, as of december2014. had these
commitments been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have primarily been classified in level3 as of both december2015 and december2014.
the following is a description of the captions in the table above:
corporate loans. corporate loans include term loans, revolving lines of credit, letter of credit
facilities and bridge loans, and are principally used for operating liquidity and general corporate purposes, or in connection with acquisitions. corporate loans may be secured or unsecured, depending on the loan purpose, the risk profile of the
borrower and other factors.
loans to private wealth management clients. loans to the firms private wealth management
clients include loans used by clients to finance private asset purchases, employ leverage for strategic investments in real or financial assets, bridge cash flow timing gaps or provide liquidity for other needs. such loans are primarily secured by
securities or other assets.
loans backed by commercial real estate. loans backed by commercial real estate include loans extended
by the firm that are directly or indirectly secured by hotels, retail stores, multifamily housing complexes and commercial and industrial properties. loans backed by commercial real estate also include loans purchased by the firm.
loans backed by residential real estate. loans backed by residential real estate include loans
extended by the firm to clients who warehouse assets that are directly or indirectly secured by residential real estate. loans backed by residential real estate also include loans purchased by the firm.
other loans. other loans primarily include loans extended to clients who warehouse assets that are
directly or indirectly secured by consumer loans, including auto loans, and private student loans and other assets.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
loans receivable includes purchased credit impaired (pci) loans. pci loans represent acquired
loans or pools of loans with evidence of credit deterioration subsequent to their origination and where it is probable, at acquisition, that the firm will not be able to collect all contractually required payments. loans acquired within the same
reporting period, which have at least two common risk characteristics, one of which relates to their credit risk, are eligible to be pooled together and considered a single unit of account. pci loans are initially recorded at acquisition price and
the difference between the acquisition price and the expected cash flows (accretable yield) is recognized over the life of such loans or pools of loans on an effective yield method. expected cash flows on pci loans are determined using various
inputs and assumptions, including default rates, loss severities, recoveries, amount and timing of prepayments and other macroeconomic indicators. as of december2015, the carrying value of such loans was $2.12billion (including
$1.16billion, $941million and $23million related to loans backed by commercial real estate, residential real estate and other consumer loans, respectively). the outstanding principal balance and accretable yield related to such
loans was $5.54billion and $234million, respectively, as of december2015. the fair value, related expected cash flows, and the contractually required cash flows of pci loans at the time of acquisition was $2.27billion,
$2.50billion and $6.47billion, respectively. the firm did not have any pci loans as of december2014.  credit quality
the firms risk assessment process includes evaluating the credit quality of its loans receivable. for loans receivable (excluding pci
loans), the firm performs credit reviews which include initial and ongoing analyses of its borrowers. a credit review is an independent analysis of the capacity and willingness of a borrower to meet its financial obligations, resulting in an
internal credit rating. the determination of internal credit ratings also incorporates assumptions with respect to the nature of and outlook for the borrowers industry, and the economic environment. the firm also assigns a regulatory risk
rating to such loans based on the definitions provided by the u.s. federal bank regulatory agencies. such loans are determined to be impaired when it is probable that the firm will not be able to collect all principal and interest due under the
contractual terms of the loan. at that time, loans are placed on non-accrual status and all accrued but uncollected interest is reversed against interest income, and interest subsequently collected is recognized on a cash basis to the extent the
loan balance is deemed collectible. otherwise, all cash received is used to reduce the outstanding loan balance. as of december2015 and december2014, impaired loans receivable (excluding pci loans) in non-accrual status were
$223million and $59million, respectively.
for pci loans, the firms risk assessment process includes reviewing certain key metrics,
such as delinquency status, collateral values, credit scores and other risk factors. when it is determined that the firm cannot reasonably estimate expected cash flows on the pci loans or pools of loans, such loans are placed on non-accrual status.
the table below presents gross loans receivable (excluding pci loans of $2.12 billion, which are not assigned a credit rating equivalent)
and related lending commitments by the firms internally determined public rating agency equivalent and by regulatory risk rating. non-criticized/pass loans and lending commitments represent loans and lending commitments that are performing
and/or do not demonstrate adverse characteristics that are likely to result in a credit loss.
$ inmillions
loans
lendingcommitments
total
credit rating equivalent
as of december2015
investment-grade
$19,459
$64,898
$84,357
non-investment-grade
24,241
29,021
53,262
total
$43,700
$93,919
$137,619
as of december2014
investment-grade
$8,090
$48,112
$56,202
non-investment-grade
21,076
18,106
39,182
total
$29,166
$66,218
$95,384
regulatory risk rating
as of december2015
non-criticized/pass
$40,967
$92,021
$132,988
criticized
2,733
1,898
4,631
total
$43,700
$93,919
$137,619
as of december2014
non-criticized/pass
$27,538
$65,141
$92,679
criticized
1,628
1,077
2,705
total
$29,166
$66,218
$95,384
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments
the firms allowance for loan losses is comprised of portfolio level reserves, specific loan level reserves, and reserves on pci loans as
described below:
portfolio level reserves are determined on loans (excluding pci loans) not deemed impaired by aggregating groups of loans with similar risk
characteristics and estimating the probable loss inherent in the portfolio.
specific loan level reserves are determined on loans (excluding pci loans) that exhibit credit quality weakness and are therefore individually
evaluated for impairment.
reserves on pci loans are recorded when it is determined that the expected cash flows, which are reassessed on a quarterly basis, will be lower
than those used to establish the current effective yield for such loans or pools of loans. if the expected cash flows are determined to be significantly higher than those used to establish the current effective yield, such increases are initially
recognized as a reduction to any previously recorded allowances for loan losses and any remaining increases are recognized as interest income prospectively over the life of the loan or pools of loans as an increase to the effective yield.
the allowance for loan losses is determined using various inputs, including industry default and loss data, current
macroeconomic indicators, borrowers capacity to meet its financial obligations, borrowers country of risk, loan seniority and collateral type. managements estimate of loan losses entails judgment about loan collectability at the
reporting dates, and there are uncertainties inherent in those judgments. while management uses the best information available to determine this estimate, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary based on, among other things, changes in
the economic environment or variances between actual results and the original assumptions used. loans are charged off against the allowance for loan losses when deemed to be uncollectible. as of december2015 and december2014,
substantially all of the firms loans receivable were evaluated for impairment at the portfolio level.
the firm also records an allowance for losses on lending commitments that are held for investment and accounted for on an accrual basis. such
allowance is determined using the same methodology as the allowance for loan losses, while also taking into consideration the probability of drawdowns or funding, and is included in other liabilities and accrued expenses in the
consolidated statements of financial condition. as of december2015 and december2014, substantially all of such lending commitments were evaluated for impairment at the portfolio level.
the table below presents changes in the allowance for loan losses and the allowance for losses on lending commitments.
$ inmillions
yearendeddecember
allowance for loan losses
balance, beginning of period
$228
$139
charge-offs
(1
)
(3
)
provision for loan losses
balance, end of period
$414
$228
allowance for losses on
lending commitments
balance, beginning of period
$86
$57
provision for losses on lending commitments
balance, end of period
$188
$86
the provision for losses on loans and lending commitments is included in other principal
transactions in the consolidated statements of earnings. as of december2015 and december2014, substantially all of the allowance for loan losses and allowance for losses on lending commitments were related to corporate loans and
corporate lending commitments and were primarily determined at the portfolio level. the firm did not have any allowance for losses on pci loans as of december2015 and did not have any pci loans as of december2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note10.
collateralized agreements and financings
collateralized agreements are securities purchased under agreements to resell (resale
agreements) and securities borrowed. collateralized financings are securities sold under agreements to repurchase (repurchase agreements), securities loaned and other secured financings. the firm enters into these transactions in order to, among
other things, facilitate client activities, invest excess cash, acquire securities to cover short positions and finance certain firm activities.
collateralized agreements and financings are presented on a net-by-counterparty basis when a legal right of setoff exists. interest on
collateralized agreements and collateralized financings is recognized over the life of the transaction and included in interest income and interest expense, respectively. see note23 for further information about
interest income and interest expense.  the table below presents the carrying value of resale and repurchase agreements and securities
borrowed and loaned transactions.
as of december
$ inmillions
securities purchased under agreements to resell1
$120,905
$127,938
securities borrowed2
172,099
160,722
securities sold under agreements to repurchase1
86,069
88,215
securities loaned2
3,614
5,570
1.
substantially all resale agreements and all repurchase agreements are carried at fair value under the fair value option. see note8 for further
information about the valuation techniques and significant inputs used to determine fair value.
2.
as of december2015 and december2014, $69.80billion and $66.77billion of securities borrowed, and $466million and
$765million of securities loaned were at fair value, respectively.
resale and repurchase agreements
a resale agreement is a transaction in which the firm purchases financial instruments from a seller, typically in exchange for cash, and
simultaneously enters into an agreement to resell the same or substantially the same financial instruments to the seller at a stated price plus accrued interest at a future date.
a repurchase agreement is a transaction in which the firm sells financial instruments to a buyer, typically in exchange for cash, and
simultaneously enters into an agreement to repurchase the same or substantially the same financial instruments from the buyer at a stated price plus accrued interest at a future date.
the financial instruments purchased or sold in resale and repurchase agreements typically include u.s. government and federal agency, and
investment-grade sovereign obligations.  the firm receives financial instruments purchased under resale agreements and makes delivery of
financial instruments sold under repurchase agreements. to mitigate credit exposure, the firm monitors the market value of these financial instruments on a daily basis, and delivers or obtains additional collateral due to changes in the market value
of the financial instruments, as appropriate. for resale agreements, the firm typically requires collateral with a fair value approximately equal to the carrying value of the relevant assets in the consolidated statements of financial condition.
even though repurchase and resale agreements (including repos- and reverses-to-maturity) involve the legal transfer of
ownership of financial instruments, they are accounted for as financing arrangements because they require the financial instruments to be repurchased or resold at the maturity of the agreement. a repo-to-maturity is a transaction in which the firm
transfers a security under an agreement to repurchase the security where the maturity date of the repurchase agreement matches the maturity date of the underlying security. prior to january2015, repos-to-maturity were accounted for as sales.
the firm had no repos-to-maturity as of december2015 and december2014. see note3 for information about changes to the accounting for repos-to-maturity which became effective in january2015.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
securities borrowed and loaned transactions
in a securities borrowed transaction, the firm borrows securities from a counterparty in exchange for cash or securities. when the firm returns
the securities, the counterparty returns the cash or securities. interest is generally paid periodically over the life of the transaction.
in a securities loaned transaction, the firm lends securities to a counterparty in exchange for cash or securities. when the counterparty
returns the securities, the firm returns the cash or securities posted as collateral. interest is generally paid periodically over the life of the transaction.
the firm receives securities borrowed and makes delivery of securities loaned. to mitigate credit exposure, the firm monitors the market value
of these securities on a daily basis, and delivers or obtains additional collateral due to changes in the market value of the securities, as appropriate. for securities borrowed transactions, the firm typically requires collateral with a fair value
approximately equal to the carrying value of the securities borrowed transaction.  securities borrowed and loaned within fixed income,
currency and commodities client execution are recorded at fair value under the fair value option. see note8 for further information about securities borrowed and loaned accounted for at fair value.
securities borrowed and loaned within securities services are recorded based on the amount of cash collateral advanced or received plus accrued
interest. as these arrangements generally can be terminated on demand, they exhibit little, if any, sensitivity to changes in interest rates. therefore, the carrying value of such arrangements approximates fair value. while these arrangements are
carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in
notes6 through 8. had these arrangements been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have been classified in level2 as of december2015 and december2014.
offsetting arrangements
the tables below present the gross and net resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loaned transactions, and the related
amount of counterparty netting included in the consolidated statements of financial condition. the tables below also present the amounts not offset in the consolidated statements of financial condition, including counterparty netting that does not
meet the criteria for netting under u.s. gaap and the fair value of cash or securities collateral received or posted subject to enforceable credit support agreements.
as of december2015
assets
liabilities
$ inmillions
resaleagreements
securitiesborrowed
repurchase agreements
securities loaned
amountsincludedin theconsolidated statements of financialcondition
gross carrying value
$163,199
$180,203
$114,960
$6,179
counterparty netting
(28,891
)
(2,565
)
(28,891)
(2,565)
total
134,308
177,638
86,069
3,614
amountsnotoffsetin theconsolidated statements of financialcondition
counterpartynetting
(4,979
)
(1,732
)
(4,979)
(1,732)
collateral
(125,561
)
(167,061
)
(78,958)
(1,721)
total
$3,768
$8,845
$2,132
$161
as of december2014
assets
liabilities
$ inmillions
resaleagreements
securitiesborrowed
repurchase agreements
securities loaned
amounts included in theconsolidated statements of financialcondition
gross carrying value
$160,644
$171,384
$114,879
$9,150
counterparty netting
(26,664
)
(3,580
)
(26,664)
(3,580)
total
133,980
167,804
88,215
5,570
amounts not offset in theconsolidated statements of financialcondition
counterpartynetting
(3,834
)
(641
)
(3,834)
(641)
collateral
(124,528
)
(154,058
)
(78,457)
(4,882)
total
$5,618
$13,105
$5,924
$47
1.
as of december2015 and december2014, the firm had $13.40billion and $6.04billion, respectively, of securities received under resale
agreements, and $5.54billion and $7.08billion, respectively, of securities borrowed transactions that were segregated to satisfy certain regulatory requirements. these securities are included in cash and securities segregated for
regulatory and other purposes.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
in the tables above:
substantially all of the gross carrying values of these arrangements are subject to enforceable netting agreements.
where the firm has received or posted collateral under credit support agreements, but has not yet determined such agreements are enforceable, the
related collateral has not been netted.  gross carrying value of repurchase agreements and securities loaned
the tables below present the gross carrying value of repurchase agreements and securities loaned by class of collateral pledged.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
repurchaseagreements
securities loaned
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$806
$
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
54,856
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
31,547
2,465
securities backed by commercial real estate
securities backed by residential real estate
2,059
corporate debt securities
6,877
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
equities and convertible debentures
17,836
3,583
total
$114,960
$6,179
as of december2014
$ inmillions
repurchaseagreements
securities loaned
commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and other money market instruments
$900
$
u.s. government and federal agency obligations
56,788
non-u.s. government and agency obligations
27,169
3,463
securities backed by commercial real estate
securities backed by residential real estate
1,574
corporate debt securities
8,028
state and municipal obligations
other debt obligations
equities and convertible debentures
18,455
5,538
total
$114,879
$9,150
the table below presents the gross carrying value of repurchase agreements and securities loaned
by maturity date.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
repurchaseagreements
securitiesloaned
no stated maturity and overnight
$30,901
$4,275
2 - 30days
35,686
1,437
31 - 90days
16,035
91days - 1year
25,691
greater than 1year
6,647
total
$114,960
$6,179
in the table above:
repurchase agreements and securities loaned that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their contractual
maturity dates.
repurchase agreements and securities loaned that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holders are reflected at the earliest dates
such options become exercisable.  other secured financings
in addition to repurchase agreements and securities loaned transactions, the firm funds certain assets through the use of other secured
financings and pledges financial instruments and other assets as collateral in these transactions. these other secured financings consist of:
liabilities of consolidated vies;
transfers of assets accounted for as financings rather than sales (primarily collateralized central bank financings, pledged commodities, bank
loans and mortgage whole loans); and
other structured financing arrangements.
other secured financings include arrangements that are nonrecourse. as of december2015 and december2014, nonrecourse other secured
financings were $2.20billion and $1.94billion, respectively.  the firm has elected to apply the fair value option to
substantially all other secured financings because the use of fair value eliminates non-economic volatility in earnings that would arise from using different measurement attributes. see note8 for further information about other secured
financings that are accounted for at fair value.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
other secured financings that are not recorded at fair value are recorded based on the amount of
cash received plus accrued interest, which generally approximates fair value. while these financings are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in
accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6 through 8. had these financings been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have been primarily classified
in level2 as of december2015 and december2014.  the tables below present information about other secured financings.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
u.s.dollar
non-u.s.dollar
total
other secured financings (short-term):
at fair value
$7,952
$5,448
$13,400
at amortized cost
weighted average interest rates
2.93%
3.83%
other secured financings (long-term):
at fair value
6,702
3,105
9,807
at amortized cost
weighted average interest rates
2.87%
1.54%
total 1
$15,538
$9,215
$24,753
amount of other secured financings collateralized by:
financial instruments2
$14,862
$8,872
$23,734
other assets
1,019
as of december2014
$ inmillions
u.s.dollar
non-u.s.dollar
total
other secured financings (short-term):
at fair value
$7,887
$7,668
$15,555
at amortized cost
weighted average interest rates
4.33%
%
other secured financings (long-term):
at fair value
3,290
2,605
5,895
at amortized cost
1,354
weighted average interest rates
2.69%
2.31%
total1
$11,762
$11,047
$22,809
amount of other secured financings collateralized by:
financial instruments2
$11,460
$10,483
$21,943
other assets
1.
includes $334million and $974million related to transfers of financial assets accounted for as financings rather than sales as of
december2015 and december2014, respectively. such financings were collateralized by financial assets included in financial instruments owned, at fair value of $336million and $995million as of december2015
and december2014, respectively.
2.
includes $14.98billion and $10.24billion of other secured financings collateralized by financial instruments owned, at fair value as of
december2015 and december2014, respectively, and includes $8.76billion and $11.70billion of other secured financings collateralized by financial instruments received as collateral and repledged as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively.
in the tables above:
short-term secured financings include financings maturing within one year of the financial statement date and financings that are redeemable within
one year of the financial statement date at the option of the holder.
weighted average interest rates exclude secured financings at fair value and include the effect of hedging activities. see note7 for further
information about hedging activities.  the table below presents other secured financings by maturity date.
$ inmillions
as ofdecember2015
other secured financings (short-term)
$14,233
other secured financings (long-term):
5,651
2,814
2021 - thereafter
total other secured financings (long-term)
10,520
total other secured financings
$24,753
in the table above:
long-term secured financings that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity dates.
long-term secured financings that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holders are reflected at the earliest dates such options
become exercisable.  collateral received and pledged
the firm receives cash and securities (e.g., u.s. government and federal agency, other sovereign and corporate obligations, as well as equities
and convertible debentures) as collateral, primarily in connection with resale agreements, securities borrowed, derivative transactions and customer margin loans. the firm obtains cash and securities as collateral on an upfront or contingent basis
for derivative instruments and collateralized agreements to reduce its credit exposure to individual counterparties.  in many cases, the
firm is permitted to deliver or repledge financial instruments received as collateral when entering into repurchase agreements and securities loaned transactions, primarily in connection with secured client financing activities. the firm is also
permitted to deliver or repledge these financial instruments in connection with other secured financings, collateralized derivative transactions and firm or customer settlement requirements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the firm also pledges certain financial instruments owned, at fair value in connection with
repurchase agreements, securities loaned transactions and other secured financings, and other assets (primarily real estate and cash) in connection with other secured financings to counterparties who may or may not have the right to deliver or
repledge them.  the table below presents financial instruments at fair value received as collateral that were available to be delivered or
repledged and were delivered or repledged by the firm.
as of december
$ inmillions
collateral available to be delivered orrepledged1
$636,684
$630,046
collateral that was delivered or repledged
496,240
474,057
1.
as of december2015 and december2014, amounts exclude $13.40billion and $6.04billion, respectively, of securities received under resale
agreements, and $5.54billion and $7.08billion, respectively, of securities borrowed transactions that contractually had the right to be delivered or repledged, but were segregated to satisfy certain regulatory requirements.
the table below presents information about assets pledged.
as of december
$ inmillions
financial instruments owned, at fair value pledged to counterparties that:
had the right to deliver or repledge
$54,426
$64,473
did not have the right to deliver or repledge
63,880
68,027
other assets pledged to counterparties that:
did not have the right to deliver or repledge
1,841
1,304
note11.
securitization activities  the firm securitizes
residential and commercial mortgages, corporate bonds, loans and other types of financial assets by selling these assets to securitization vehicles (e.g., trusts, corporate entities and limited liability companies) or through a resecuritization. the
firm acts as underwriter of the beneficial interests that are sold to investors. the firms residential mortgage securitizations are primarily in connection with government agency securitizations.
beneficial interests issued by securitization entities are debt or equity securities that give
the investors rights to receive all or portions of specified cash inflows to a securitization vehicle and include senior and subordinated interests in principal, interest and/or other cash inflows. the proceeds from the sale of beneficial interests
are used to pay the transferor for the financial assets sold to the securitization vehicle or to purchase securities which serve as collateral.
the firm accounts for a securitization as a sale when it has relinquished control over the transferred assets. prior to securitization, the
firm accounts for assets pending transfer at fair value and therefore does not typically recognize significant gains or losses upon the transfer of assets. net revenues from underwriting activities are recognized in connection with the sales of the
underlying beneficial interests to investors.  for transfers of assets that are not accounted for as sales, the assets remain in
financial instruments owned, at fair value and the transfer is accounted for as a collateralized financing, with the related interest expense recognized over the life of the transaction. see notes10 and 23 for further information
about collateralized financings and interest expense, respectively.  the firm generally receives cash in exchange for the transferred
assets but may also have continuing involvement with transferred assets, including ownership of beneficial interests in securitized financial assets, primarily in the form of senior or subordinated securities. the firm may also purchase senior or
subordinated securities issued by securitization vehicles (which are typically vies) in connection with secondary market-making activities.
the primary risks included in beneficial interests and other interests from the firms continuing involvement with securitization vehicles
are the performance of the underlying collateral, the position of the firms investment in the capital structure of the securitization vehicle and the market yield for the security. substantially all of these interests are accounted for at fair
value, are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and are classified in level2 of the fair value hierarchy. see notes5 through 8 for further information about fair value measurements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents the amount of financial assets securitized and the cash flows received
on retained interests in securitization entities in which the firm had continuing involvement.
year ended december
$ inmillions
residential mortgages
$10,479
$19,099
$29,772
commercial mortgages
6,043
2,810
6,086
other financial assets
1,009
total
$16,522
$22,918
$35,858
cash flows on retained interests
$174
$215
$249
the tables below present the firms continuing involvement in nonconsolidated securitization entities to
which the firm sold assets, as well as the total outstanding principal amount of transferred assets in which the firm has continuing involvement.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
outstandingprincipalamount
fairvalueofretainedinterests
fairvalueofpurchasedinterests
u.s. governmentagency-issuedcollateralized mortgage obligations
$39,088
$846
$20
other residentialmortgage-backed
2,195
other commercialmortgage-backed
6,842
cdos, clos and other
2,732
total
$50,857
$1,159
$72
as of december2014
$ inmillions
outstandingprincipalamount
fair value ofretainedinterests
fair value ofpurchasedinterests
u.s. governmentagency-issuedcollateralized mortgage obligations
$56,792
$2,140
$
other residentialmortgage-backed
2,273
other commercialmortgage-backed
3,313
cdos, clos and other
4,299
total
$66,677
$2,429
$67
in the tables above:
the outstanding principal amount is presented for the purpose of providing information about the size of the securitization entities in which the
firm has continuing involvement and is not representative of the firms risk of loss.
for retained or purchased interests, the firms risk of loss is limited to the fair value of these interests.
purchased interests represent senior and subordinated interests, purchased in connection with secondary market-making activities, in securitization
entities in which the firm also holds retained interests.
substantially all of the total outstanding principal amount and total fair value of retained interests as of december2015 relate to
securitizations during 2012 and thereafter, and substantially all of the total outstanding principal amount and total fair value of retained interests as of december2014 relate to securitizations during 2011 and thereafter.
in addition to the interests in the tables above, the firm had other continuing involvement in the form of derivative
transactions and commitments with certain nonconsolidated vies. the carrying value of these derivatives and commitments was a net asset of $92million and $115million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. the
notional amounts of these derivatives and commitments are included in maximum exposure to loss in the nonconsolidated vie table in note12.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents the weighted average key economic assumptions used in measuring the
fair value of mortgage-backed retained interests and the sensitivity of this fair value to immediate adverse changes of 10% and 20% in those assumptions.
as of december
$ inmillions
fair value of retained interests
$1,115
$2,370
weighted average life (years)
7.5
7.6
constant prepayment rate
10.4%
13.2%
impact of 10% adverse change
$(22
)
$(33
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(43
)
(66
)
discount rate
5.5%
4.1%
impact of 10% adverse change
$(28
)
$(50
)
impact of 20% adverse change
(55
)
(97
)
in the table above:
amounts do not reflect the benefit of other financial instruments that are held to mitigate risks inherent in these retained interests.
changes in fair value based on an adverse variation in assumptions generally cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in
assumptions to the change in fair value is not usually linear.
the impact of a change in a particular assumption is calculated independently of changes in any other assumption. in practice, simultaneous changes
in assumptions might magnify or counteract the sensitivities disclosed above.
the constant prepayment rate is included only for positions for which it is a key assumption in the determination of fair value.
the discount rate for retained interests that relate to u.s. government agency-issued collateralized mortgage obligations does not include any
credit loss.
expected credit loss assumptions are reflected in the discount rate for the remainder of retained interests.
the firm has other retained interests not reflected in the table above with a fair value of $44million and a weighted average life of
3.5years as of december2015, and a fair value of $59million and a weighted average life of 3.6years as of december2014. due to the nature and current fair value of certain of these retained interests, the weighted
average assumptions for constant prepayment and discount rates and the related sensitivity to adverse changes are not meaningful as of december2015 and december2014. the firms maximum exposure to adverse changes in the value of
these interests is the carrying value of $44million and $59million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively.
note12.
variable interest entities  vies generally finance
the purchase of assets by issuing debt and equity securities that are either collateralized by or indexed to the assets held by the vie. the debt and equity securities issued by a vie may include tranches of varying levels of subordination. the
firms involvement with vies includes securitization of financial assets, as described in note11, and investments in and loans to other types of vies, as described below. see note11 for additional information about securitization
activities, including the definition of beneficial interests. see note3 for the firms consolidation policies, including the definition of a vie.
the firm is principally involved with vies through the following business activities:
mortgage-backed vies and corporate cdo and clo vies.
the firm sells residential and commercial mortgage loans and securities to mortgage-backed vies and corporate bonds and loans to corporate cdo and clo vies and may retain beneficial interests in the assets sold to these vies. the firm purchases and
sells beneficial interests issued by mortgage-backed and corporate cdo and clo vies in connection with market-making activities. in addition, the firm may enter into derivatives with certain of these vies, primarily interest rate swaps, which are
typically not variable interests. the firm generally enters into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate its risk from derivatives with these vies.
certain mortgage-backed and corporate cdo and clo vies, usually referred to as synthetic cdos or credit-linked note vies, synthetically create
the exposure for the beneficial interests they issue by entering into credit derivatives, rather than purchasing the underlying assets. these credit derivatives may reference a single asset, an index, or a portfolio/basket of assets or indices. see
note7 for further information about credit derivatives. these vies use the funds from the sale of beneficial interests and the premiums received from credit derivative counterparties to purchase securities which serve to collateralize the
beneficial interest holders and/or the credit derivative counterparty. these vies may enter into other derivatives, primarily interest rate swaps, which are typically not variable interests. the firm may be a counterparty to derivatives with these
vies and generally enters into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate its risk.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
real estate, credit-related and other investing
vies. the firm purchases equity and debt securities issued by and makes loans to vies that hold real estate, performing and nonperforming debt, distressed loans and equity securities. the firm
typically does not sell assets to, or enter into derivatives with, these vies.  other
asset-backed vies. the firm structures vies that issue notes to clients, and purchases and sells beneficial interests issued by other asset-backed vies in connection with market-making activities.
in addition, the firm may enter into derivatives with certain other asset-backed vies, primarily total return swaps on the collateral assets held by these vies under which the firm pays the vie the return due to the note holders and receives the
return on the collateral assets owned by the vie. the firm generally can be removed as the total return swap counterparty. the firm generally enters into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate its risk from derivatives with these vies.
the firm typically does not sell assets to the other asset-backed vies it structures.
principal-protected note vies. the firm structures vies
that issue principal-protected notes to clients. these vies own portfolios of assets, principally with exposure to hedge funds. substantially all of the principal protection on the notes issued by these vies is provided by the asset portfolio
rebalancing that is required under the terms of the notes. the firm enters into total return swaps with these vies under which the firm pays the vie the return due to the principal-protected note holders and receives the return on the assets owned
by the vie. the firm may enter into derivatives with other counterparties to mitigate the risk it has from the derivatives it enters into with these vies. the firm also obtains funding through these vies.
other vies. other primarily includes nonconsolidated
power-related and investment fund vies. the firm purchases debt and equity securities issued by vies that hold power-related assets, and may provide commitments to these vies. the firm also makes equity investments in certain of the investment fund
vies it manages, and is entitled to receive fees from these vies. the firm typically does not sell assets to, or enter into derivatives with, these vies.
vie consolidation analysis
a variable interest in a vie is an investment (e.g., debt or equity securities) or other interest (e.g., derivatives or loans and lending
commitments) in a vie that will absorb portions of the vies expected losses and/or receive portions of the vies expected residual returns.
the firms variable interests in vies include senior and subordinated debt in residential and commercial mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed securitization entities, cdos and clos; loans and lending commitments; limited and general partnership interests; preferred and common equity; derivatives that may include foreign currency, equity and/or credit risk; guarantees; and
certain of the fees the firm receives from investment funds. certain interest rate, foreign currency and credit derivatives the firm enters into with vies are not variable interests because they create rather than absorb risk.
the enterprise with a controlling financial interest in a vie is known as the primary beneficiary and consolidates the vie. the firm determines
whether it is the primary beneficiary of a vie by performing an analysis that principally considers:
which variable interest holder has the power to direct the activities of the vie that most significantly impact the vies economic
performance;
which variable interest holder has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the vie that could potentially be
significant to the vie;
the vies purpose and design, including the risks the vie was designed to create and pass through to its variable interest holders;
the vies capital structure;
the terms between the vie and its variable interest holders and other parties involved with the vie; and
related-party relationships.
the firm reassesses its initial evaluation of whether an entity is a vie when certain reconsideration events occur. the firm reassesses its
determination of whether it is the primary beneficiary of a vie on an ongoing basis based on current facts and circumstances.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
nonconsolidated vies
the table below presents information about nonconsolidated vies in which the firm holds variable
interests.
nonconsolidatedvies
as of december
$ inmillions
mortgage-backed1
assets in vies
$62,672
$78,107
carrying value of variable interests- assets
2,439
4,348
maximum exposure to loss
retained interests
1,115
2,370
purchased interests
1,324
1,978
commitments and guarantees
derivatives
total maximum exposure to loss
2,701
4,740
corporate cdos and clos
assets in vies
6,493
8,317
carrying value of variable interests- assets
carrying value of variable interests- liabilities
maximum exposure to loss
retained interests
purchased interests
commitments and guarantees
derivatives
2,633
2,053
loans and investments
total maximum exposure to loss
3,654
2,241
real estate, credit-related and other
investing
assets in vies
9,793
8,720
carrying value of variable interests- assets
3,557
3,051
carrying value of variable interests- liabilities
maximum exposure to loss
commitments and guarantees
loans and investments
3,557
3,051
total maximum exposure to loss
4,127
3,655
other asset-backed
assets in vies
7,026
8,253
carrying value of variable interests- assets
carrying value of variable interests- liabilities
maximum exposure to loss
retained interests
purchased interests
commitments and guarantees
derivatives
4,075
3,221
total maximum exposure to loss
4,714
3,811
other
assets in vies
4,161
5,677
carrying value of variable interests- assets
maximum exposure to loss
commitments and guarantees
derivatives
loans and investments
total maximum exposure to loss
total nonconsolidated vies
assets in vies
90,145
109,074
carrying value of variable interests- assets
7,171
8,661
carrying value of variable interests- liabilities
maximum exposure to loss
retained interests
1,159
2,429
purchased interests
1,528
2,484
commitments and guarantees2
2,020
1,124
derivatives2
6,936
5,754
loans and investments
4,108
3,341
total maximum exposure to loss
$15,751
$15,132
1.
assets in vies and maximum exposure to loss include $4.08billion and $502million, respectively, as of december2015, and $3.57billion
and $662million, respectively, as of december2014, related to cdos backed by mortgage obligations.
2.
includes $1.52billion and $1.64billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, related to commitments and derivative
transactions with vies to which the firm transferred assets.
the firms exposure to the obligations of vies is generally limited to its interests in
these entities. in certain instances, the firm provides guarantees, including derivative guarantees, to vies or holders of variable interests in vies.
in the table above, nonconsolidated vies are aggregated based on principal business activity. the nature of the firms variable interests
can take different forms, as described in the rows under maximum exposure to loss. in the table above:
the maximum exposure to loss excludes the benefit of offsetting financial instruments that are held to mitigate the risks associated with these
variable interests.
for retained and purchased interests, and loans and investments, the maximum exposure to loss is the carrying value of these interests.
for commitments and guarantees, and derivatives, the maximum exposure to loss is the notional amount, which does not represent anticipated losses
and also has not been reduced by unrealized losses already recorded. as a result, the maximum exposure to loss exceeds liabilities recorded for commitments and guarantees, and derivatives provided to vies.
the carrying values of the firms variable interests in nonconsolidated vies are included in the consolidated statement of financial
condition as follows:
substantially all assets held by the firm related to mortgage-backed and corporate cdo and clo vies are included in financial instruments
owned, at fair value. substantially all liabilities held by the firm related to corporate cdo and clo vies are included in financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value;
substantially all assets held by the firm related to other asset-backed vies are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value
and loans receivable. substantially all liabilities held by the firm related to other asset-backed vies are included in financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value;
substantially all assets held by the firm related to real estate, credit-related and other investing vies are included in financial
instruments owned, at fair value, loans receivable, and other assets. substantially all liabilities held by the firm related to real estate, credit-related and other investing vies are included in other
liabilities and accrued expenses and financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value; and
substantially all assets held by the firm related to other vies are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
consolidated vies
the table below presents the carrying amount and classification of assets and liabilities in consolidated vies, excluding the benefit of
offsetting financial instruments that are held to mitigate the risks associated with the firms variable interests.
consolidated vies
as of december
$ inmillions
real estate, credit-related and other investing
assets
cash and cash equivalents
$374
$218
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
loans receivable
1,534
financial instruments owned, at fair value
1,585
2,608
other assets
total
3,999
3,783
liabilities
other secured financings
payables to customers and counterparties
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
unsecured long-term borrowings
other liabilities and accrued expenses
total
1,347
cdos, mortgage-backed and other
asset-backed
assets
financial instruments owned, at fair value
other assets
total
liabilities
other secured financings
payables to customers and counterparties
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
total
principal-protected notes
assets
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
financial instruments owned, at fair value
total
liabilities
other secured financings
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings
1,090
unsecured long-term borrowings
total
1,141
1,632
total consolidated vies
assets
cash and cash equivalents
cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes
receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations
loans receivable
1,534
financial instruments owned, at fair value
2,283
3,005
other assets
total
4,712
4,211
liabilities
other secured financings
payables to customers and counterparties
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
unsecured short-term borrowings, including the current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings
1,090
unsecured long-term borrowings
other liabilities and accrued expenses
total
$2,592
$3,086
in the table above:
consolidated vies are aggregated based on principal business activity and their assets and liabilities are presented net of intercompany
eliminations. the majority of the assets in principal-protected notes vies are intercompany and are eliminated in consolidation.
vies in which the firm holds a majority voting interest are excluded if (i)the vie meets the definition of a business and (ii)the
vies assets can be used for purposes other than the settlement of its obligations.
substantially all the assets can only be used to settle obligations of the vie. the liabilities of real estate, credit-related and other investing
vies, and cdos, mortgage-backed and other asset-backed vies do not have recourse to the general credit of the firm.
note13.  other assets
other assets are generally less liquid, non-financial assets. the table below presents other assets by type.
as of december
$ inmillions
property, leasehold improvements and equipment
$9,956
$9,344
goodwill and identifiable intangible assets
4,148
4,160
income tax-related assets
5,548
5,181
equity-method
investments1
miscellaneous receivables and other2
5,308
3,156
total
$25,218
$22,201
1.
excludes investments accounted for at fair value under the fair value option where the firm would otherwise apply the equity method of accounting of
$6.59billion and $6.62billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, all of which are included in financial instruments owned, at fair value. the firm has generally elected the fair value option for
such investments acquired after the fair value option became available.
2.
includes $581million and $461million of investments in qualified affordable housing projects as of december2015 and december2014,
respectively.
3.
includes $1.96billion of assets classified as held for sale related to certain of the firms consolidated investments in europe.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
assets held for sale
in the fourth quarter of 2015, the firm classified certain consolidated investments in europe within its investing& lending segment
as held for sale. as of december2015, assets and liabilities related to these investments were included in other assets and other liabilities and accrued expenses, respectively. assets related to these investments were
$1.96billion as of december2015 and substantially all consisted of property, leasehold improvements and equipment. liabilities related to these investments were $783million as of december2015 and substantially all
consisted of other secured financings carried at fair value under the fair value option.  property, leasehold improvements and equipment
property, leasehold improvements and equipment in the table above is net of accumulated depreciation and amortization of $7.77billion and
$8.98billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. property, leasehold improvements and equipment included $5.93billion and $5.81billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively,
related to property, leasehold improvements and equipment that the firm uses in connection with its operations. the remainder is held by investment entities, including vies, consolidated by the firm. substantially all property and equipment is
depreciated on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset. leasehold improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the improvement or the term of the lease, whichever is shorter. certain costs of software
developed or obtained for internal use are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the software.  goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets  the tables below present the carrying values of goodwill and identifiable intangible assets.
goodwillasofdecember
$ inmillions
investment banking:
financial advisory
$98
$98
underwriting
institutional client services:
fixed income, currency andcommodities client execution
equities client execution
2,402
2,403
securities services
investing& lending
investment management
total
$3,657
$3,645
identifiableintangibleassets
as of december
$ inmillions
institutional client services:
fixed income, currency andcommodities client execution
$92
$138
equities client execution
investing& lending
investment management
total
$491
$515
goodwill. goodwill is
the cost of acquired companies in excess of the fair value of net assets, including identifiable intangible assets, at the acquisition date.
goodwill is assessed for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an
impairment may exist. when assessing goodwill for impairment, first, qualitative factors are assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. if the results of the
qualitative assessment are not conclusive, a quantitative goodwill test is performed. the quantitative goodwill test consists of two steps:
the first step compares the estimated fair value of each reporting unit with its estimated net book value (including goodwill and identifiable
intangible assets). if the reporting units estimated fair value exceeds its estimated net book value, goodwill is not impaired.
if the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its estimated net book value, the second step of the goodwill test is performed to
measure the amount of impairment, if any. an impairment is equal to the excess of the carrying amount of goodwill over its fair value.
goodwill was tested for impairment, using a quantitative test, during the fourth quarter of 2015. the estimated fair value of each of the
reporting units exceeded its respective net book value. accordingly, goodwill was not impaired and step two of the quantitative goodwill test was not performed.
to estimate the fair value of each reporting unit, a relative value technique was used because the firm believes market participants would use
this technique to value the firms reporting units. the relative value technique applies observable price-to-earnings multiples or price-to-book multiples and projected return on equity of comparable competitors to reporting units net
earnings or net book value. the net book value of each reporting unit reflects an allocation of total shareholders equity and represents the estimated amount of total shareholders equity required to support the activities of the
reporting unit under currently applicable regulatory capital requirements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
identifiable intangible assets. the table below presents the gross carrying amount, accumulated amortization and net carrying amount of identifiable intangible assets and their weighted average remaining useful lives.
as of december
$ inmillions
weightedaverageremainingusefullives(years)
customer lists
gross carrying amount
$1,072
$1,036
accumulated amortization
(777
)
(715
)
net carrying amount
commodities-related
gross carrying amount
accumulated amortization
(94
)
(78
)
net carrying amount
other
gross carrying amount
accumulated amortization
(159
)
(144
)
net carrying amount
total
gross carrying amount
1,521
1,452
accumulated amortization
(1,030
)
(937
)
net carrying amount
$491
$515
1.
primarily includes commodities-related transportation rights.
2.
primarily includes intangible assets related to acquired leases.
substantially all of the firms identifiable intangible assets are considered to have finite useful lives and are amortized over their
estimated useful lives using the straight-line method or based on economic usage for certain commodities-related intangibles.  the tables
below present details about amortization of identifiable intangible assets.
year ended december
$ inmillions
amortization
$132
$217
$205
$ inmillions
estimated future amortization
as ofdecember2015
$130
impairments
the firm tests property, leasehold improvements and equipment, identifiable intangible assets and other assets for impairment whenever events
or changes in circumstances suggest that an assets or asset groups carrying value may not be fully recoverable. to the extent the carrying value of an asset exceeds the projected undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use
and eventual disposal of the asset or asset group, the firm determines the asset is impaired and records an impairment equal to the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of the asset or asset group. in addition, the firm
will recognize an impairment prior to the sale of an asset if the carrying value of the asset exceeds its estimated fair value.  during
2015, the firm recorded impairments of $103million, substantially all of which were attributable to consolidated investments and included in the firms investing& lending segment. the impairments generally reflected challenging
market conditions for certain companies in the energy industry resulting from continued low energy commodity prices. these impairments consisted of $81million related to property, leasehold improvements and equipment, which was included in
depreciation and amortization, and $22million related to other assets, which was included in other expenses.
during 2014, primarily as a result of deterioration in market and operating conditions related to certain of the firms consolidated
investments and the firms exchange-traded fund lead market maker (lmm) rights, the firm determined that certain assets were impaired and recorded impairments of $360million, all of which were included in depreciation and
amortization. these impairments consisted of $268million related to property, leasehold improvements and equipment, substantially all of which was attributable to a consolidated investment in latin america, $70million related to
identifiable intangible assets, primarily attributable to the firms lmm rights, and $22million related to goodwill as a result of the sale of metro international trade services (metro). the impairments related to property, leasehold
improvements and equipment and goodwill were included within the firms investing& lending segment and the impairments related to identifiable intangible assets were principally included within the firms institutional client
services segment.  the impairments represented the excess of the carrying values of these assets over their estimated fair values,
substantially all of which are calculated using level3 measurements. these fair values were calculated using a combination of discounted cash flow analyses and relative value analyses, including the estimated cash flows expected to result from
the use and eventual disposition of these assets.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note14.
deposits  the table below presents deposits held in
u.s. and non-u.s. offices, substantially all of which were interest-bearing. substantially all u.s. deposits were held at goldman sachs bank usa (gs bank usa) and substantially all non-u.s. deposits were held at goldman sachs international bank
(gsib).
as of december
$ inmillions
u.s. offices
$81,920
$69,142
non-u.s. offices
15,599
13,738
total
$97,519
$82,880
the table below presents maturities of time deposits held in u.s. and non-u.s. offices.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
u.s.
non-u.s.
total
$8,572
$8,692
$17,264
6,213
6,332
3,975
3,982
3,931
3,931
3,191
3,191
2021-thereafter
8,196
8,312
total
$34,078
$8,934
$43,012
1.
includes $1.92billion greater than $100,000, of which $741million matures within three months, $730million matures within three to six
months, $326million matures within six to twelve months, and $127million matures after twelve months.
2.
includes $6.98billion greater than $100,000.
3.
includes $14.68billion of time deposits accounted for at fair value under the fair value option. see note8 for further information about deposits
accounted for at fair value.  as of december2015 and december2014, deposits include $54.51billion and
$49.29billion, respectively, of savings and demand deposits, which have no stated maturity, and were recorded based on the amount of cash received plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value. in addition, the firm designates certain
derivatives as fair value hedges to convert substantially all of its time deposits not accounted for at fair value from fixed-rate obligations into floating-rate obligations. accordingly, the carrying value of time deposits approximated fair value
as of december2015 and december2014. while these savings and demand deposits and time deposits are carried at amounts that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in
accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6 through 8. had these deposits been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, they would have been classified in
level2 as of december2015 and december2014.
note15.
short-term borrowings  the table below presents
details about the firms short-term borrowings.
as of december
$ inmillions
other secured financings (short-term)
$14,233
$15,560
unsecured short-term borrowings
42,787
44,539
total
$57,020
$60,099
see note10 for information about other secured financings.
unsecured short-term borrowings include the portion of unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement date
and unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable within one year of the financial statement date at the option of the holder.  the
firm accounts for promissory notes, commercial paper and certain hybrid financial instruments at fair value under the fair value option. see note8 for further information about unsecured short-term borrowings that are accounted for at fair
value. the carrying value of unsecured short-term borrowings that are not recorded at fair value generally approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of the obligations. while these unsecured short-term borrowings are carried at amounts
that approximate fair value, they are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap and therefore are not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6 through 8.
had these borrowings been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of december2015 and december2014.
the table below presents details about the firms unsecured short-term borrowings.
as of december
$ inmillions
current portion of unsecured long-term borrowings1
$25,373
$25,125
hybrid financial instruments
12,956
14,083
promissory notes
commercial paper
other short-term borrowings
4,250
4,376
total
$42,787
$44,539
weighted average interest rate2
1.52%
1.52%
1.
includes $24.11billion and $23.82billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, issued by group inc.
2.
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings include the effect of hedging activities and exclude financial instruments accounted for at fair
value under the fair value option. see note7 for further information about hedging activities.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note16.
long-term borrowings
the table below presents details about the firms long-term borrowings.
as of december
$ inmillions
other secured financings (long-term)
$10,520
$7,249
unsecured long-term borrowings
175,422
167,302
total
$185,942
$174,551
see note10 for information about other secured financings.
the tables below present unsecured long-term borrowings extending through 2061 and consisting principally of senior borrowings.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
u.s. dollar
non-u.s.dollar
total
fixed-rate obligations1
group inc.
$90,076
$29,808
$119,884
subsidiaries
2,114
3,009
floating-rate obligations2
group inc.
27,881
16,916
44,797
subsidiaries
5,662
2,070
7,732
total
$125,733
$49,689
$175,422
as of december2014
$ inmillions
u.s. dollar
non-u.s.dollar
total
fixed-rate obligations1
group inc.
$86,255
$34,070
$120,325
subsidiaries
3,062
3,772
floating-rate obligations2
group inc.
23,396
14,590
37,986
subsidiaries
4,137
1,082
5,219
total
$116,850
$50,452
$167,302
1.
interest rates on u.s. dollar-denominated debt ranged from 1.60% to 10.04% (with a weighted average rate of 4.89%) and 1.55% to 10.04% (with a weighted
average rate of 5.08%) as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. interest rates on non-u.s. dollar-denominated debt ranged from 0.40% to 13.00% (with a weighted average rate of 3.81%) and 0.02% to 13.00% (with a weighted average
rate of 4.06%) as of december2015 and december2014, respectively.
2.
floating interest rates generally are based on libor or ois. equity-linked and indexed instruments are included in floating-rate obligations.
the table below presents unsecured long-term borrowings by maturity date.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
groupinc.
subsidiaries
total
$22,744
$2,618
$25,362
23,262
1,869
25,131
15,010
1,025
16,035
17,606
17,955
2021- thereafter
86,059
4,880
90,939
total1
$164,681
$10,741
$175,422
1.
includes $8.34billion of adjustments to the carrying value of certain unsecured long-term borrowings resulting from the application of hedge accounting
by year of maturity as follows: $436million in 2017, $614million in 2018, $407million in 2019, $443million in 2020, and $6.44billion in 2021 and thereafter.
in the table above:
unsecured long-term borrowings maturing within one year of the financial statement date and unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable
within one year of the financial statement date at the option of the holders are excluded from the table as they are included as unsecured short-term borrowings.
unsecured long-term borrowings that are repayable prior to maturity at the option of the firm are reflected at their contractual maturity dates.
unsecured long-term borrowings that are redeemable prior to maturity at the option of the holders are reflected at the earliest dates such options
become exercisable.  the firm designates certain derivatives as fair value hedges to convert a majority of the amount of
its fixed-rate unsecured long-term borrowings not accounted for at fair value into floating-rate obligations. accordingly, excluding the cumulative impact of changes in the firms credit spreads, the carrying value of unsecured long-term
borrowings approximated fair value as of december2015 and december2014. see note7 for further information about hedging activities. for unsecured long-term borrowings for which the firm did not elect the fair value option, the
cumulative impact due to changes in the firms own credit spreads would be an increase of less than 1% and an increase of 2% in the carrying value of such borrowings as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. as these
borrowings are not accounted for at fair value under the fair value option or at fair value in accordance with other u.s. gaap, their fair value is not included in the firms fair value hierarchy in notes6 through 8. had these borrowings
been included in the firms fair value hierarchy, substantially all would have been classified in level2 as of december2015 and december2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the tables below present unsecured long-term borrowings, after giving effect to hedging
activities that converted a majority of the amount of fixed-rate obligations to floating-rate obligations.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
groupinc.
subsidiaries
total
fixed-rateobligations
at fair value
$
$21
$21
at amortized cost1
52,448
2,569
55,017
floating-rateobligations
at fair value
16,194
6,058
22,252
at amortized cost1
96,039
2,093
98,132
total
$164,681
$10,741
$175,422
as of december2014
$ inmillions
group inc.
subsidiaries
total
fixed-rate obligations
at fair value
$
$861
$861
at amortized cost1
31,232
2,440
33,672
floating-rate obligations
at fair value
11,662
3,482
15,144
at amortized cost1
115,417
2,208
117,625
total
$158,311
$8,991
$167,302
1.
the weighted average interest rates on the aggregate amounts were 2.73% (4.33% related to fixed-rate obligations and 1.84% related to floating-rate
obligations) and 2.68% (5.09% related to fixed-rate obligations and 2.01% related to floating-rate obligations) as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. these rates exclude financial instruments accounted for at fair value
under the fair value option.  subordinated borrowings
unsecured long-term borrowings include subordinated debt and junior subordinated debt. junior subordinated debt is junior in right of payment
to other subordinated borrowings, which are junior to senior borrowings. as of december2015 and december2014, subordinated debt had maturities ranging from 2017 to 2045, and 2017 to 2038, respectively.
the tables below present subordinated borrowings.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
par amount
carryingamount
rate
subordinated debt2
$18,004
$20,784
3.79%
junior subordinated debt
1,359
1,817
5.77%
totalsubordinatedborrowings
$19,363
$22,601
3.93%
as of december2014
$ inmillions
paramount
carryingamount
rate
subordinated debt2
$14,254
$17,236
3.77%
junior subordinated debt
1,582
2,121
6.21%
total subordinated borrowings
$15,836
$19,357
4.02%
1.
weighted average interest rates after giving effect to fair value hedges used to convert these fixed-rate obligations into floating-rate obligations. see
note7 for further information about hedging activities. see below for information about interest rates on junior subordinated debt.
2.
par amount and carrying amount of subordinated debt issued by group inc. were $17.47billion and $20.25billion, respectively, as of
december2015, and $13.68billion and $16.67billion, respectively, as of december2014.
junior subordinated debt
junior subordinated debt held by 2012 trusts. in 2012,
the vesey street investment trust i and the murray street investment trust i (together, the 2012 trusts) issued an aggregate of $2.25billion of senior guaranteed trust securities to third parties. the proceeds of that offering were used to
purchase $1.75billion of junior subordinated debt issued by group inc. that pays interest semi-annually at a fixed annual rate of 4.647% and matures on march9,2017, and $500million of junior subordinated debt issued by group
inc. that pays interest semi-annually at a fixed annual rate of 4.404% and matures on september1,2016. during 2014, the firm exchanged $175million of the senior guaranteed trust securities held by the firm for $175million of
junior subordinated debt held by the murray street investment trust i. following the exchange, these senior guaranteed trust securities and junior subordinated debt were extinguished.
the 2012 trusts purchased the junior subordinated debt from goldman sachs capital ii and goldman sachs capital iii (apex trusts). the apex
trusts used the proceeds from such sales to purchase shares of group inc.s perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock, seriese (seriese preferred stock) and perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock, seriesf (seriesf
preferred stock). see note19 for more information about the seriese and seriesf preferred stock.  the 2012 trusts are
required to pay distributions on their senior guaranteed trust securities in the same amounts and on the same dates that they are scheduled to receive interest on the junior subordinated debt they hold, and are required to redeem their respective
senior guaranteed trust securities upon the maturity or earlier redemption of the junior subordinated debt they hold.  the firm has the
right to defer payments on the junior subordinated debt, subject to limitations. during any such deferral period, the firm will not be permitted to, among other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of its common or preferred stock.
however, as group inc. fully and unconditionally guarantees the payment of the distribution and redemption amounts when due on a senior basis on the senior guaranteed trust securities issued by the 2012 trusts, if the 2012 trusts are unable to make
scheduled distributions to the holders of the senior guaranteed trust securities, under the guarantee, group inc. would be obligated to make those payments. as such, the $1.58billion and the $500million of junior subordinated debt held
by the 2012 trusts for the benefit of investors, included in unsecured long-term borrowings and unsecured short-term borrowings, respectively, in the consolidated statements of financial condition, is not classified as
subordinated borrowings.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the apex trusts and the 2012 trusts are delaware statutory trusts sponsored by the firm and
wholly-owned finance subsidiaries of the firm for regulatory and legal purposes but are not consolidated for accounting purposes.  the firm
has covenanted in favor of the holders of group inc.s 6.345% junior subordinated debt due february15,2034, that, subject to certain exceptions, the firm will not redeem or purchase the capital securities issued by the apex trusts
or shares of group inc.s seriese or seriesf preferred stock prior to specified dates in 2022 for a price that exceeds a maximum amount determined by reference to the net cash proceeds that the firm has received from the sale of
qualifying securities.  junior subordinated debt issued in connection with trust preferred
securities. group inc. issued $2.84billion of junior subordinated debt in 2004 to goldman sachs capital i (trust), a delaware statutory trust. the trust issued $2.75billion of
guaranteed preferred beneficial interests (trust preferred securities) to third parties and $85million of common beneficial interests to group inc. and used the proceeds from the issuances to purchase the junior subordinated debt from group
inc. during 2014 and the first quarter of 2015, the firm purchased $1.43billion (par amount) of trust preferred securities and delivered these securities, along with $44.2million of common beneficial interests, to the trust in exchange
for a corresponding par amount of the junior subordinated debt. following the exchanges, these trust preferred securities, common beneficial interests and junior subordinated debt were extinguished. subsequent to these extinguishments, the
outstanding par amount of junior subordinated debt held by the trust was $1.36billion and the outstanding par amount of trust preferred securities and common beneficial interests issued by the trust was $1.32billion and
$40.8million, respectively. the trust is a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of the firm for regulatory and legal purposes but is not consolidated for accounting purposes.
the firm pays interest semi-annually on the junior subordinated debt at an annual rate of 6.345%
and the debt matures on february15,2034. the coupon rate and the payment dates applicable to the beneficial interests are the same as the interest rate and payment dates for the junior subordinated debt. the firm has the right, from time
to time, to defer payment of interest on the junior subordinated debt, and therefore cause payment on the trusts preferred beneficial interests to be deferred, in each case up to ten consecutive semi-annual periods. during any such deferral
period, the firm will not be permitted to, among other things, pay dividends on or make certain repurchases of its common stock. the trust is not permitted to pay any distributions on the common beneficial interests held by group inc. unless all
dividends payable on the preferred beneficial interests have been paid in full.  note17.
other liabilities and accrued expenses  the table
below presents other liabilities and accrued expenses by type.
as of december
$ inmillions
compensation and benefits
$8,149
$8,368
noncontrolling interests1
income tax-related liabilities
1,280
1,533
employee interests in consolidated funds
subordinated liabilities issued by consolidatedvies
accrued expenses and other2
8,355
4,751
total
$18,893
$16,075
1.
primarily relates to consolidated investment funds.
2.
substantially all of the increase from december2014 to december2015 relates to provisions for the agreement in principle with the residential
mortgage-backed securities working group of the u.s. financial fraud enforcement task force (rmbs working group). see note27 for further information about this agreement in principle.
3.
includes $783million of liabilities classified as held for sale related to certain of the firms consolidated investments in europe. see
note13 for further information.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note18.
commitments, contingencies and guarantees
commitments
the table below presents the firms commitments by type.
as of december
$ inmillions
commitments to extend credit
commercial lending:
investment-grade
$72,428
$63,634
non-investment-grade
41,277
29,605
warehouse financing
3,453
2,710
total commitments to extend credit
117,158
95,949
contingent and forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements
28,874
35,225
forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements
5,878
8,180
letters of credit
investment commitments
6,054
5,164
other
6,944
6,321
total commitments
$165,157
$151,147
the table below presents the firms commitments by period of expiration.
commitment amount by period
of expiration as of december2015
$ inmillions
2017 -2018
2019 -2020
2021-thereafter
commitments to extend credit
commercial lending:
investment-grade
$18,283
$14,530
$36,811
$2,804
non-investment-grade
9,652
8,521
16,932
6,172
warehouse financing
1,905
1,000
total commitments to extend credit
28,404
24,956
53,822
9,976
contingent and forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements
28,839
forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements
5,878
letters of credit
investment commitments
4,600
1,094
other
6,484
total commitments
$74,422
$25,691
$53,919
$11,125
commitments to extend credit
the firms commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend with fixed termination dates and depend on the satisfaction of all
contractual conditions to borrowing. these commitments are presented net of amounts syndicated to third parties. the total commitment amount does not necessarily reflect actual future cash flows because the firm may syndicate all or substantial
additional portions of these commitments. in addition, commitments can expire unused or be reduced or cancelled at the counterpartys request.
as of december2015 and december2014, $93.92billion and $66.22billion, respectively, of the firms lending
commitments were held for investment and were accounted for on an accrual basis. see note9 for further information about such commitments. in addition, as of december2015 and december2014, $9.92billion and $3.12billion,
respectively, of the firms lending commitments were held for sale and were accounted for at the lower of cost or fair value.  the
firm accounts for the remaining commitments to extend credit at fair value. losses, if any, are generally recorded, net of any fees in other principal transactions.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
commercial lending. the firms commercial lending commitments are extended to investment-grade and non-investment-grade corporate borrowers. commitments to investment-grade corporate borrowers are principally used for operating
liquidity and general corporate purposes. the firm also extends lending commitments in connection with contingent acquisition financing and other types of corporate lending as well as commercial real estate financing. commitments that are extended
for contingent acquisition financing are often intended to be short-term in nature, as borrowers often seek to replace them with other funding sources.
sumitomo mitsui financial group, inc. (smfg) provides the firm with credit loss protection on certain approved loan commitments (primarily
investment-grade commercial lending commitments). the notional amount of such loan commitments was $27.03billion and $27.51billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. the credit loss protection on loan
commitments provided by smfg is generally limited to 95% of the first loss the firm realizes on such commitments, up to a maximum of approximately $950million. in addition, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, upon the
firms request, smfg will provide protection for 70% of additional losses on such commitments, up to a maximum of $1.13billion, of which $768million of protection had been provided as of both december2015 and
december2014. the firm also uses other financial instruments to mitigate credit risks related to certain commitments not covered by smfg. these instruments primarily include credit default swaps that reference the same or similar underlying
instrument or entity, or credit default swaps that reference a market index.  warehouse
financing. the firm provides financing to clients who warehouse financial assets. these arrangements are secured by the warehoused assets, primarily consisting of consumer and corporate loans.
contingent and forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements/forward starting repurchase and secured lending agreements
the firm enters into resale and securities borrowing agreements and repurchase and secured lending agreements that settle at a future
date, generally within three business days. the firm also enters into commitments to provide contingent financing to its clients and counterparties through resale agreements. the firms funding of these commitments depends on the satisfaction
of all contractual conditions to the resale agreement and these commitments can expire unused.
letters of credit
the firm has commitments under letters of credit issued by various banks which the firm provides to counterparties in lieu of securities or
cash to satisfy various collateral and margin deposit requirements.  investment commitments
the firms investment commitments of $6.05billion and $5.16billion as of december2015 and december2014,
respectively, include commitments to invest in private equity, real estate and other assets directly and through funds that the firm raises and manages. of these amounts, $2.86billion and $2.87billion as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively, relate to commitments to invest in funds managed by the firm. if these commitments are called, they would be funded at market value on the date of investment.
leases  the firm has contractual obligations under
long-term noncancelable lease agreements for office space expiring on various dates through 2069. certain agreements are subject to periodic escalation provisions for increases in real estate taxes and other charges.
the table below presents future minimum rental payments, net of minimum sublease rentals.
$ inmillions
as ofdecember2015
$317
2021 - thereafter
1,160
total
$2,575
rent charged to operating expense was $249million for 2015, $309million for 2014 and
$324million for 2013.  operating leases include office space held in excess of current requirements. rent expense relating to space
held for growth is included in occupancy. the firm records a liability, based on the fair value of the remaining lease rentals reduced by any potential or existing sublease rentals, for leases where the firm has ceased using the space
and management has concluded that the firm will not derive any future economic benefits. costs to terminate a lease before the end of its term are recognized and measured at fair value on termination.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
contingencies
legal proceedings. see note27 for information
about legal proceedings, including certain mortgage-related matters, and agreements the firm has entered into to toll the statute of limitations.
certain mortgage-related contingencies. there are
multiple areas of focus by regulators, governmental agencies and others within the mortgage market that may impact originators, issuers, servicers and investors. there remains significant uncertainty surrounding the nature and extent of any
potential exposure for participants in this market.  the firm has not been a significant originator of residential mortgage loans.
the firm did purchase loans originated by others and generally received loan-level representations. during the period 2005 through 2008, the firm sold approximately $10billion of loans to government-sponsored enterprises and approximately
$11billion of loans to other third parties. in addition, the firm transferred $125billion of loans to trusts and other mortgage securitization vehicles. in connection with both sales of loans and securitizations, the firm provided loan
level representations and/or assigned the loan level representations from the party from whom the firm purchased the loans.  the
firms exposure to claims for repurchase of residential mortgage loans based on alleged breaches of representations will depend on a number of factors such as the extent to which these claims are made within the statute of limitations taking
into consideration the agreements to toll the statute of limitations the firm has entered into with trustees representing trusts. based upon the large number of defaults in residential mortgages, including those sold or securitized by the firm,
there is a potential for repurchase claims. however, the firm is not in a position to make a meaningful estimate of that exposure at this time.
other contingencies. in connection with the sale of
metro, the firm provided customary representations and warranties, and indemnities for breaches of these representations and warranties, to the buyer.the firm further agreed to provide indemnities to the buyer, which primarily relate to
potential liabilities for legal or regulatory proceedings arising out of the conduct of metros business while the firm owned it.
guarantees
the tables below present information about certain derivatives that meet the definition of a guarantee, securities lending indemnifications and
certain other guarantees.
as of december2015
$ inmillions
derivatives
securitieslendingindemnifications
otherfinancialguarantees
carrying value of net liability
$8,351
$
$76
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration
$640,288
$31,902
$611
2017 - 2018
168,784
1,402
2019 - 2020
67,643
1,772
2021 - thereafter
49,728
total
$926,443
$31,902
$4,461
as of december2014
$ inmillions
derivatives
securities lendingindemnifications
otherfinancialguarantees
carrying value of net liability
$11,201
$
$119
maximum payout/notional amount by period of expiration
$351,308
$27,567
$471
2016 - 2017
150,989
2018 - 2019
51,927
1,390
2020 - thereafter
58,511
1,690
total
$612,735
$27,567
$4,486
in the tables above:
the maximum payout is based on the notional amount of the contract and does not represent anticipated losses.
amounts exclude certain commitments to issue standby letters of credit that are included in commitments to extend credit. see the
tables in commitments above for a summary of the firms commitments.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
derivative guarantees. the firm enters into various derivatives that meet the definition of a guarantee under u.s. gaap, including written equity and commodity put options, written currency contracts and interest rate caps, floors and
swaptions. these derivatives are risk managed together with derivatives that do not meet the definition of a guarantee, and therefore the amounts in the tables above do not reflect the firms overall risk related to its derivative activities.
disclosures about derivatives are not required if they may be cash settled and the firm has no basis to conclude it is probable that the counterparties held the underlying instruments at inception of the contract. the firm has concluded that these
conditions have been met for certain large, internationally active commercial and investment bank counterparties, central clearing counterparties and certain other counterparties. accordingly, the firm has not included such contracts in the tables
above. in addition, see note7 for information about credit derivatives that meet the definition of a guarantee, which are not included in the tables above.
derivatives are accounted for at fair value and therefore the carrying value is considered the best indication of payment/performance risk for
individual contracts. however, the carrying values in the tables above exclude the effect of counterparty and cash collateral netting.  securities lending indemnifications. the firm, in its capacity as an agency lender, indemnifies most of its securities lending customers against losses incurred in the
event that borrowers do not return securities and the collateral held is insufficient to cover the market value of the securities borrowed. collateral held by the lenders in connection with securities lending indemnifications was $32.85billion
and $28.49billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. because the contractual nature of these arrangements requires the firm to obtain collateral with a market value that exceeds the value of the securities lent to
the borrower, there is minimal performance risk associated with these guarantees.
other financial guarantees. in the ordinary course of business, the firm provides other financial guarantees of the obligations of third parties (e.g., standby letters of credit and other guarantees to enable clients to complete
transactions and fund-related guarantees). these guarantees represent obligations to make payments to beneficiaries if the guaranteed party fails to fulfill its obligation under a contractual arrangement with that beneficiary.
guarantees of securities issued by trusts. the firm has
established trusts, including goldman sachs capital i, the apex trusts, the 2012 trusts, and other entities for the limited purpose of issuing securities to third parties, lending the proceeds to the firm and entering into contractual arrangements
with the firm and third parties related to this purpose. the firm does not consolidate these entities. see note16 for further information about the transactions involving goldman sachs capital i, the apex trusts, and the 2012 trusts.
the firm effectively provides for the full and unconditional guarantee of the securities issued by these entities. timely payment
by the firm of amounts due to these entities under the guarantee, borrowing, preferred stock and related contractual arrangements will be sufficient to cover payments due on the securities issued by these entities.
management believes that it is unlikely that any circumstances will occur, such as nonperformance on the part of paying agents or other service
providers, that would make it necessary for the firm to make payments related to these entities other than those required under the terms of the guarantee, borrowing, preferred stock and related contractual arrangements and in connection with
certain expenses incurred by these entities.  indemnities and guarantees of service
providers. in the ordinary course of business, the firm indemnifies and guarantees certain service providers, such as clearing and custody agents, trustees and administrators, against specified
potential losses in connection with their acting as an agent of, or providing services to, the firm or its affiliates.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the firm may also be liable to some clients or other parties for losses arising from its
custodial role or caused by acts or omissions of third-party service providers, including sub-custodians and third-party brokers. in certain cases, the firm has the right to seek indemnification from these third-party service providers for certain
relevant losses incurred by the firm. in addition, the firm is a member of payment, clearing and settlement networks as well as securities exchanges around the world that may require the firm to meet the obligations of such networks and exchanges in
the event of member defaults and other loss scenarios.  in connection with its prime brokerage and clearing businesses, the firm agrees to
clear and settle on behalf of its clients the transactions entered into by them with other brokerage firms. the firms obligations in respect of such transactions are secured by the assets in the clients account as well as any proceeds
received from the transactions cleared and settled by the firm on behalf of the client. in connection with joint venture investments, the firm may issue loan guarantees under which it may be liable in the event of fraud, misappropriation,
environmental liabilities and certain other matters involving the borrower.  the firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum
payout under these guarantees and indemnifications. however, management believes that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under these arrangements, and no material liabilities related to these guarantees and
indemnifications have been recognized in the consolidated statements of financial condition as of december2015 and december2014.
other representations, warranties and indemnifications.
the firm provides representations and warranties to counterparties in connection with a variety of commercial transactions and occasionally indemnifies them against potential losses caused by the breach of those representations and warranties. the
firm may also provide indemnifications protecting against changes in or adverse application of certain u.s. tax laws in connection with ordinary-course transactions such as securities issuances, borrowings or derivatives.
in addition, the firm may provide indemnifications to some counterparties to protect them in the
event additional taxes are owed or payments are withheld, due either to a change in or an adverse application of certain non-u.s. tax laws.
these indemnifications generally are standard contractual terms and are entered into in the ordinary course of business. generally, there are
no stated or notional amounts included in these indemnifications, and the contingencies triggering the obligation to indemnify are not expected to occur. the firm is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under these guarantees and
indemnifications. however, management believes that it is unlikely the firm will have to make any material payments under these arrangements, and no material liabilities related to these arrangements have been recognized in the consolidated
statements of financial condition as of december2015 and december2014.  guarantees of
subsidiaries. group inc. fully and unconditionally guarantees the securities issued by gs finance corp., a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of the firm.
group inc. has guaranteed the payment obligations of goldman, sachs& co. (gs&co.), gs bank usa and goldman sachs
execution& clearing, l.p. (gsec), subject to certain exceptions.  in november2008, the firm contributed subsidiaries into
gs bank usa, and group inc. agreed to guarantee the reimbursement of certain losses, including credit-related losses, relating to assets held by the contributed entities.
in addition, group inc. guarantees many of the obligations of its other consolidated subsidiaries on a transaction-by-transaction basis, as
negotiated with counterparties. group inc. is unable to develop an estimate of the maximum payout under its subsidiary guarantees; however, because these guaranteed obligations are also obligations of consolidated subsidiaries, group inc.s
liabilities as guarantor are not separately disclosed.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note19.
shareholders equity
common equity
dividends declared per common share were $2.55 in 2015, $2.25 in 2014 and $2.05 in 2013. on january19,2016, group inc. declared a
dividend of $0.65 per common share to be paid on march30,2016 to common shareholders of record on march2,2016.  the
firms share repurchase program is intended to help maintain the appropriate level of common equity. the share repurchase program is effected primarily through regular open-market purchases (which may include repurchase plans designed to comply
with rule10b5-1), the amounts and timing of which are determined primarily by the firms current and projected capital position, but which may also be influenced by general market conditions and the prevailing price and trading volumes of
the firms common stock. prior to repurchasing common stock, the firm must receive confirmation that the federal reserve board does not object to such capital actions.
the table below presents the amount of common stock repurchased by the firm under the share repurchase program.
year ended december
inmillions, except per share amounts
common share repurchases
22.1
31.8
39.3
average cost per share
$189.41
$171.79
$157.11
totalcostofcommon share repurchases
$4,195
$5,469
$6,175
pursuant to the terms of certain share-based compensation plans, employees may remit shares to the firm or the
firm may cancel restricted stock units (rsus) or stock options to satisfy minimum statutory employee tax withholding requirements and the exercise price of stock options. under these plans, during 2015,2014 and 2013, employees remitted 35,217
shares, 174,489 shares and 161,211 shares with a total value of $6million, $31million and $25million, and the firm cancelled 5.7million, 5.8million and 4.0million of rsus with a total value of $1.03billion,
$974million and $599million. under these plans, the firm also cancelled 2.0million and 15.6million of stock options with a total value of $406million and $2.65billion during 2015 and 2014, respectively.
preferred equity
the tables below present details about the perpetual preferred stock issued and outstanding as of december2015.
series
sharesauthorized
sharesissued
sharesoutstanding
depositarysharespershare
a
50,000
30,000
29,999
1,000
b
50,000
32,000
32,000
1,000
c
25,000
8,000
8,000
1,000
d
60,000
54,000
53,999
1,000
e
17,500
17,500
17,500
n/a
f
5,000
5,000
5,000
n/a
i
34,500
34,000
34,000
1,000
j
46,000
40,000
40,000
1,000
k
32,200
28,000
28,000
1,000
l
52,000
52,000
52,000
m1
80,000
80,000
80,000
total
452,200
380,500
380,498
1.
in april2015, group inc. issued 80,000 shares of seriesm perpetual 5.375% fixed-to-floating rate non-cumulative preferred stock (seriesm
preferred stock).
series
liquidationpreference
redemption pricepershare
redemptionvalue($inmillions)
a
$25,000
$25,000plusdeclaredandunpaid dividends
$750
b
25,000
$25,000 plus declared andunpaid dividends
c
25,000
$25,000 plus declared andunpaid dividends
d
25,000
$25,000 plus declared andunpaid dividends
1,350
e
100,000
$100,000plusdeclaredandunpaid dividends
1,750
f
100,000
$100,000 plus declared andunpaid dividends
i
25,000
$25,000 plus accrued andunpaid dividends
j
25,000
$25,000 plus accrued andunpaid dividends
1,000
k
25,000
$25,000 plus accrued andunpaid dividends
l
25,000
$25,000 plus accrued andunpaid dividends
1,300
m
25,000
$25,000 plus accrued andunpaid dividends
2,000
total
$11,200
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
in the tables above:
each share of non-cumulative seriesa, seriesb, seriesc and seriesd preferred stock issued and outstanding is redeemable at
the firms option.
each share of non-cumulative seriese and seriesf preferred stock issued and outstanding is redeemable at the firms option,
subject to certain covenant restrictions governing the firms ability to redeem or purchase the preferred stock without issuing common stock or other instruments with equity-like characteristics. see note16 for information about the
replacement capital covenants applicable to the seriese and seriesf preferred stock.
each share of non-cumulative seriesi preferred stock issued and outstanding is redeemable at the firms option beginning
november10,2017.
each share of non-cumulative seriesj preferred stock issued and outstanding is redeemable at the firms option beginning
may10,2023.
each share of non-cumulative seriesk preferred stock issued and outstanding is redeemable at the firms option beginning
may10,2024.
each share of non-cumulative seriesl preferred stock issued and outstanding is redeemable at the firms option beginning
may10,2019.
each share of non-cumulative seriesm preferred stock issued and outstanding is redeemable at the firms option beginning
may10,2020.
all shares of preferred stock have a par value of $0.01 per share and, where applicable, each share of preferred stock is represented by the
specified number of depositary shares.  prior to redeeming preferred stock, the firm must receive confirmation that the
federal reserve board does not object to such capital actions. all series of preferred stock are pari passu and have a preference over the firms common stock on liquidation. dividends on each series of preferred stock, excluding seriesl
and seriesm preferred stock, if declared, are payable quarterly in arrears. dividends on seriesl and seriesm preferred stock, if declared, are payable semi-annually in arrears from the issuance date to, but excluding,
may10,2019 and may10,2020, respectively, and quarterly thereafter. the firms ability to declare or pay dividends on, or purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, its common stock is subject to certain restrictions in the
event that the firm fails to pay or set aside full dividends on the preferred stock for the latest completed dividend period.
the table below presents the dividend rates of the firms perpetual preferred stock as of
december2015.
series
dividend rate
a
3monthlibor+0.75%,withfloorof3.75%perannum
b
6.20% per annum
c
3monthlibor+0.75%,withfloorof4.00%perannum
d
3month libor + 0.67%, with floor of 4.00% per annum
e
3month libor + 0.77%, with floor of 4.00% per annum
f
3month libor + 0.77%, with floor of 4.00% per annum
i
5.95% per annum
j
5.50% per annum to, but excluding, may10,2023;
3month libor + 3.64% per annum thereafter
k
6.375% per annum to, but excluding, may10,2024;
3month libor + 3.55% per annum thereafter
l
5.70% per annum to, but excluding, may10,2019;
3month libor + 3.884% per annum thereafter
m
5.375% per annum to, but excluding, may10,2020;
3month libor + 3.922% per annum thereafter
the table below presents preferred dividends declared on the firms preferred stock.
year ended december
series
per share
$ in millions
per share
$ in millions
per share
$ in millions
a
$950.52
$28
$945.32
$28
$947.92
$28
b
1,550.00
1,550.00
1,550.00
c
1,013.90
1,008.34
1,011.11
d
1,013.90
1,008.34
1,011.11
e
4,055.55
4,044.44
4,044.44
f
4,055.55
4,044.44
4,044.44
i
1,487.52
1,487.52
1,553.63
j
1,375.00
1,375.00
744.79
k
1,593.76
850.00
l
1,425.00
760.00
m
735.33
total
$515
$400
$314
on january8,2016, group inc. declared dividends of $239.58, $387.50, $255.56, $255.56, $371.88,
$343.75 and $398.44 per share of seriesa preferred stock, seriesb preferred stock, seriesc preferred stock, seriesd preferred stock, seriesi preferred stock, seriesj preferred stock and seriesk preferred
stock, respectively, to be paid on february10,2016 to preferred shareholders of record on january26,2016. in addition, the firm declared dividends of $1,011.11 per each share of seriese preferred stock and seriesf
preferred stock, to be paid on march1,2016 to preferred shareholders of record on february15,2016.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
accumulated other comprehensive loss
the tables below present accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax by type.
december2015
$ inmillions
balance,beginningof year
othercomprehensiveincome/(loss)adjustments,net of tax
balance,end ofyear
currency translation
$(473
)
$(114
)
$(587
)
pension and postretirement liabilities
(270
)
(131
)
accumulated other comprehensiveincome/(loss), net of tax
$(743
)
$25
$(718
)
december2014
$ inmillions
balance,beginningof year
othercomprehensiveincome/(loss)adjustments,net of tax
balance,end ofyear
currency translation
$(364
)
$(109
)
$(473
)
pension and postretirement liabilities
(168
)
(102
)
(270
)
cash flow hedges
(8
)
accumulated other comprehensive loss,net of tax
$(524
)
$(219
)
$(743
)
note20.
regulation and capital adequacy  the federal reserve
board is the primary regulator of group inc., a bank holding company under the bank holding company act of 1956 (bhc act) and a financial holding company under amendments to the bhc act. as a bank holding company, the firm is subject to consolidated
regulatory capital requirements which are calculated in accordance with the revised risk-based capital and leverage regulations of the federal reserve board, subject to certain transitional provisions (revised capital framework).
the risk-based capital requirements are expressed as capital ratios that compare measures of regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets (rwas).
failure to comply with these requirements could result in restrictions being imposed by the firms regulators. the firms capital levels are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components of capital, risk
weightings and other factors. furthermore, certain of the firms subsidiaries are subject to separate regulations and capital requirements as described below.
capital framework
the regulations under the revised capital framework are largely based on the basel committees final capital framework for strengthening
international capital standards (baseliii) and also implement certain provisions of the dodd-frank act. under the revised capital framework, the firm is an advanced approach banking organization.
as of december2015, the firm calculated its common equity tier1 (cet1), tier1 capital and total capital ratios in accordance
with (i)the standardized approach and market risk rules set out in the revised capital framework (together, the standardized capital rules) and (ii)the advanced approach and market risk rules set out in the revised capital framework
(together, the baseliii advanced rules). the lower of each ratio calculated in (i)and (ii)is the ratio against which the firms compliance with its minimum ratio requirements is assessed. each of the ratios calculated in
accordance with the baseliii advanced rules was lower than that calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules and therefore the baseliii advanced ratios were the ratios that applied to the firm as of december2015.
the capital ratios that apply to the firm can change in future reporting periods as a result of these regulatory requirements.  as of
december2014, the firm calculated its cet1, tier1 capital and total capital ratios using the revised capital framework for regulatory capital, but rwas were calculated in accordance with (i)the baseli capital accord of the
basel committee, incorporating the market risk requirements set out in the revised capital framework, and adjusted for certain items related to capital deductions and for the phase-in of capital deductions (hybrid capital rules), and (ii)the
baseliii advanced rules. the lower of each ratio calculated in (i)and (ii)was the ratio against which the firms compliance with its minimum ratio requirements was assessed. each of the ratios calculated in accordance with the
baseliii advanced rules was lower than that calculated in accordance with the hybrid capital rules and therefore the baseliii advanced ratios were the ratios that applied to the firm as of december2014.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
regulatory capital and capital ratios. the table below presents the minimum ratios required for the firm as of december2015.
minimumratio
cet1 ratio
4.5%
tier1 capital ratio
6.0%
total capital ratio1
8.0%
tier1 leverage ratio2
4.0%
1.
in order to meet the quantitative requirements for being well-capitalized under the federal reserve boards regulations, the firm must meet a
higher required minimum total capital ratio of 10.0%.
2.
tier1 leverage ratio is defined as tier1 capital divided by quarterly average adjusted total assets (which includes adjustments for goodwill and
identifiable intangible assets, and certain investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions).  certain aspects of
the revised capital frameworks requirements phase in over time (transitional provisions). these include the introduction of capital buffers (including surcharges) and certain deductions from regulatory capital (such as investments in
nonconsolidated financial institutions). these deductions from regulatory capital are required to be phased in ratably per year from 2014 to 2018, with residual amounts not deducted during the transitional period subject to risk weighting. in
addition, junior subordinated debt issued to trusts is being phased out of regulatory capital. the minimum cet1, tier1 and total capital ratios that apply to the firm will increase as the transitional provisions phase in and capital buffers
(including surcharges) are introduced.  definition of risk-weighted assets. as of december2015, rwas were calculated in accordance with both the standardized capital rules and the baseliii advanced rules. the following is a comparison of rwa calculations under these rules:
rwas for credit risk in accordance with the standardized capital rules are calculated in a different manner than the baseliii advanced rules.
the primary difference is that the standardized capital rules do not contemplate the use of internal models to compute exposure for credit risk on derivatives and securities financing transactions, whereas the baseliii advanced rules permit
the use of such models, subject to supervisory approval. in addition, credit rwas calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules utilize prescribed risk-weights which depend largely on the type of counterparty, rather than on internal
assessments of the creditworthiness of such counterparties;
rwas for market risk in accordance with the standardized capital rules and the baseliii advanced rules are generally consistent; and
rwas for operational risk are not required by the standardized capital rules, whereas the baseliii advanced rules do include such a
requirement.
as of december2014, the firm calculated rwas in accordance with both the baseliii
advanced rules and the hybrid capital rules described below.  credit risk
credit rwas are calculated based upon measures of exposure, which are then risk weighted. the following is a description of the calculation of
credit rwas in accordance with the standardized capital rules, the baseliii advanced rules and the hybrid capital rules:
for credit rwas calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules, the firm utilizes prescribed risk-weights which depend largely on the
type of counterparty (e.g., whether the counterparty is a sovereign, bank, broker-dealer or other entity). the exposure measure for derivatives is based on a combination of positive net current exposure and a percentage of the notional amount of
each derivative. the exposure measure for securities financing transactions is calculated to reflect adjustments for potential price volatility, the size of which depends on factors such as the type and maturity of the security, and whether it is
denominated in the same currency as the other side of the financing transaction. the firm utilizes specific required formulaic approaches to measure exposure for securitizations and equities;
for credit rwas calculated in accordance with the baseliii advanced rules, the firm has been given permission by its regulators to compute
risk-weights for wholesale and retail credit exposures in accordance with the advanced internal ratings-based approach. this approach is based on internal assessments of the creditworthiness of counterparties, with key inputs being the probability
of default, loss given default and the effective maturity. the firm utilizes internal models to measure exposure for derivatives, securities financing transactions and eligible margin loans. the revised capital framework requires that a bank holding
company obtain prior written agreement from its regulators before using internal models for such purposes. the firm utilizes specific required formulaic approaches to measure exposure for securitizations and equities; and
for credit rwas calculated in accordance with the hybrid capital rules, the firm utilized prescribed risk-weights depending on, among other things,
the type of counterparty. the exposure measure for derivatives was based on a combination of positive net current exposure and a percentage of the notional amount of each derivative. the exposure measure for securities financing transactions was
based on the carrying value without the application of potential price volatility adjustments required under the standardized capital rules.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
market risk
market rwas are calculated based on measures of exposure which include value-at-risk (var), stressed var, incremental risk and comprehensive
risk based on internal models, and a standardized measurement method for specific risk. the market risk regulatory capital rules require that a bank holding company obtain prior written agreement from its regulators before using any internal model
to calculate its risk-based capital requirement. the following is further information regarding the measures of exposure for market rwas calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules, baseliii advanced rules and hybrid capital
rules:
var is the potential loss in value of inventory positions, as well as certain other financial assets and financial liabilities, due to adverse
market movements over a defined time horizon with a specified confidence level. for both risk management purposes and regulatory capital calculations the firm uses a single var model which captures risks including those related to interest rates,
equity prices, currency rates and commodity prices. however, var used for regulatory capital requirements (regulatory var) differs from risk management var due to different time horizons and confidence levels (10-day and 99% for regulatory var vs.
one-day and 95% for risk management var), as well as differences in the scope of positions on which var is calculated. in addition, the daily trading net revenues used to determine risk management var exceptions (i.e., comparing the daily trading
net revenues to the var measure calculated as of the end of the prior business day) include intraday activity, whereas the federal reserve boards regulatory capital rules require that intraday activity be excluded from daily trading net
revenues when calculating regulatory var exceptions. intraday activity includes bid/offer net revenues, which are more likely than not to be positive by their nature. as a result, there may be differences in the number of var exceptions and the
amount of daily trading net revenues calculated for regulatory var compared to the amounts calculated for risk management var. the firms positional losses observed on a single day did not exceed its 99% one-day regulatory var during 2015, but
did exceed its 99% one-day regulatory var on three occasions during 2014. there was no change in the var multiplier used to calculate market rwas;
stressed var is the potential loss in value of inventory positions, as well as certain other financial assets and financial liabilities, during a
period of significant market stress;
incremental risk is the potential loss in value of non-securitized inventory positions due to the default or credit migration of issuers of
financial instruments over a one-year time horizon;
comprehensive risk is the potential loss in value, due to price risk and defaults, within the firms credit correlation positions; and
specific risk is the risk of loss on a position that could result from factors other than broad market movements, including event risk, default
risk and idiosyncratic risk. the standardized measurement method is used to determine specific risk rwas, by applying supervisory defined risk-weighting factors after applicable netting is performed.
operational risk  operational rwas are only
required to be included under the baseliii advanced rules. the firm has been given permission by its regulators to calculate operational rwas in accordance with the advanced measurement approach, and therefore utilizes an internal
risk-based model to quantify operational rwas.  consolidated regulatory capital ratios  capital ratios and rwas. each of the ratios calculated in accordance with the baseliii advanced rules was lower than that calculated in accordance with the standardized rules as of december2015 and therefore such lower ratios
applied to the firm as of that date. each of the ratios calculated in accordance with the baseliii advanced rules was lower than that calculated in accordance with the hybrid capital rules as of december2014 and therefore such lower
ratios applied to the firm as of that date.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the table below presents the ratios calculated in accordance with both the standardized and
baseliii advanced rules as of both december2015 and december2014. while the ratios calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules were not applicable until january2015, the december2014 ratios are
presented in the table below for comparative purposes.
as of december
$ inmillions
common shareholders equity
$75,528
$73,597
deductions for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, net of deferred tax liabilities
(2,814
)
(2,787
)
deductions for investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions
(864
)
(953
)
other adjustments
(487
)
(27
)
common equity tier1
71,363
69,830
perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock
11,200
9,200
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
deduction for investments in covered funds
(413
)
other adjustments
(969
)
(1,257
)
tier1 capital
$81,511
$78,433
standardized tier2 and total capital
tier1 capital
$81,511
$78,433
qualifying subordinated debt
15,132
11,894
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments
other adjustments
(19
)
(9
)
standardized tier2 capital
16,705
12,861
standardized total capital
$98,216
$91,294
baseliii advanced tier2 and total capital
tier1 capital
$81,511
$78,433
standardized tier2 capital
16,705
12,861
allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments
(602
)
(316
)
baseliii advanced tier2 capital
16,103
12,545
baseliii advanced total capital
$97,614
$90,978
rwas
standardized
$524,107
$619,216
baseliii advanced
577,651
570,313
cet1 ratio
standardized
13.6%
11.3%
baseliii advanced
12.4%
12.2%
tier1 capital ratio
standardized
15.6%
12.7%
baseliii advanced
14.1%
13.8%
total capital ratio
standardized
18.7%
14.7%
baseliii advanced
16.9%
16.0%
tier1 leverage ratio
9.3%
9.0%
in the table above:
the deductions for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, include goodwill of $3.66billion and
$3.65billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively, and identifiable intangible assets of $196million (40% of $491million) and $103million (20% of $515million) as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively, net of associated deferred tax liabilities of $1.04billion and $961million as of december2015 and december2014, respectively. goodwill is fully deducted from cet1, while the deduction for
identifiable intangible assets is required to be phased into cet1 ratably over five years from 2014 to 2018. the balance that is not deducted during the transitional period is risk weighted.
the deductions for investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions represent the amount by which the firms investments in the capital
of nonconsolidated financial institutions exceed certain prescribed thresholds. the deduction for such investments is required to be phased into cet1 ratably over five years from 2014 to 2018. as of december2015 and december2014, cet1
reflects 40% and 20% of the deduction, respectively. the balance that is not deducted during the transitional period is risk weighted.
the deduction for investments in covered funds represents the firms aggregate investments in applicable covered funds, as permitted by the
volcker rule, that were purchased after december2013. substantially all of these investments in covered funds were purchased in connection with the firms market-making activities. this deduction became effective in july2015 and is
not subject to a transition period. see note6 for further information about the volcker rule.
other adjustments within cet1 and tier1 capital primarily include accumulated other comprehensive loss, credit valuation adjustments on
derivative liabilities, debt valuation adjustments, the overfunded portion of the firms defined benefit pension plan obligation net of associated deferred tax liabilities, disallowed deferred tax assets and other required credit risk-based
deductions. the deductions for such items are generally required to be phased into cet1 ratably over five years from 2014 to 2018. as of december2015 and december2014, cet1 reflects 40% and 20% of such deductions, respectively. the
balance that is not deducted from cet1 during the transitional period is generally deducted from tier1 capital within other adjustments.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
junior subordinated debt issued to trusts is reflected in both tier1 capital (25%)and tier2 capital (75%)as of
december2015. such percentages were 50% for both tier1 and tier2 capital as of december2014. junior subordinated debt issued to trusts is reduced by the amount of trust preferred securities purchased by the firm and will be
fully phased out of tier1 capital into tier2 capital by 2016, and then out of tier2 capital by 2022. see note16 for additional information about the firms junior subordinated debt issued to trusts and trust preferred
securities purchased by the firm.
qualifying subordinated debt represents subordinated debt issued by group inc. with an original term to maturity of five years or greater. the
outstanding amount of subordinated debt qualifying for tier2 capital is reduced upon reaching a remaining maturity of five years. see note16 for additional information about the firms subordinated debt.
the tables below present changes in cet1, tier1 capital and tier2 capital for the period ended december2015 and the period
from december31,2013 to december31,2014.
period endeddecember2015
$ inmillions
standardized
baseliiiadvanced
common equity tier1
beginning balance
$69,830
$69,830
increased deductions due to transitional provisions1
(1,368
)
(1,368
)
increase in common shareholders equity
1,931
1,931
change in deduction for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, net of deferred tax liabilities
change in deduction for investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions
1,059
1,059
change in other adjustments
(164
)
(164
)
ending balance
$71,363
$71,363
tier1 capital
beginning balance
$78,433
$78,433
increased deductions due to transitional provisions1
(1,073
)
(1,073
)
other net increase in cet1
2,901
2,901
redesignation of junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
(330
)
(330
)
increase in perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock
2,000
2,000
deduction for investments in covered funds
(413
)
(413
)
change in other adjustments
(7
)
(7
)
ending balance
81,511
81,511
tier2 capital
beginning balance
12,861
12,545
increased deductions due to transitional provisions1
(53
)
(53
)
increase in qualifying subordinated debt
3,238
3,238
redesignation of junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
change in the allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments
change in other adjustments
ending balance
16,705
16,103
total capital
$98,216
$97,614
1.
represents the increased phase-in of deductions from 20% to 40%, effective january2015.
$ inmillions
period endeddecember2014
common equity tier1
balance, december31,2013
$63,248
change in cet1 related to the transition to the revised
capitalframework1
3,177
increase in common shareholders equity
2,330
change in deduction for goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, net of deferred tax liabilities
change in deduction for investments in nonconsolidated financial institutions
change in other adjustments
balance, december31,2014
$69,830
tier1 capital
balance, december31,2013
$72,471
change in cet1 related to the transition to the revised
capitalframework1
3,177
change in tier1 capital related to the transition to the revised capital
framework2
(443
)
other net increase in cet1
3,405
increase in perpetual non-cumulative preferred stock
2,000
redesignation of junior subordinated debt issued to trusts and decrease related to trust preferred securities purchased by the firm
(1,403
)
change in other adjustments
(774
)
balance, december31,2014
78,433
tier2 capital
balance, december31,2013
13,632
change in tier2 capital related to the transition to the revised capital
framework3
(197
)
decrease in qualifying subordinated debt
(879
)
trust preferred securities purchased by the firm, net of redesignation of junior subordinated debt issued to trusts
(27
)
change in other adjustments
balance, december31,2014
12,545
total capital
$90,978
1.
includes $3.66billion related to the transition to the revised capital framework on january1,2014 as well as $(479)million related to
the firms application of the baseliii advanced rules on april1,2014.
2.
includes $(219)million related to the transition to the revised capital framework on january1,2014 as well as $(224)million related to
the firms application of the baseliii advanced rules on april1,2014.
3.
includes $(2)million related to the transition to the revised capital framework on january1,2014 as well as $(195)million related to
the firms application of the baseliii advanced rules on april1,2014.  in the table above,
change in cet1 related to the transition to the revised capital framework primarily reflects the change in the treatment of equity investments in certain nonconsolidated entities. the revised capital framework requires only a portion of
such investments that exceed certain prescribed thresholds to be treated as deductions from cet1 and the remainder are risk-weighted, subject to the applicable transitional provisions. as of december2013, in accordance with the previous
capital regulations, these equity investments were treated as deductions.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the tables below present the components of rwas calculated in accordance with the standardized
and baseliii advanced rules as of december2015 and december2014.
standardizedcapitalrulesas of december
$ inmillions
credit rwas
derivatives
$136,841
$180,771
commitments, guarantees and loans
111,391
89,783
securities financing transactions1
71,392
92,116
equity investments
37,687
38,526
other2
62,807
71,499
total credit rwas
420,118
472,695
market rwas
regulatory var
12,000
10,238
stressed var
21,738
29,625
incremental risk
9,513
16,950
comprehensive risk
5,725
9,855
specific risk
55,013
79,853
total market rwas
103,989
146,521
total rwas
$524,107
$619,216
baseliii advanced rulesas of december
$ inmillions
credit rwas
derivatives
$113,671
$122,501
commitments, guarantees and loans
114,523
95,209
securities financing transactions1
14,901
15,618
equity investments
40,110
40,146
other2
60,877
54,470
total credit rwas
344,082
327,944
market rwas
regulatory var
12,000
10,238
stressed var
21,738
29,625
incremental risk
9,513
16,950
comprehensive risk
4,717
8,150
specific risk
55,013
79,918
total market rwas
102,981
144,881
total operational rwas
130,588
97,488
total rwas
$577,651
$570,313
1.
represents resale and repurchase agreements and securities borrowed and loaned transactions.
2.
includes receivables, other assets, and cash and cash equivalents.
the table below presents changes in rwas calculated in accordance with the standardized and
baseliii advanced rules for the period ended december2015.
period endeddecember2015
$ inmillions
standardized
baseliiiadvanced
risk-weighted assets
beginning balance
$619,216
$570,313
credit rwas
increased deductions due to transitional provisions1
(1,073
)
(1,073
)
increase/(decrease) in derivatives
(43,930
)
(8,830
)
increase/(decrease) in commitments, guarantees and loans
21,608
19,314
increase/(decrease) in securities financing transactions
(20,724
)
(717
)
increase/(decrease) in equity investments
change in other
(8,589
)
6,510
change in credit rwas
(52,577
)
16,138
market rwas
increase/(decrease) in regulatory var
1,762
1,762
increase/(decrease) in stressed var
(7,887
)
(7,887
)
increase/(decrease) in incremental risk
(7,437
)
(7,437
)
increase/(decrease) in comprehensive risk
(4,130
)
(3,433
)
increase/(decrease) in specific risk
(24,840
)
(24,905
)
change in market rwas
(42,532
)
(41,900
)
operational rwas
increase/(decrease) in operational risk
33,100
change in operational rwas
33,100
ending balance
$524,107
$577,651
1.
represents the increased phase-in of deductions from 20% to 40%, effective january2015.
standardized credit rwas as of december2015 decreased by $52.58billion compared with december2014, reflecting decreases in
derivatives and securities financing transactions, primarily due to lower exposures. these decreases were partially offset by an increase in lending activity. standardized market rwas as of december2015 decreased by $42.53billion
compared with december2014, primarily due to decreased specific risk, as a result of reduced risk exposures.  baseliii advanced
credit rwas as of december2015 increased by $16.14billion compared with december2014, primarily reflecting an increase in lending activity. this increase was partially offset by a decrease in rwas related to derivatives, due to
lower counterparty credit risk. baseliii advanced market rwas as of december2015 decreased by $41.90billion compared with december2014, primarily due to decreased specific risk, as a result of reduced risk exposures.
baseliii advanced operational rwas as of december2015 increased by $33.10billion compared with december2014, substantially all of which is associated with mortgage-related legal matters and regulatory proceedings.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
see definition of risk-weighted assets above for a description of the calculations
of credit rwas, market rwas and operational rwas, including the differences in the calculation of credit rwas under each of the standardized capital rules and the basel iii advanced rules.
the table below presents changes in rwas from december31,2013 to december31,2014. as of december31,2013,
the firm was subject to the capital regulations of the federal reserve board that were based on the basel committees baseli capital accord, including the revised market risk capital requirements.
$ inmillions
period endeddecember2014
risk-weighted assets
balance, december31,2013
$433,226
credit rwas
change related to the transition to the revised capitalframework1
69,101
decrease in derivatives
(24,109
)
increase in commitments, guarantees and loans
18,208
decrease in securities financing transactions
(2,782
)
decrease in equity investments
(2,728
)
increase in other
2,007
change in credit rwas
59,697
market rwas
change related to the transition to the revised capitalframework
1,626
decrease in regulatory var
(5,175
)
decrease in stressed var
(11,512
)
increase in incremental risk
7,487
decrease in comprehensive risk
(6,617
)
decrease in specific risk
(5,907
)
change in market rwas
(20,098
)
operational rwas
change related to the transition to the revised capitalframework
88,938
increase in operational risk
8,550
change in operational rwas
97,488
ending balance (baseliii advanced)
$570,313
1.
includes $26.67billion of rwa changes related to the transition to the revised capital framework on january1,2014 and $42.43billion of
changes to the calculation of credit rwas in accordance with the baseliii advanced rules related to the firms application of the baseliii advanced rules on april1,2014.
credit rwas as of december2014 increased by $59.70billion compared with december2013, primarily due to increased risk
weightings related to counterparty credit risk for derivative exposures and the inclusion of rwas for equity investments in certain nonconsolidated entities, both resulting from the transition to the revised capital framework. market rwas as of
december2014 decreased by $20.10billion compared with december2013, primarily due to a decrease in stressed var, reflecting reduced fixed income and equities exposures. operational rwas as of december2014 increased by
$97.49billion compared with december2013, substantially all of which was due to the transition to the revised capital framework.
bank subsidiaries
regulatory capital ratios. gs bank usa, an
fdic-insured, new york state-chartered bank and a member of the federal reserve system, is supervised and regulated by the federal reserve board, the fdic, the new york state department of financial services and the consumer financial protection
bureau, and is subject to regulatory capital requirements that are calculated in substantially the same manner as those applicable to bank holding companies. for purposes of assessing the adequacy of its capital, gs bank usa calculates its capital
ratios in accordance with the risk-based capital and leverage requirements applicable to state member banks. those requirements are based on the revised capital framework described above. gs bank usa is an advanced approach banking organization
under the revised capital framework.  under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action applicable to gs bank usa, in
order to meet the quantitative requirements for being a well-capitalized depository institution, gs bank usa must meet higher minimum requirements than the minimum ratios in the table below. the table below presents the minimum ratios
and well-capitalized minimum ratios required for gs bank usa as of december2015.
minimumratio
well-capitalizedminimum ratio
cet1 ratio
4.5%
6.5%
tier1 capital ratio
6.0%
8.0%
total capital ratio
8.0%
10.0%
tier1 leverage ratio
4.0%
5.0%
gs bank usa was in compliance with its minimum capital requirements and the well-capitalized
minimum ratios as of december2015 and december2014. gs bank usas capital levels and prompt corrective action classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components of capital, risk weightings
and other factors. failure to comply with these capital requirements could result in restrictions being imposed by gs bank usas regulators.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
as of december2015, similar to the firm, gs bank usa is required to calculate each of the
cet1, tier1 capital and total capital ratios in accordance with both the standardized capital rules and baseliii advanced rules. the lower of each ratio calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules and baseliii
advanced rules is the ratio against which gs bank usas compliance with its minimum ratio requirements is assessed. each of the ratios calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules was lower than that calculated in accordance
with the baseliii advanced rules and therefore the standardized capital ratios were the ratios that applied to gs bank usa as of december2015. the capital ratios that apply to gs bank usa can change in future reporting periods as a
result of these regulatory requirements.  as of december2014, gs bank usa was required to calculate each of the cet1, tier1
capital and total capital ratios in accordance with both the baseliii advanced rules and hybrid capital rules. the lower of each ratio calculated in accordance with the baseliii advanced rules and the hybrid capital rules was the ratio
against which gs bank usas compliance with its minimum ratio requirements was assessed. each of the ratios calculated in accordance with the hybrid capital rules was lower than that calculated in accordance with the baseliii advanced
rules and therefore the hybrid capital ratios were the ratios that applied to gs bank usa as of december2014.
the table below presents the ratios for gs bank usa calculated in accordance with both the
standardized and baseliii advanced rules as of both december2015 and december2014, and with the hybrid capital rules as of december2014. while the ratios calculated in accordance with the standardized capital rules were not
applicable until january2015, the december2014 ratios are presented in the table below for comparative purposes.
as of december
$ inmillions
standardized
common equity tier1
$23,017
$21,293
tier1 capital
23,017
21,293
tier2 capital
2,311
2,182
total capital
$25,328
$23,475
rwas
$202,197
$200,605
cet1 ratio
11.4%
10.6%
tier1 capital ratio
11.4%
10.6%
total capital ratio
12.5%
11.7%
baseliii advanced
common equity tier1
$23,017
$21,293
tier1 capital
23,017
21,293
standardized tier2 capital
2,311
2,182
allowance for losses on loans and lendingcommitments
(311
)
(182
)
tier2 capital
2,000
2,000
total capital
$25,017
$23,293
rwas
$131,059
$141,978
cet1 ratio
17.6%
15.0%
tier1 capital ratio
17.6%
15.0%
total capital ratio
19.1%
16.4%
hybrid
rwas
n/a
$149,963
cet1 ratio
n/a
14.2%
tier1 capital ratio
n/a
14.2%
total capital ratio
n/a
15.7%
tier1 leverage ratio
16.4%
17.3%
the firms principal non-u.s. bank subsidiary, gsib, is a wholly-owned credit institution, regulated by
the prudential regulation authority (pra) and the financial conduct authority (fca) and is subject to minimum capital requirements. as of december2015 and december2014, gsib was in compliance with all regulatory capital requirements.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
broker-dealer subsidiaries
u.s. regulated broker-dealer subsidiaries. the
firms u.s. regulated broker-dealer subsidiaries include gs&co. and gsec. gs&co. and gsec are registered u.s. broker-dealers and futures commission merchants, and are subject to regulatory capital requirements, including those imposed
by the sec, the u.s. commodity futures trading commission (cftc), the chicago mercantile exchange, the financial industry regulatory authority, inc. (finra) and the national futures association. rule15c3-1 of the sec and rule1.17 of the
cftc specify uniform minimum net capital requirements, as defined, for their registrants, and also effectively require that a significant part of the registrants assets be kept in relatively liquid form. gs&co. and gsec have elected to
calculate their minimum capital requirements in accordance with the alternative net capital requirement as permitted by rule15c3-1.
as of december2015 and december2014, gs&co. had regulatory net capital, as defined by rule15c3-1, of $14.75billion
and $14.83billion, respectively, which exceeded the amount required by $12.37billion and $12.46billion, respectively. as of december2015 and december2014, gsec had regulatory net capital, as defined by rule15c3-1,
of $1.71billion and $1.67billion, respectively, which exceeded the amount required by $1.59billion and $1.53billion, respectively.
in addition to its alternative minimum net capital requirements, gs&co. is also required to hold tentative net capital in excess of
$1billion and net capital in excess of $500million in accordance with the market and credit risk standards of appendix e of rule15c3-1. gs&co. is also required to notify the sec in the event that its tentative net capital is
less than $5billion. as of december2015 and december2014, gs&co. had tentative net capital and net capital in excess of both the minimum and the notification requirements.
non-u.s. regulated broker-dealer subsidiaries. the firms principal non-u.s. regulated broker-dealer subsidiaries include goldman sachs international (gsi) and goldman sachs japan co., ltd. (gsjcl). gsi, the firms u.k. broker-dealer, is regulated
by the pra and the fca. gsjcl, the firms japanese broker-dealer, is regulated by japans financial services agency. these and certain other non-u.s. subsidiaries of the firm are also subject to capital adequacy requirements promulgated by
authorities of the countries in which they operate. as of december2015 and december2014, these subsidiaries were in compliance with their local capital adequacy requirements.
restrictions on payments  group inc.s ability
to withdraw capital from its regulated subsidiaries is limited by minimum equity capital requirements applicable to those subsidiaries, provisions of applicable law and regulations and other regulatory restrictions that limit the ability of those
subsidiaries to declare and pay dividends without prior regulatory approval even if the relevant subsidiary would satisfy the equity capital requirements applicable to it after giving effect to the dividend. for example, the federal reserve board,
the fdic and the new york state department of financial services have authority to prohibit or to limit the payment of dividends by the banking organizations they supervise (including gs bank usa) if, in the relevant regulators opinion,
payment of a dividend would constitute an unsafe or unsound practice in the light of the financial condition of the banking organization.
as of december2015 and december2014, group inc. was required to maintain $48.09billion and $33.62billion, respectively,
of minimum equity capital in its regulated subsidiaries in order to satisfy the regulatory requirements of such subsidiaries. the increased requirement is primarily a result of higher regulatory capital requirements in gs bank usa, reflecting the
implementation of the standardized capital rules.  other
the deposits of gs bank usa are insured by the fdic to the extent provided by law. the federal reserve board requires that gs bank usa maintain
cash reserves with the federal reserve bank of new york. the amount deposited by gs bank usa held at the federal reserve bank of new york was $49.36billion and $38.68billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively,
which exceeded required reserve amounts by $49.25billion and $38.57billion as of december2015 and december2014, respectively.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note21.
earnings per common share  basic earnings per common
share (eps) is calculated by dividing net earnings applicable to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. common shares outstanding includes common stock and rsus for which no future service is required as a
condition to the delivery of the underlying common stock. diluted eps includes the determinants of basic eps and, in addition, reflects the dilutive effect of the common stock deliverable for stock options, warrants and for rsus for which future
service is required as a condition to the delivery of the underlying common stock.  the table below presents the computations of basic and
diluted eps.
year ended december
inmillions, except per share amounts
numerator for basic and diluted eps net earnings applicableto common
shareholders
$5,568
$8,077
$7,726
denominator for basic epsweighted average numberof common shares
448.9
458.9
471.3
effect of dilutive securities:
rsus
5.3
6.1
7.2
stock options and warrants
4.4
8.2
21.1
dilutive potential common shares
9.7
14.3
28.3
denominator for diluted eps weighted average number of common shares and dilutive
potential common shares
458.6
473.2
499.6
basic eps
$12.35
$17.55
$16.34
diluted eps
12.14
17.07
15.46
in the table above, unvested share-based awards that have non-forfeitable rights to dividends or dividend
equivalents are treated as a separate class of securities in calculating eps. the impact of applying this methodology was a reduction in basic eps of $0.05 for 2015,2014 and 2013.
the diluted eps computations in the table above do not include antidilutive rsus and common shares underlying antidilutive stock options of
6.0million for 2015,2014 and 2013.
note22.
transactions with affiliated funds  the firm has
formed numerous nonconsolidated investment funds with third-party investors. as the firm generally acts as the investment manager for these funds, it is entitled to receive management fees and, in certain cases, advisory fees or incentive fees from
these funds. additionally, the firm invests alongside the third-party investors in certain funds.  the tables below present fees earned
from affiliated funds, fees receivable from affiliated funds and the aggregate carrying value of the firms interests in affiliated funds.
year ended december
$ inmillions
fees earned from funds
$3,293
$3,232
$2,897
as of december
$ inmillions
fees receivable from funds
$599
$724
aggregate carrying value of interests in funds
7,768
9,099
as of december2015 and december2014, the firm had outstanding guarantees on behalf of its funds of
$300million and $304million, respectively. this amount primarily related to a guarantee that the firm has voluntarily provided in connection with a financing agreement with a third-party lender executed by one of the firms real
estate funds that is not covered by the volcker rule. as of december2015 and december2014, the firm had no outstanding loans or commitments to extend credit to affiliated funds.
the volcker rule restricts the firm from providing financial support to covered funds (as defined in the rule) after the expiration of any
applicable conformance period. as a general matter, in the ordinary course of business, the firm does not expect to provide additional voluntary financial support to any covered funds but may choose to do so with respect to funds that are not
subject to the volcker rule; however, in the event that such support is provided, the amount is not expected to be material.  in addition,
in the ordinary course of business, the firm may also engage in other activities with its affiliated funds including, among others, securities lending, trade execution, market making, custody, and acquisition and bridge financing. see note18
for the firms investment commitments related to these funds.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note23.
interest income and interest expense  interest is
recorded over the life of the instrument on an accrual basis based on contractual interest rates. the table below presents the firms sources of interest income and interest expense.
year ended december
$ inmillions
interest income
deposits with banks
$161
$164
$186
securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds
sold1
(81
)
financial instruments owned, at fair value
5,842
7,452
8,159
loans receivable
1,191
other interest2
1,248
1,361
1,376
total interest income
8,452
9,604
10,060
interest expense
deposits
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to repurchase
financial instruments sold, but notyet purchased, at fair value
1,319
1,741
2,054
short-term secured and unsecured borrowings
long-term secured and unsecured borrowings
3,878
3,460
3,752
other interest3
(976
)
(855
)
(495
)
total interest expense
5,388
5,557
6,668
net interest income
$3,064
$4,047
$3,392
1.
includes rebates paid and interest income on securities borrowed.
2.
includes interest income on customer debit balances and other interest-earning assets.
3.
includes rebates received on other interest-bearing liabilities and interest expense on customer credit balances.
note24.
income taxes  provision for income taxes
income taxes are provided for using the asset and liability method under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary
differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. the firm reports interest expense related to income tax matters in provision for taxes and income tax penalties in other expenses.
the tables below present the components of the provision for taxes and a reconciliation of the u.s. federal statutory income tax rate to the
firms effective income tax rate.
year ended december
$ inmillions
current taxes
u.s. federal
$1,116
$1,908
$2,589
state and local
(12
)1
non-u.s.
1,166
total current tax expense
2,270
3,385
3,668
deferred taxes
u.s. federal
(188
)
state and local
non-u.s.
(34
)
total deferred tax expense
provision for taxes
$2,695
$3,880
$3,697
1.
includes the impact of a settlement of state and local examinations.
year ended december
u.s. federal statutory income tax rate
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
state and local taxes, net of u.s. federal income tax effects
0.3%
3.2%
4.1%
tax credits
(1.7)%
(1.1)%
(1.0)%
non-u.s. operations1
(12.1)%
(5.8)%
(5.6)%
tax-exempt income, including dividends
(0.7)%
(0.3)%
(0.5)%
non-deductible legal expenses
10.2%
other
(0.3)%
0.4%
(0.5)%
effective income tax rate
30.7%
31.4%
31.5%
1.
includes the impact of permanently reinvested earnings.
2.
includes the impact of a settlement of state and local examinations.
3.
substantially all of the non-deductible legal expenses relate to provisions for the agreement in principle with the rmbs working group. see note27 for
further information about this agreement in principle.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
deferred income taxes
deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the financial
reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. these temporary differences result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years and are measured using the tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such differences are expected to
reverse. valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that more likely than not will be realized and primarily relate to the ability to utilize losses in various tax jurisdictions. tax assets and liabilities are
presented as a component of other assets and other liabilities and accrued expenses, respectively.  the table below
presents the significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities, excluding the impact of netting within tax jurisdictions.
as of december
$ inmillions
deferred tax assets
compensation and benefits
$2,744
$3,032
asc740 asset related to unrecognized tax benefits
non-u.s. operations
1,200
1,418
net operating losses
occupancy-related
other comprehensive income-related
other, net
subtotal
6,004
5,858
valuation allowance
(73
)
(64
)
total deferred tax assets
$5,931
$5,794
depreciation and amortization
$1,254
$1,176
unrealized gains
total deferred tax liabilities
$2,107
$1,582
the firm has recorded deferred tax assets of $426million and $336million as of december2015
and december2014, respectively, in connection with u.s. federal, state and local and foreign net operating loss carryforwards. the firm also recorded a valuation allowance of $24million and $26million as of december2015 and
december2014, respectively, related to these net operating loss carryforwards.
as of december2015, the u.s. federal and foreign net operating loss carryforwards were
$106million and $1.48billion, respectively. if not utilized, the u.s. federal net operating loss carryforward will begin to expire in 2016. the foreign net operating loss carryforwards can be carried forward indefinitely. state and local
net operating loss carryforwards of $798million will begin to expire in 2016. if these carryforwards expire, they will not have a material impact on the firms results of operations. the firm had no foreign tax credit carryforwards and no
related net deferred income tax assets as of december2015 and december2014.  the firm had no capital loss carryforwards and no
related net deferred income tax assets as of december2015 and december2014.  the valuation allowance increased by
$9million during 2015 and decreased by $119million during 2014. the increase in 2015 was primarily due to an increase in deferred tax assets from which the firm does not expect to realize any benefit. the decrease in 2014 was primarily
due to a decrease in deferred tax assets from which the firm does not expect to realize any benefit.  the firm permanently reinvests
eligible earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly, does not accrue any u.s. income taxes that would arise if such earnings were repatriated. as of december2015 and december2014, this policy resulted in an unrecognized
net deferred tax liability of $5.66billion and $4.66billion, respectively, attributable to reinvested earnings of $28.55billion and $24.88billion, respectively.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
unrecognized tax benefits
the firm recognizes tax positions in the financial statements only when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on
examination by the relevant taxing authority based on the technical merits of the position. a position that meets this standard is measured at the largest amount of benefit that will more likely than not be realized on settlement. a liability is
established for differences between positions taken in a tax return and amounts recognized in the financial statements.  the accrued
liability for interest expense related to income tax matters and income tax penalties was $101million as of both december2015 and december2014. the firm recognized interest expense and income tax penalties of $17million,
$45million and $53million for 2015,2014 and 2013, respectively. it is reasonably possible that unrecognized tax benefits could change significantly during the twelve months subsequent to december2015 due to potential audit
settlements. however, at this time it is not possible to estimate any potential change.  the table below presents the changes in the
liability for unrecognized tax benefits. this liability is included in other liabilities and accrued expenses. see note17 for further information.
as of december
$ inmillions
balance, beginning of year
$871
$1,765
$2,237
increases based on tax positionsrelated to the current year
increases based on tax positionsrelated to prior years
decreases based on tax positionsrelated to prior years
(205
)
(241
)
(471
)
decreases related to settlements
(87
)
(1,112
)
(299
)
exchange rate fluctuations
(8
)
balance, end of year
$825
$871
$1,765
related deferred income tax asset
net unrecognized tax benefit
$628
$699
$1,290
regulatory tax examinations
the firm is subject to examination by the u.s. internal revenue service (irs) and other taxing authorities in jurisdictions where the firm has
significant business operations, such as the united kingdom, japan, hong kong, korea and various states, such as new york. the tax years under examination vary by jurisdiction. the firm does not expect completion of these audits to have a material
impact on the firms financial condition but it may be material to operating results for a particular period, depending, in part, on the operating results for that period.
the table below presents the earliest tax years that remain subject to examination by major jurisdiction.
jurisdiction
as ofdecember2015
u.s. federal
new york state and city
united kingdom
japan
hong kong
korea
the u.s. federal examinations of fiscal 2008 through calendar 2010 have been finalized, but the settlement is
subject to review by the joint committee of taxation. the examinations of 2011 and 2012 began in 2013.  the firm has been accepted into the
compliance assurance process program by the irs for the 2013,2014,2015 and 2016 tax years. this program allows the firm to work with the irs to identify and resolve potential u.s. federal tax issues before the filing of tax returns. the
2013 tax year is the first year that was examined under the program, and 2013 and 2014 remain subject to post-filing review.  new york
state and city examinations of fiscal 2007 through calendar 2010 began in 2013. new york state and city examinations of 2011 through 2014 began in 2015.
all years including and subsequent to the years in the table above remain open to examination by the taxing authorities. the firm believes that
the liability for unrecognized tax benefits it has established is adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note25.
business segments
the firm reports its activities in the following four business segments: investment banking,
institutional client services, investing& lending and investment management.  basis of presentation
in reporting segments, certain of the firms business lines have been aggregated where they have similar economic characteristics and are
similar in each of the following areas: (i)the nature of the services they provide, (ii)their methods of distribution, (iii)the types of clients they serve and (iv)the regulatory environments in which they operate.
the cost drivers of the firm taken as a whole compensation, headcount and levels of business activity are broadly
similar in each of the firms business segments. compensation and benefits expenses in the firms segments reflect, among other factors, the overall performance of the firm as well as the performance of individual businesses. consequently,
pre-tax margins in one segment of the firms business may be significantly affected by the performance of the firms other business segments.
the firm allocates assets (including allocations of global core liquid assets and cash, secured client financing and other assets), revenues
and expenses among the four business segments. due to the integrated nature of these segments, estimates and judgments are made in allocating certain assets, revenues and expenses. the allocation process is based on the manner in which management
currently views the performance of the segments. transactions between segments are based on specific criteria or approximate third-party rates. total operating expenses include charitable contributions that have not been allocated to individual
business segments.  management believes that the information in the table below provides a reasonable representation of each segments
contribution to consolidated pre-tax earnings and total assets.
year ended or as of december
$ inmillions
investment banking
financial advisory
$3,470
$2,474
$1,978
equity underwriting
1,546
1,750
1,659
debt underwriting
2,011
2,240
2,367
total underwriting
3,557
3,990
4,026
total net revenues
7,027
6,464
6,004
operating expenses
3,713
3,688
3,479
pre-tax earnings
$3,314
$2,776
$2,525
segment assets
$2,564
$1,844
$1,900
institutionalclientservices
fixed income, currency and commodities client execution
$7,322
$8,461
$8,651
equities client execution
3,028
2,079
2,594
commissions and fees
3,156
3,153
3,103
securities services
1,645
1,504
1,373
total equities
7,829
6,736
7,070
total net revenues
15,151
15,197
15,721
operating expenses
13,938
10,880
11,792
pre-tax earnings
$1,213
$4,317
$3,929
segment assets
$663,394
$695,674
$787,896
investing&
lending
equity securities
$3,781
$4,579
$4,974
debt securities and loans
1,655
2,246
2,044
total net revenues1
5,436
6,825
7,018
operating expenses
2,402
2,819
2,686
pre-tax earnings
$3,034
$4,006
$4,332
segment assets
$179,428
$143,790
$109,250
investment management
management and other fees
$4,887
$4,800
$4,386
incentive fees
transaction revenues
total net revenues
6,206
6,042
5,463
operating expenses
4,841
4,647
4,357
pre-tax earnings
$1,365
$1,395
$1,106
segment assets
$16,009
$14,534
$12,078
total net revenues
$33,820
$34,528
$34,206
total operating expenses2, 3
25,042
22,171
22,469
total pre-tax earnings
$8,778
$12,357
$11,737
total assets
$861,395
$855,842
$911,124
1.
net revenues related to the firms consolidated investments, previously reported in other net revenues within investing& lending, are now
reported in equity securities and debt securities and loans, as results from these activities ($391million for 2015) are no longer significant principally due to the sale of metro in the fourth quarter of 2014. reclassifications have been made
to previously reported amounts to conform to the current presentation.
2.
includes net provisions for litigation and regulatory proceedings of $4.01billion (of which $3.37billion was related to the agreement in principle
with the rmbs working group) for 2015, $754million for 2014 and $962million for 2013. see note27 for further information about this agreement in principle.
3.
includes charitable contributions that have not been allocated to the firms segments of $148million for 2015, $137million for 2014 and
$155million for 2013.
4.
includes $37million of realized gains on available-for-sale securities.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
the segment information presented in the table above is prepared according to the following
methodologies:
revenues and expenses directly associated with each segment are included in determining pre-tax earnings.
net revenues in the firms segments include allocations of interest income and interest expense to specific securities, commodities and other
positions in relation to the cash generated by, or funding requirements of, such underlying positions. net interest is included in segment net revenues as it is consistent with the way in which management assesses segment performance.
overhead expenses not directly allocable to specific segments are allocated ratably based on direct segment expenses.
the table below presents the amounts of net interest income by segment included in net revenues.
year ended december
$ inmillions
investment banking
$
$
$
institutional client services
2,471
3,679
3,250
investing& lending
investment management
total net interest income
$3,064
$4,047
$3,392
the table below presents the amounts of depreciation and amortization expense by segment included in pre-tax
earnings.
year ended december
$ inmillions
investment banking
$123
$135
$144
institutional client services
investing& lending
investment management
total depreciation and amortization
$991
$1,337
$1,322
geographic information
due to the highly integrated nature of international financial markets, the firm manages its businesses based on the profitability of the
enterprise as a whole. the methodology for allocating profitability to geographic regions is dependent on estimates and management judgment because a significant portion of the firms activities require cross-border coordination in order to
facilitate the needs of the firms clients.
geographic results are generally allocated as follows:
investment banking: location of the client and investment banking team.
institutional client services: fixed income, currency and commodities client execution, and equities (excluding securities services): location of
the market-making desk; securities services: location of the primary market for the underlying security.
investing& lending: investing: location of the investment; lending: location of the client.
investment management: location of the sales team.
the table below presents the total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings of the firm by geographic region allocated based on the
methodology referred to above, as well as the percentage of total net revenues, pre-tax earnings and net earnings (excluding corporate) for each geographic region. in the table below, asia includes australia and new zealand.
year ended december
$ inmillions
netrevenues
americas
$19,202
56%
$20,062
58%
$19,858
58%
europe, middle eastandafrica
8,981
27%
9,057
26%
8,828
26%
asia
5,637
17%
5,409
16%
5,520
16%
totalnetrevenues
$33,820
100%
$34,528
100%
$34,206
100%
pre-tax earnings
americas
$3,359
37%
$7,144
57%
$6,794
57%
europe, middle eastandafrica
3,364
38%
3,338
27%
3,230
27%
asia
2,203
25%
2,012
16%
1,868
16%
subtotal
8,926
100%
12,494
100%
11,892
100%
corporate1
(148
)
(137
)
(155
)
totalpre-taxearnings
$8,778
$12,357
$11,737
net earnings
americas
$1,587
26%
$4,558
53%
$4,425
54%
europe, middle eastandafrica
2,914
47%
2,576
30%
2,377
29%
asia
1,686
27%
1,434
17%
1,345
17%
subtotal
6,187
100%
8,568
100%
8,147
100%
corporate1
(104
)
(91
)
(107
)
totalnetearnings
$6,083
$8,477
$8,040
1.
includes charitable contributions that have not been allocated to the firms geographic regions.
2.
includes provisions of $3.37 billion recorded during 2015 for the agreement in principle with the rmbs working group. see note 27 for further information
about this agreement in principle.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note26.
credit concentrations
credit concentrations may arise from market making, client facilitation, investing,
underwriting, lending and collateralized transactions and may be impacted by changes in economic, industry or political factors. the firm seeks to mitigate credit risk by actively monitoring exposures and obtaining collateral from counterparties as
deemed appropriate.  while the firms activities expose it to many different industries and counterparties, the firm routinely
executes a high volume of transactions with asset managers, investment funds, commercial banks, brokers and dealers, clearing houses and exchanges, which results in significant credit concentrations.
in the ordinary course of business, the firm may also be subject to a concentration of credit risk to a particular counterparty, borrower or
issuer, including sovereign issuers, or to a particular clearing house or exchange.  the table below presents the credit concentrations in
cash instruments held by the firm.
as of december
$ inmillions
u.s. government and federalagency obligations1
$63,844
$69,170
% of total assets
7.4%
8.1%
non-u.s. government andagency obligations1
$31,772
$37,059
% of total assets
3.7%
4.3%
1.
included in financial instruments owned, at fair value and cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes.
as of december2015 and december2014, the firm did not have credit exposure to any other counterparty that
exceeded 2% of total assets.
to reduce credit exposures, the firm may enter into agreements with counterparties that permit
the firm to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties and/or enable the firm to obtain collateral on an upfront or contingent basis. collateral obtained by the firm related to derivative assets is principally cash and is held by the
firm or a third-party custodian. collateral obtained by the firm related to resale agreements and securities borrowed transactions is primarily u.s. government and federal agency obligations and non-u.s. government and agency obligations. see
note10 for further information about collateralized agreements and financings.  the table below presents u.s. government and federal
agency obligations, and non-u.s. government and agency obligations, that collateralize resale agreements and securities borrowed transactions (including those in cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes). because
the firms primary credit exposure on such transactions is to the counterparty to the transaction, the firm would be exposed to the collateral issuer only in the event of counterparty default.
as of december
$ inmillions
u.s. government and federalagency obligations
$107,198
$103,263
non-u.s. government andagency
obligations1
74,326
71,302
1.
principally consists of securities issued by the governments of france, the united kingdom, japan and germany.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note27.
legal proceedings
the firm is involved in a number of judicial, regulatory and arbitration proceedings (including
those described below) concerning matters arising in connection with the conduct of the firms businesses. many of these proceedings are in early stages, and many of these cases seek an indeterminate amount of damages.
under asc450, an event is reasonably possible if the chance of the future event or events occurring is more than remote
but less than likely and an event is remote if the chance of the future event or events occurring is slight. thus, references to the upper end of the range of reasonably possible loss for cases in which the firm is able
to estimate a range of reasonably possible loss mean the upper end of the range of loss for cases for which the firm believes the risk of loss is more than slight.
with respect to matters described below for which management has been able to estimate a range of reasonably possible loss where
(i)actual or potential plaintiffs have claimed an amount of money damages, (ii)the firm is being, or threatened to be, sued by purchasers in an underwriting and is not being indemnified by a party that the firm believes will pay any
judgment, or (iii)the purchasers are demanding that the firm repurchase securities, management has estimated the upper end of the range of reasonably possible loss as being equal to (a)in the case of (i), the amount of money damages
claimed, (b)in the case of (ii), the difference between the initial sales price of the securities that the firm sold in such underwriting and the estimated lowest subsequent price of such securities and (c)in the case of (iii), the price
that purchasers paid for the securities less the estimated value, if any, as of december2015 of the relevant securities, in each of cases (i), (ii)and (iii), taking into account any factors believed to be relevant to the particular
matter or matters of that type. as of the date hereof, the firm has estimated the upper end of the range of reasonably possible aggregate loss for such matters and for any other matters described below where management has been able to estimate a
range of reasonably possible aggregate loss to be approximately $2.0billion in excess of the aggregate reserves for such matters.
management is generally unable to estimate a range of reasonably possible loss for matters other
than those included in the estimate above, including where (i)actual or potential plaintiffs have not claimed an amount of money damages, except in those instances where management can otherwise determine an appropriate amount,
(ii)matters are in early stages, (iii)matters relate to regulatory investigations or reviews, except in those instances where management can otherwise determine an appropriate amount, (iv)there is uncertainty as to the likelihood
of a class being certified or the ultimate size of the class, (v)there is uncertainty as to the outcome of pending appeals or motions, (vi)there are significant factual issues to be resolved, and/or (vii)there are novel legal
issues presented. for example, the firms potential liabilities with respect to future mortgage-related put-back claims described below may ultimately result in an increase in the firms liabilities, but are not included in
managements estimate of reasonably possible loss. as another example, the firms potential liabilities with respect to the investigations and reviews described below under regulatory investigations and reviews and related
litigation also generally are not included in managements estimate of reasonably possible loss. however, management does not believe, based on currently available information, that the outcomes of such other matters will have a material
adverse effect on the firms financial condition, though the outcomes could be material to the firms operating results for any particular period, depending, in part, upon the operating results for such period. see note18 for further
information about mortgage-related contingencies.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
mortgage-related matters. beginning in april2010, a number of purported securities law class actions were filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york challenging the adequacy of group inc.s public
disclosure of, among other things, the firms activities in the cdo market, the firms conflict of interest management, and the sec investigation that led to gs&co. entering into a consent agreement with the sec, settling all claims
made against gs&co. by the sec in connection with the abacus 2007-ac1 cdo offering (abacus 2007-ac1 transaction), pursuant to which gs&co. paid $550million of disgorgement and civil penalties. the consolidated amended complaint filed
on july25,2011, which names as defendants group inc. and certain officers and employees of group inc. and its affiliates, generally alleges violations of sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the exchange act and seeks unspecified damages. on
june21,2012, the district court dismissed the claims based on group inc.s not disclosing that it had received a wells notice from the staff of the sec related to the abacus 2007-ac1 transaction, but permitted the
plaintiffs other claims to proceed. the district court granted class certification on september24,2015, but the appellate court granted defendants petition for review on january26,2016. on
february1,2016, the district court stayed proceedings in the district court pending the appellate courts decision.
in june2012, the board received a demand from a shareholder that the board investigate and take action relating to the firms
mortgage-related activities and to stock sales by certain directors and executives of the firm. on february15,2013, this shareholder filed a putative shareholder derivative action in new york supreme court, new york county, against group
inc. and certain current or former directors and employees, based on these activities and stock sales. the derivative complaint includes allegations of breach of fiduciary duty, unjust enrichment, abuse of control, gross mismanagement and corporate
waste, and seeks, among other things, unspecified monetary damages, disgorgement of profits and certain corporate governance and disclosure reforms. on may28,2013, group inc. informed the shareholder that the board completed its
investigation and determined to refuse the demand. on june20,2013, the shareholder made a books and records demand requesting materials relating to the boards determination. the parties have agreed to stay proceedings in the
putative derivative action pending resolution of the books and records demand.
in addition, the board has received books and records demands from several shareholders for
materials relating to, among other subjects, the firms mortgage servicing and foreclosure activities, participation in federal programs providing assistance to financial institutions and homeowners, loan sales to fannie mae and freddie mac,
mortgage-related activities and conflicts management.  gs&co., goldman sachs mortgage company and gs mortgage securities corp. and
three current or former goldman sachs employees are defendants in a putative class action commenced on december11,2008 in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york brought on behalf of purchasers of various mortgage
pass-through certificates and asset-backed certificates issued by various securitization trusts established by the firm and underwritten by gs&co. in 2007. on june3,2010, another investor filed a separate putative class action
asserting substantively similar allegations relating to one other offering and thereafter moved to further amend its amended complaint to add claims with respect to two additional offerings. on december30,2015, the district court
preliminarily approved a settlement covering both actions. the firm has paid the full amount of the proposed settlement into an escrow account.
on september30,2010, a class action was filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york against gs&co.,
group inc. and two former gs&co. employees on behalf of investors in $823million of notes issued in 2006 and 2007 by two synthetic cdos (hudson mezzanine 2006-1 and 2006-2). on november2,2015, the parties reached a settlement
in principle, subject to documentation and court approval. the firm has reserved the full amount of the proposed settlement.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
various alleged purchasers of, and counterparties and providers of credit enhancement involved
in transactions relating to, mortgage pass-through certificates, cdos and other mortgage-related products (including aca financial guaranty corp., aozora bank, ltd., basis yield alpha fund (master), the charles schwab corporation, cifg assurance of
north america, inc., the fdic (as receiver for guaranty bank), ikb deutsche industriebank ag, massachusetts mutual life insurance company, texas county& district retirement system and the tennessee consolidated retirement system) have
filed complaints in state and federal court against firm affiliates, generally alleging that the offering documents for the securities that they purchased contained untrue statements of material fact and material omissions and generally seeking
rescission and/or damages. certain of these complaints allege fraud and seek punitive damages. certain of these complaints also name other firms as defendants.
norges bank investment management and selective insurance company have threatened to assert claims of various types against the firm in
connection with the sale of mortgage-related securities. the firm has entered into agreements with one of these entities to toll the relevant statute of limitations.
as of the date hereof, the aggregate amount of mortgage-related securities sold to plaintiffs in active and threatened cases described in the
preceding two paragraphs where those plaintiffs are seeking rescission of such securities was approximately $3.3billion (which does not reflect adjustment for any subsequent paydowns or distributions or any residual value of such securities,
statutory interest or any other adjustments that may be claimed). this amount does not include the potential claims by these or other purchasers in the same or other mortgage-related offerings that have not been described above, or claims that have
been dismissed.  the firm has entered into agreements with deutsche bank national trust company and u.s. bank national association to toll
the relevant statute of limitations with respect to claims for repurchase of residential mortgage loans based on alleged breaches of representations related to $11.1billion original notional face amount of securitizations issued by trusts for
which they act as trustees.
group inc., litton loan servicing lp (litton), ocwen financial corporation and arrow corporate
member holdings llc (arrow), a former subsidiary of group inc., are defendants in a putative class action pending since january23,2013 in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york generally challenging the procurement
manner and scope of force-placed hazard insurance arranged by litton when homeowners failed to arrange for insurance as required by their mortgages. the complaint asserts claims for breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty,
misappropriation, conversion, unjust enrichment and violation of florida unfair practices law, and seeks unspecified compensatory and punitive damages as well as declaratory and injunctive relief. an amended complaint, filed on
november19,2013, added an additional plaintiff and rico claims. on september29,2014, the court denied without prejudice and with leave to renew at a later date group inc.s motion to sever the claims against it and
certain other defendants. on february2,2016, the defendants motion to dismiss the action as preempted by the filed-rate doctrine under a recent second circuit decision was granted with respect to certain of the
plaintiffs. on january15,2016, group inc. and arrow were added as defendants to a putative class action in the u.s. district court for the northern district of california based on substantially similar allegations, asserting rico claims
and violations of californias unfair competition law, and seeking similar relief. on february10, 2016, group inc., litton and arrow and the plaintiffs in the action pending in the southern district of new york reached a settlement in
principle, subject to documentation and court approval, which would resolve the remaining claims in both actions.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
on january14,2016, the firm announced an agreement in principle, subject to
definitive documentation, to resolve the ongoing investigation of the residential mortgage-backed securities working group of the u.s. financial fraud enforcement task force. the agreement in principle will resolve actual and potential civil claims
by the u.s. department of justice, the new york and illinois attorneys general, the national credit union administration (as conservator for several failed credit unions) and the federal home loan banks of chicago and seattle, relating to the
firms securitization, underwriting and sale of residential mortgage-backed securities from 2005 to 2007. under the terms of the agreement in principle, the firm will pay a $2.39billion civil monetary penalty, make $875million in
cash payments and provide $1.80billion in consumer relief. the consumer relief will be in the form of principal forgiveness for underwater homeowners and distressed borrowers; financing for construction, rehabilitation and preservation of
affordable housing; and support for debt restructuring, foreclosure prevention and housing quality improvement programs, as well as land banks. the firm has established a reserve for its estimated obligations under the agreement in principle. see
also regulatory investigations and reviews and related litigation below. the firm has also received, and continues to receive, requests for information and/or subpoenas from, and is engaged in discussions with, federal, state and local
regulators and law enforcement authorities as part of inquiries or investigations relating to the mortgage-related securitization process, subprime mortgages, cdos, synthetic mortgage-related products, sales communications and particular
transactions involving these products, and servicing and foreclosure activities, which may subject the firm to actions, including litigation, penalties and fines.
the firm may be the subject of additional putative shareholder derivative actions, purported class actions, rescission and put-back
claims and other litigation, additional investor and shareholder demands, and additional regulatory and other investigations and actions with respect to mortgage-related offerings, loan sales, cdos, and servicing and foreclosure activities. see
note18 for information regarding mortgage-related contingencies not described in this note27.
gt advanced technologies securities litigation. gs&co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in several putative securities class actions filed in october2014 in the u.s. district court for the district of new hampshire. in addition to the
underwriters, the defendants include certain directors and officers of gt advanced technologies inc. (gt advanced technologies). as to the underwriters, the complaints generally allege misstatements and omissions in connection with the
december2013 offerings by gt advanced technologies of approximately $86million of common stock and $214million principal amount of convertible senior notes, assert claims under the federal securities laws, and seek compensatory
damages in an unspecified amount and rescission. on july20,2015, the plaintiffs filed a consolidated amended complaint. on october7,2015, the defendants moved to dismiss. gs&co. underwrote 3,479,769 shares of common stock
and $75million principal amount of notes for an aggregate offering price of approximately $105million. on october6,2014, gt advanced technologies filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy.
fireeye securities litigation. gs&co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in
several putative securities class actions, filed beginning in june2014 in the california superior court, county of santa clara. in addition to the underwriters, the defendants include fireeye, inc. (fireeye) and certain of its directors and
officers. the complaints generally allege misstatements and omissions in connection with the offering materials for the march2014 offering of approximately $1.15billion of fireeye common stock, assert claims under the federal securities
laws, and seek compensatory damages in an unspecified amount and rescission. on august11,2015, the court overruled the defendants demurrers, which sought to have the consolidated amended complaint dismissed. on
november16,2015, plaintiffs moved for class certification. on january6,2016, fireeye and its director and officer defendants filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. gs&co.
underwrote 2,100,000 shares for a total offering price of approximately $172million.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
cobalt international energy securities litigation.
cobalt international energy, inc. (cobalt), certain of its officers and directors (including employees of affiliates of group inc. who served as directors of cobalt), affiliates of shareholders of cobalt (including group inc.) and underwriters
(including gs&co.) for certain offerings of cobalts securities are defendants in a putative securities class action filed on november30,2014 in the u.s. district court for the southern district of texas. the consolidated
amended complaint, filed on may1,2015, asserts claims under the federal securities laws, seeks compensatory and rescissory damages in unspecified amounts and alleges material misstatements and omissions concerning cobalt in connection
with a $1.67billion february2012 offering of cobalt common stock, a $1.38billion december2012 offering of cobalts convertible notes, a $1.00billion january2013 offering of cobalts common stock, a
$1.33billion may2013 offering of cobalts common stock, and a $1.30billion may2014 offering of cobalts convertible notes. the consolidated amended complaint alleges that, among others, group inc. and gs&co. are
liable as controlling persons with respect to all five offerings. the consolidated amended complaint also seeks damages from gs&co. in connection with its acting as an underwriter of 14,430,000 shares of common stock representing an aggregate
offering price of approximately $465million, $690million principal amount of convertible notes, and approximately $508million principal amount of convertible notes in the february2012, december2012 and may2014
offerings, respectively, for an aggregate offering price of approximately $1.66billion. on january19,2016, the court granted, with leave to replead, the underwriter defendants motions to dismiss as to claims by plaintiffs who
purchased cobalt securities after april30,2013, but denied the motions to dismiss in all other respects.  solazyme, inc. securities litigation. gs&co. is among the underwriters named as defendants in a putative securities class action filed on june24,2015 in the u.s. district court for the northern
district of california. in addition to the underwriters, the defendants include solazyme, inc. (solazyme) and certain of its directors and officers. as to the underwriters, the complaints generally allege misstatements and omissions in connection
with march2014 offerings by solazyme of approximately $63million of common stock and $150million principal amount of convertible senior subordinated notes, assert claims under the federal securities laws, and seek compensatory
damages in an unspecified amount and rescission. plaintiffs filed an amended complaint on december15,2015, and defendants moved to dismiss on february12,2016. gs&co. underwrote 3,450,000 shares of common stock and
$150million principal amount of notes for an aggregate offering price of approximately $187million.
employment-related matters. on september15,2010, a putative class action was filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york by three female former employees alleging that group inc. and gs&co. have
systematically discriminated against female employees in respect of compensation, promotion, assignments, mentoring and performance evaluations. the complaint alleges a class consisting of all female employees employed at specified levels in
specified areas by group inc. and gs&co. since july2002, and asserts claims under federal and new york city discrimination laws. the complaint seeks class action status, injunctive relief and unspecified amounts of compensatory, punitive
and other damages. on july17,2012, the district court issued a decision granting in part group inc.s and gs&co.s motion to strike certain of plaintiffs class allegations on the ground that plaintiffs lacked standing
to pursue certain equitable remedies and denying group inc.s and gs&co.s motion to strike plaintiffs class allegations in their entirety as premature. on march21,2013, the u.s. court of appeals for the second
circuit held that arbitration should be compelled with one of the named plaintiffs, who as a managing director was a party to an arbitration agreement with the firm. on march10,2015, the magistrate judge to whom the district judge
assigned the remaining plaintiffs may2014 motion for class certification recommended that the motion be denied in all respects. on august3,2015, the magistrate judge denied plaintiffs motion for reconsideration of that
recommendation and granted the plaintiffs motion to intervene two female individuals, one of whom was employed by the firm as of september2010 and the other of whom is a current employee of the firm. on august17,2015, the
defendants appealed the magistrate judges decision on intervention. on september28,2015, the defendants moved to dismiss the claims of an intervenor who is not a current employee of the firm for lack of standing.
investment management services. group inc. and certain
of its affiliates are parties to various civil litigation and arbitration proceedings and other disputes with clients relating to losses allegedly sustained as a result of the firms investment management services. these claims generally seek,
among other things, restitution or other compensatory damages and, in some cases, punitive damages.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
financial advisory services. group inc. and certain of its affiliates are from time to time parties to various civil litigation and arbitration proceedings and other disputes with clients and third parties relating to the firms
financial advisory activities. these claims generally seek, among other things, compensatory damages and, in some cases, punitive damages, and in certain cases allege that the firm did not appropriately disclose or deal with conflicts of interest.
credit derivatives antitrust matters. on
december4,2015, the european commission announced that it had closed antitrust proceedings against all banks, including group inc., involved in the european commissions investigation, announced in april2011, of numerous
financial services companies in connection with the supply of data related to credit default swaps and in connection with profit sharing and fee arrangements for clearing of credit default swaps, including potential anti-competitive practices.
gs&co. is among the numerous defendants in putative antitrust class actions relating to credit derivatives, filed beginning in
may2013 and consolidated in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york. on october29,2015, the court preliminarily approved the settlement among gs&co. and the plaintiffs. the firm has reserved the full
amount of the proposed settlement.  libya-related litigation. gsi is the defendant in an action filed on january21,2014 with the high court of justice in london by the libyan investment authority, relating to nine derivative transactions between the plaintiff
and gsi and seeking, among other things, rescission of the transactions and unspecified equitable compensation and damages exceeding $1billion. on december4,2014, the libyan investment authority filed an amended statement of claim.
municipal securities matters. gs&co. (along with, in some cases, other financial services firms) is named by municipalities, municipal-owned entities, state-owned agencies or instrumentalities and non-profit entities in a number of finra
arbitrations and federal court cases based on gs&co.s role as underwriter of the claimants issuances of an aggregate of approximately $1.9billion of auction rate securities from 2003 through 2007 and as a broker-dealer with
respect to auctions for these securities. the claimants generally allege that gs&co. failed to disclose that it had a practice of placing cover bids in auctions, and/or failed to inform the claimant of the deterioration of the auction rate
market beginning in the fall of 2007, and that, as a result, the claimant was forced to engage in a series of expensive refinancing and conversion transactions after the failure of the auction market in february2008. certain claimants also
allege that gs&co. advised them to enter into or continue with interest rate swaps in connection with their auction rate securities issuances, causing them to incur additional losses. the claims include breach of fiduciary duty, fraudulent
concealment, negligent misrepresentation, breach of contract, violations of the exchange act and state securities laws, and breach of duties under the rules of the municipal securities rulemaking board and the nasd. certain of the arbitrations have
been enjoined in accordance with the exclusive forum selection clauses in the transaction documents. in addition, gs&co. has filed motions with the finra panels to dismiss the arbitrations, one of which has been granted, and has filed motions to
dismiss two of the proceedings pending in federal court, one of which was granted but has been appealed and one of which was denied. gs&co. has also reached settlements or settlements in principle in five actions and one action was voluntarily
dismissed.  u.s. treasury securities-related litigation. gs&co. is among the primary dealers named as defendants in several putative class actions relating to the market for u.s. treasury securities, filed beginning in july2015 and consolidated in the u.s.
district court for the southern district of new york. the complaints generally allege that the defendants violated the federal antitrust laws and the commodity exchange act in connection with an alleged conspiracy to manipulate the when-issued
market and auctions for u.s. treasury securities, as well as related futures and options, and seek declaratory and injunctive relief, treble damages in an unspecified amount and restitution.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
commodities-related litigation. gs&co., gsi, j.aron& company and metro, a previously consolidated subsidiary of group inc. that was sold in the fourth quarter of 2014, are among the defendants in a number of putative class
actions filed beginning on august1,2013 and consolidated in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york. the complaints generally allege violations of federal antitrust laws and state laws in connection with the storage
of aluminum and aluminum trading. the complaints seek declaratory, injunctive and other equitable relief as well as unspecified monetary damages, including treble damages. on august29,2014, the court granted the goldman sachs
defendants motion to dismiss. certain plaintiffs appealed on september24,2014, and the remaining plaintiffs sought to amend their complaints in october2014. on march26,2015, the court granted in part and denied in
part plaintiffs motions for leave to amend their complaints, rejecting their monopolization claims and most state law claims but permitting their antitrust conspiracy claims and certain parallel state law and unjust enrichment claims to
proceed, and the court directed the remaining plaintiffs to file their amended complaints, which they did on april9,2015.
gs power, metro and gsi are among the defendants named in putative class actions, filed beginning on may23,2014 in the u.s.
district court for the southern district of new york, based on similar alleged violations of the federal antitrust laws in connection with the management of zinc storage facilities. on january7,2016, the court granted the
defendants motion to dismiss.  gsi is among the defendants named in putative class actions relating to trading in platinum and
palladium, filed beginning on november25,2014, in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york. the complaints generally allege that the defendants violated federal antitrust laws and the commodity exchange act in
connection with an alleged conspiracy to manipulate a benchmark for physical platinum and palladium prices and seek declaratory and injunctive relief as well as treble damages in an unspecified amount. on july27,2015, plaintiffs filed a
second amended consolidated complaint, and on september21,2015, the defendants moved to dismiss.
isdafix-related litigation. group inc. is among the defendants named in several putative class actions relating to trading in interest rate derivatives, filed beginning in september2014 in the u.s. district court for the southern
district of new york. the second consolidated amended complaint, filed on february12,2015, asserts claims under the federal antitrust laws and state common law in connection with an alleged conspiracy to manipulate the isdafix benchmark
and seeks declaratory and injunctive relief as well as treble damages in an unspecified amount. defendants moved to dismiss the second consolidated amended complaint on april13,2015.
currencies-related litigation. gs&co. and group
inc. are among the defendants named in several putative antitrust class actions relating to trading in the foreign exchange markets, filed beginning in december2013 in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york. the
complaints generally allege that defendants violated federal antitrust laws in connection with an alleged conspiracy to manipulate the foreign currency exchange markets and seek declaratory and injunctive relief as well as treble damages in an
unspecified amount. on february13,2014, the cases were consolidated into one action.  beginning in february2015,
gs&co. and group inc. were named as defendants in separate putative class actions filed in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york, which were consolidated with the antitrust class actions described above on
august13,2015. on december15,2015, the court preliminarily approved a settlement among gs&co., group inc. and the plaintiffs in the consolidated action. the firm has paid the full amount of the proposed settlement into an
escrow account.  on june3,2015, gs&co. and group inc. were among the defendants named in a putative class action filed in
the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york on behalf of certain erisa employee benefit plans. as to the claims brought against gs&co. and group inc., the amended complaint, filed on november16,2015, generally
alleges that the defendants violated erisa in connection with an alleged conspiracy to manipulate the foreign currency exchange markets, which caused losses to erisa plans for which the defendants provided foreign exchange services or otherwise
authorized the execution of foreign exchange services. the plaintiffs have moved for leave to file a second amended complaint containing substantially the same allegations. plaintiffs seek declaratory and injunctive relief as well as restitution and
disgorgement in an unspecified amount.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
group inc., gs&co. and goldman sachs canada inc. are among the defendants named in putative
class actions related to trading in foreign exchange markets, filed beginning in september2015 in the superior court of justice in ontario, canada and the superior court of quebec, canada, on behalf of direct and indirect purchasers of foreign
exchange instruments traded in canada. the complaints generally allege a conspiracy to manipulate the foreign currency exchange markets and assert claims under canadas competition act and common law. the ontario and quebec complaints seek,
among other things, compensatory damages in the amounts of 1billion canadian dollars and 100million canadian dollars, respectively, as well as restitution and 50million canadian dollars in punitive, exemplary and aggravated
damages.  interest rate swap antitrust litigation.
group inc., gs&co., gsi, gs bank usa and goldman sachs financial markets, l.p. are among the defendants named in a putative antitrust class action relating to the trading of interest rate swaps, filed on november25,2015 in the u.s.
district court for the southern district of new york. the complaint generally alleges a conspiracy among the dealers and brokers since at least january1,2008 to preclude exchange trading of interest rate swaps. the complaint seeks
declaratory and injunctive relief as well as treble damages in an unspecified amount.
compensation-related litigation. on
june9,2015, group inc. and certain of its current and former directors were named as defendants in a purported shareholder derivative action in the court of chancery of the state of delaware. the derivative complaint alleges that
excessive compensation has been paid to such directors since 2012. the derivative complaint includes allegations of breach of fiduciary duty and unjust enrichment and seeks, among other things, unspecified monetary damages, disgorgement of director
compensation and reform of the firms stock incentive plan. on september30,2015, the defendants moved to dismiss.
regulatory investigations and reviews and related
litigation. group inc. and certain of its affiliates are subject to a number of other investigations and reviews by, and in some cases have received subpoenas and requests for documents and
information from, various governmental and regulatory bodies and self-regulatory organizations and litigation relating to various matters relating to the firms businesses and operations, including:
the 2008 financial crisis;
the public offering process;
the firms investment management and financial advisory services;
conflicts of interest;
research practices, including research independence and interactions between research analysts and other firm personnel, including investment
banking personnel, as well as third parties;
transactions involving municipal securities, including wall-cross procedures and conflict of interest disclosure with respect to state and
municipal clients, the trading and structuring of municipal derivative instruments in connection with municipal offerings, political contribution rules, municipal advisory services and the possible impact of credit default swap transactions on
municipal issuers;
the offering, auction, sales, trading and clearance of corporate and government securities, currencies, commodities and other financial products
and related sales and other communications and activities, including compliance with the secs short sale rule, algorithmic, high-frequency and quantitative trading, the firms u.s. alternative trading system (dark pool), futures trading,
options trading, when-issued trading, transaction reporting, technology systems and controls, securities lending practices, trading and clearance of credit derivative instruments, commodities activities and metals storage, private placement
practices, allocations of and trading in securities, and trading activities and communications in connection with the establishment of benchmark rates, such as currency rates and the isdafix benchmark rates;
compliance with the u.s. foreign corrupt practices act;
the firms hiring and compensation practices;
the firms system of risk management and controls; and
insider trading, the potential misuse and dissemination of material nonpublic information regarding corporate and governmental developments and the
effectiveness of the firms insider trading controls and information barriers.  goldman sachs is cooperating with
all such regulatory investigations and reviews.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note28.
employee benefit plans  the firm sponsors various
pension plans and certain other postretirement benefit plans, primarily healthcare and life insurance. the firm also provides certain benefits to former or inactive employees prior to retirement.
defined benefit pension plans and postretirement plans
employees of certain non-u.s. subsidiaries participate in various defined benefit pension plans. these plans generally provide benefits based
on years of credited service and a percentage of the employees eligible compensation. the firm maintains a defined benefit pension plan for certain u.k. employees. as of april2008, the u.k. defined benefit plan was closed to new
participants, but allows existing participants to continue to accrue benefits. in 2015, the firm notified plan participants that the u.k. defined benefit plan will no longer accrue future benefit accruals after march31,2016. the non-u.s.
plans do not have a material impact on the firms consolidated results of operations.  the firm also maintains a defined benefit
pension plan for substantially all u.s. employees hired prior to november1,2003. as of november2004, this plan was closed to new participants and frozen for existing participants. in addition, the firm maintains unfunded
postretirement benefit plans that provide medical and life insurance for eligible retirees and their dependents covered under these programs. these plans do not have a material impact on the firms consolidated results of operations.
the firm recognizes the funded status of its defined benefit pension and postretirement plans, measured as the difference between the fair
value of the plan assets and the benefit obligation, in the consolidated statements of financial condition. as of december2015, other assets and other liabilities and accrued expenses included $329million (related
to overfunded pension plans) and $561million, respectively, related to these plans. as of december2014, other assets and other liabilities and accrued expenses included $273million (related to overfunded
pension plans) and $739million, respectively, related to these plans.  defined contribution plans
the firm contributes to employer-sponsored u.s. and non-u.s. defined contribution plans. the firms contribution to these plans was
$231million for 2015, $223million for 2014 and $219million for 2013.
note29.
employee incentive plans  the cost of employee
services received in exchange for a share-based award is generally measured based on the grant-date fair value of the award. share-based awards that do not require future service (i.e., vested awards, including awards granted to retirement-eligible
employees) are expensed immediately. share-based awards that require future service are amortized over the relevant service period. expected forfeitures are included in determining share-based employee compensation expense.
the firm pays cash dividend equivalents on outstanding rsus. dividend equivalents paid on rsus are generally charged to retained earnings.
dividend equivalents paid on rsus expected to be forfeited are included in compensation expense. the firm accounts for the tax benefit related to dividend equivalents paid on rsus as an increase to additional paid-in capital.
the firm generally issues new shares of common stock upon delivery of share-based awards. in certain cases, primarily related to conflicted
employment (as outlined in the applicable award agreements), the firm may cash settle share-based compensation awards accounted for as equity instruments. for these awards, whose terms allow for cash settlement, additional paid-in capital is
adjusted to the extent of the difference between the value of the award at the time of cash settlement and the grant-date value of the award.  stock incentive
plan  the firm sponsors a stock incentive plan, the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (2015)(2015 sip),
which provides for grants of rsus, restricted stock, dividend equivalent rights, incentive stock options, nonqualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, and other share-based awards, each of which may be subject to performance conditions. on
may21,2015, shareholders approved the 2015 sip. the 2015 sip replaced the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (2013)(2013 sip) previously in effect, and applies to awards granted on or after the date of
approval.  as of december2015, 83.8million shares were available for grant under the 2015 sip. if any shares of common stock
underlying awards granted under the 2015 sip or 2013 sip are not delivered due to forfeiture, termination or cancellation or are surrendered or withheld, those shares will again become available to be delivered under the 2015 sip. shares available
for grant are also subject to adjustment for certain changes in corporate structure as permitted under the 2015 sip. the 2015 sip is scheduled to terminate on the date of the annual meeting of shareholders that occurs in 2019.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
restricted stock units
the firm grants rsus to employees under the 2015 sip, which are valued based on the closing price of the underlying shares on the date of grant
after taking into account a liquidity discount for any applicable post-vesting and delivery transfer restrictions. rsus generally vest and underlying shares of common stock deliver as outlined in the applicable award agreements. employee award
agreements generally provide that vesting is accelerated in certain circumstances, such as on retirement, death, disability and conflicted employment. delivery of the underlying shares of common stock is conditioned on the grantees satisfying
certain vesting and other requirements outlined in the award agreements.  the table below presents the activity related to rsus.
restricted stock
units outstanding
weighted averagegrant-datefairvalueof restricted stockunitsoutstanding
future servicerequired
nofutureservicerequired
futureservicerequired
nofutureservicerequired
outstanding, december2014
6,656,869
21,289,845
$143.07
$129.52
granted1, 2
4,193,176
10,450,094
164.23
158.58
forfeited
(726,013
)
(165,355
)
152.06
147.10
delivered3
(13,966,859
)
125.29
vested2
(4,474,876
)
4,474,876
140.29
140.29
outstanding, december2015
5,649,156
22,082,601
159.82
148.00
1.
the weighted average grant-date fair value of rsus granted during 2015,2014 and 2013 was $160.19, $151.40 and $122.59, respectively. the fair value of
the rsus granted during 2015,2014 and 2013 includes a liquidity discount of 9.2%, 13.8% and 13.7%, respectively, to reflect post-vesting and delivery transfer restrictions of up to 4years.
2.
the aggregate fair value of awards that vested during 2015,2014 and 2013 was $2.40billion, $2.39billion and $2.26billion,
respectively.
3.
includes rsus that were cash settled.
4.
includes restricted stock subject to future service requirements as of december2015 and december2014 of 6,354 and 20,651 shares, respectively.
in the first quarter of 2016, the firm granted to its employees 15.0million year-end rsus, of which
4.0million rsus require future service as a condition of delivery for the related shares of common stock. these awards are subject to additional conditions as outlined in the award agreements. generally, shares underlying these awards, net of
required withholding tax, deliver over a three-year period but are subject to post-vesting and delivery transfer restrictions through january2021. these grants are not included in the table above.
stock options
stock options generally vest as outlined in the applicable stock option agreement. in general, options expire on the tenth anniversary of the
grant date, although they may be subject to earlier termination or cancellation under certain circumstances in accordance with the terms of the applicable stock option agreement and the sip in effect at the time of grant.
the table below presents the activity related to outstanding stock options, all of which were granted in 2005 through 2008.
optionsoutstanding
weightedaverageexerciseprice
aggregateintrinsicvalue(inmillions)
weightedaverageremaininglife(years)
outstanding, december2014
19,955,338
$120.40
$1,516
3.28
exercised
(5,199,063
)
96.57
outstanding, december2015
14,756,275
128.79
2.38
exercisable, december2015
14,756,275
128.79
2.38
the total intrinsic value of options exercised during 2015,2014 and 2013 was $531million,
$2.03billion and $26million, respectively.  the table below presents options outstanding.
exercise price
optionsoutstanding
weightedaverageexerciseprice
weightedaverageremaininglife
(years)
$75.00-$89.99
8,780,151
$78.78
3.00
90.00-194.99
195.00-209.99
5,976,124
202.27
1.48
outstanding, december2015
14,756,275
128.79
2.38
as of december2015, there was $440million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to
non-vested share-based compensation arrangements. this cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 1.54years.
the table below presents the share-based compensation and the related excess tax benefit.
year ended december
$ inmillions
share-based compensation
$2,304
$2,101
$2,039
excess net tax benefit related to optionsexercised
excess net tax benefit related to share-based awards1
1.
represents the net tax benefit recognized in additional paid-in capital on stock options exercised, the delivery of common stock underlying share-based awards
and dividend equivalents paid on rsus.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
notes to consolidated financial statements
note30.
parent company
group inc.  condensed statements of earnings
year ended december
$ inmillions
revenues
dividends from subsidiaries
bank subsidiaries
$32
$16
$2,000
nonbank subsidiaries
3,181
2,739
4,176
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
3,506
5,330
1,086
other revenues
(132
)
2,209
total non-interest revenues
6,587
8,911
9,471
interest income
3,519
3,769
4,048
interest expense
4,165
3,802
4,161
net interest loss
(646
)
(33
)
(113
)
net revenues, including net interest loss
5,941
8,878
9,358
operating expenses
compensation and benefits
other expenses
total operating expenses
pre-tax earnings
5,255
8,185
8,531
provision/(benefit) for taxes
(828
)
(292
)
net earnings
6,083
8,477
8,040
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$5,568
$8,077
$7,726
group inc.  condensed statements of financial condition
as of december
$ inmillions
assets
cash and cash equivalents
with third-party banks
$36
$42
with subsidiary bank
1,300
loans to and receivables from subsidiaries
bank subsidiaries
9,494
8,222
nonbank subsidiaries1
179,826
171,121
investments in subsidiaries and other affiliates
bank subsidiaries
23,985
22,393
nonbank subsidiaries and other affiliates
61,533
57,311
financial instruments owned, at fair value
4,410
11,812
other assets
7,472
7,374
total assets
$288,056
$278,275
liabilities and shareholders
equity
payables to subsidiaries
$591
$129
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, atfairvalue
unsecured short-term borrowings
with third parties2
29,547
31,021
with subsidiaries
1,955
unsecured long-term borrowings
with third parties3
164,718
158,359
with subsidiaries4
3,854
1,616
other liabilities and accrued expenses
1,547
2,229
total liabilities
201,328
195,478
commitments, contingencies and
guarantees
shareholders
equity
preferred stock
11,200
9,200
common stock
share-based awards
4,151
3,766
additional paid-in capital
51,340
50,049
retained earnings
83,386
78,984
accumulated other comprehensive loss
(718
)
(743
)
stock held in treasury, at cost
(62,640
)
(58,468
)
total shareholders equity
86,728
82,797
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$288,056
$278,275
group inc.  condensed statements of cash flows
year ended december
$ inmillions
cash flows from operating activities
net earnings
$6,083
$8,477
$8,040
adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities
undistributed earnings of subsidiaries
(3,506)
(5,330)
(1,086
)
depreciation and amortization
deferred income taxes
(4)
1,398
share-based compensation
gain related to extinguishment of junior subordinated debt
(34)
(289)
changes in operating assets and liabilities
financial instruments owned, at fair value
(620)
6,766
(3,235
)
financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
(252)
other, net
(56)
(5,793)
net cash provided by operating activities
2,455
3,805
6,095
cash flows from investing
activities
purchase of property, leasehold improvements and equipment
(33)
(15)
(3
)
issuances of short-term loans to subsidiaries,net
(24,417)
(4,099)
(5,153
)
issuance of term loans to subsidiaries
(8,632)
(8,803)
(2,174
)
repayments of term loans by subsidiaries
24,196
3,979
7,063
capital distributions from/(contributions to) subsidiaries, net
(1,500)
net cash provided by/(used for) investing activities
(10,386)
(8,073)
cash flows from financing
activities
unsecured short-term borrowings, net
(2,684)
1,296
proceeds from issuance of long-term borrowings
42,795
37,101
28,458
repayment of long-term borrowings, including the current portion
(27,726)
(27,931)
(29,910
)
purchase of trust preferred securities and senior guaranteed trust securities
(1)
(1,801)
common stock repurchased
(4,135)
(5,469)
(6,175
)
dividends and dividend equivalents paid on common stock, preferred stock and share-based awards
(1,681)
(1,454)
(1,302
)
proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, net of issuance costs
1,993
1,980
proceeds from issuance of common stock, including exercise of share-based awards
excess tax benefit related to share-based awards
cash settlement of share-based awards
(2)
(1)
(1
)
net cash provided by/(used for) financing activities
9,225
4,293
(6,480
)
net increase in cash and cash equivalents
1,294
cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
cash and cash equivalents, end of year
$1,336
$42
$17
supplemental disclosures:
cash payments for third-party interest, net of capitalized interest, were $3.54billion, $4.31billion and $2.78billion for
2015,2014 and 2013, respectively.  cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, were $1.28billion, $2.35billion and
$3.21billion for 2015,2014 and 2013, respectively.  non-cash activity:
during 2015, group inc. exchanged $262million of trust preferred securities and common beneficial interests held by group inc. for
$296million of group inc.s junior subordinated debt held by the issuing trusts. following the exchange, this junior subordinated debt was extinguished.
during 2015, group inc. exchanged $6.12billion in financial instruments owned, at fair value, held by group inc. for $5.20billion of loans
to and $918million of equity in certain of its subsidiaries.  during 2015, group inc. repurchased $60million of its common stock for
which settlement occurred and cash was paid in 2016.  during 2014, group inc. exchanged $1.58billion of trust preferred securities, common
beneficial interests and senior guaranteed trust securities held by group inc. for $1.87billion of group inc.s junior subordinated debt held by the issuing trusts. following the exchange, this junior subordinated debt was extinguished.
1.
primarily includes overnight loans, the proceeds of which can be used to satisfy the short-term obligations of group inc.
2.
includes $4.92billion and $5.88billion at fair value for 2015 and 2014, respectively.
3.
includes $16.19billion and $11.66billion at fair value for 2015 and 2014, respectively.
4.
unsecured long-term borrowings with subsidiaries by maturity date are $2.18billion in 2017, $254million in 2018, $108million in 2019,
$217million in 2020, and $1.09billion in 2021-thereafter.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
supplemental financial information
quarterly results (unaudited)
the tables below present the firms unaudited quarterly results for 2015 and 2014. these quarterly results were prepared in accordance
with u.s. gaap and reflect all adjustments that are, in the opinion of management, necessary for a fair statement of the results. these adjustments are of a normal, recurring nature. the timing and magnitude of changes in the firms
discretionary compensation accruals (included in operating expenses) can have a significant effect on results in a given quarter.
three months ended
inmillions, except per
share data
december2015
september2015
june2015
march2015
non-interest revenues
$6,573
$6,019
$8,406
$9,758
interest income
2,148
2,119
2,150
2,035
interest expense
1,448
1,277
1,487
1,176
net interest income
net revenues, including net interest income
7,273
6,861
9,069
10,617
operating expenses
6,201
4,815
7,343
6,683
pre-tax earnings
1,072
2,046
1,726
3,934
provision for taxes
1,090
net earnings
1,426
1,048
2,844
preferred stock dividends
netearnings applicable to common shareholders
$574
$1,330
$916
$2,748
earningspercommonshare
basic
$1.28
$2.95
$2.01
$6.05
diluted
1.27
2.90
1.98
5.94
dividends declared per common share
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.60
three months ended
inmillions, except per
share data
december2014
september2014
june2014
march2014
non-interest revenues
$6,727
$7,338
$8,125
$8,291
interest income
2,134
2,297
2,579
2,594
interest expense
1,173
1,248
1,579
1,557
net interest income
1,049
1,000
1,037
net revenues, including netinterest income
7,688
8,387
9,125
9,328
operating expenses
4,478
5,082
6,304
6,307
pre-tax earnings
3,210
3,305
2,821
3,021
provision for taxes
1,044
1,064
net earnings
2,166
2,241
2,037
2,033
preferred stock dividends
net earnings applicable to common shareholders
$2,032
$2,143
$1,953
$1,949
earnings per common share
basic
$4.50
$4.69
$4.21
$4.15
diluted
4.38
4.57
4.10
4.02
dividends declared per common share
0.60
0.55
0.55
0.55
common stock price range
the table below presents the high and low sales prices per share of the firms common stock.
year ended december
high
low
high
low
high
low
first quarter
$195.73
$172.26
$181.13
$159.77
$159.00
$129.62
secondquarter
218.77
186.96
171.08
151.65
168.20
137.29
third quarter
214.61
167.49
188.58
161.53
170.00
149.28
fourth quarter
199.90
169.87
198.06
171.26
177.44
152.83
as of february5,2016, there were 9,307 holders of record of the firms common stock.
on february5,2016, the last reported sales price for the firms common stock on the new york stock exchange was
$156.47per share.  common stock performance
the following graph and table compare the performance of an investment in the firms common stock from december31,2010 (the
last trading day before the firms 2011 fiscal year) through december31,2015, with the s&p 500 index and the s&p 500 financials index. the graph and table assume $100 was invested on december31,2010 in each of
the firms common stock, the s&p 500 index and the s&p 500 financials index, and the dividends were reinvested on the date of payment without payment of any commissions. the performance shown represents past performance and should not
be considered an indication of future performance.
as of december
thegoldman sachsgroup,inc.
$100.00
$54.40
$77.99
$109.80
$121.64
$114.59
s&p500index
100.00
102.11
118.44
156.78
178.22
180.66
s&p500financialsindex
100.00
82.94
106.78
144.78
166.76
164.15
goldmansachs2015form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
supplemental financial information
selected financial data
year ended or as of december
income statement data ($ inmillions)
non-interest revenues
$30,756
$30,481
$30,814
$30,283
$23,619
interest income
8,452
9,604
10,060
11,381
13,174
interest expense
5,388
5,557
6,668
7,501
7,982
net interest income
3,064
4,047
3,392
3,880
5,192
net revenues, including net interest income
33,820
34,528
34,206
34,163
28,811
compensation and benefits
12,678
12,691
12,613
12,944
12,223
non-compensation expenses
12,364
9,480
9,856
10,012
10,419
pre-tax earnings
$8,778
$12,357
$11,737
$11,207
$6,169
balance sheet data ($ inmillions)
total assets1
$861,395
$855,842
$911,124
$938,205
$923,022
other secured financings (long-term)
10,520
7,249
7,524
8,965
8,179
unsecured long-term borrowings
175,422
167,302
160,695
167,084
173,407
total liabilities1
774,667
773,045
832,657
862,489
852,643
total shareholders equity
86,728
82,797
78,467
75,716
70,379
common share data (inmillions, except per share amounts)
earnings per common share
basic
$12.35
$17.55
$16.34
$14.63
$4.71
diluted
12.14
17.07
15.46
14.13
4.51
dividends declared per common share
2.55
2.25
2.05
1.77
1.40
book value per common share
171.03
163.01
152.48
144.67
130.31
common shares outstanding, including rsus granted to employees with no future service
requirements
441.6
451.5
467.4
480.5
516.3
average common shares outstanding
basic
448.9
458.9
471.3
496.2
524.6
diluted
458.6
473.2
499.6
516.1
556.9
selected data (unaudited)
total staff
americas
19,000
17,400
16,600
16,400
17,200
non-americas
17,800
16,600
16,300
16,000
16,100
total staff
36,800
34,000
32,900
32,400
33,300
assets under supervision ($ inbillions)
asset class
alternative investments
$148
$143
$142
$151
$148
equity
fixed income
long-term assets under supervision
liquidity products
total assets under supervision
$1,252
$1,178
$1,042
$965
$895
1.
the impact of adopting asu no.2015-03 was a reduction to both total assets and total liabilities of $398million, $383million,
$350million and $203million as of december2014, december2013, december2012 and december2011, respectively. see note3 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about asu
no.2015-03.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
supplemental financial information
statistical disclosures
distribution of assets, liabilities and shareholders equity
the table below presents a summary of consolidated average balances and interest rates. assets,
liabilities and interest are
classified as u.s. and non-u.s. based on the location of the legal entity in which the assets and liabilities are held.
year ended december
$ inmillions
averagebalance
interest
averagerate
averagebalance
interest
averagerate
averagebalance
interest
averagerate
assets
u.s.
$57,846
$141
0.24%
$53,606
$144
0.27%
$56,848
$167
0.29%
non-u.s.
5,360
0.37%
5,529
0.36%
5,073
0.37%
total deposits with banks
63,206
0.25%
59,135
0.28%
61,921
0.30%
u.s.
178,496
(376
)
(0.21)%
193,555
(514
)
(0.27)%
198,677
(289
)
(0.15)%
non-u.s.
111,168
0.35%
108,766
0.40%
129,071
0.26%
total securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds
sold
289,664
0.00%
302,321
(81
)
(0.03)%
327,748
0.01%
u.s.
150,631
4,063
2.70%
170,647
5,045
2.96%
182,158
5,353
2.94%
non-u.s.
97,152
1,779
1.83%
101,163
2,407
2.38%
110,807
2,806
2.53%
total financial instruments owned, at fair
value1
247,783
5,842
2.36%
271,810
7,452
2.74%
292,965
8,159
2.78%
u.s.
34,521
1,101
3.19%
21,459
3.03%
9,736
2.75%
non-u.s.
2,440
3.69%
6.00%
5.00%
total loans receivable
36,961
1,191
3.22%
22,425
3.16%
10,296
2.87%
u.s.
75,789
1.03%
85,811
0.95%
81,759
0.97%
non-u.s.
54,773
0.85%
54,922
1.00%
57,016
1.02%
total other interest-earning
assets2
130,562
1,248
0.96%
140,733
1,361
0.97%
138,775
1,376
0.99%
total interest-earning assets
768,176
8,452
1.10%
796,424
9,604
1.21%
831,705
10,060
1.21%
cash and due from banks
6,352
5,237
6,212
other non-interest-earning assets1
99,421
92,600
105,713
total assets3
$873,949
$894,261
$943,630
liabilities
u.s.
$73,063
$354
0.48%
$62,595
$286
0.46%
$60,699
$352
0.58%
non-u.s.
13,885
0.39%
10,569
0.44%
8,883
0.39%
total interest-bearing deposits
86,948
0.47%
73,164
0.46%
69,582
0.56%
u.s.
59,885
0.37%
79,517
0.26%
114,884
0.21%
non-u.s.
29,777
0.37%
52,394
0.43%
63,802
0.52%
total securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to repurchase
89,662
0.37%
131,911
0.33%
178,686
0.32%
u.s.
36,609
1.76%
39,708
2.09%
37,923
1.77%
non-u.s.
36,066
1.87%
42,511
2.15%
54,990
1,383
2.52%
total financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value1
72,675
1,319
1.81%
82,219
1,741
2.12%
92,913
2,054
2.21%
u.s.
42,743
0.94%
45,841
0.90%
40,511
0.90%
non-u.s.
14,447
0.19%
18,751
0.18%
20,415
0.14%
total short-term borrowings4
57,190
0.75%
64,592
0.69%
60,926
0.65%
u.s.
172,160
3,722
2.16%
164,568
3,327
2.02%
167,850
3,635
2.17%
non-u.s.
8,843
1.76%
7,201
1.85%
6,088
1.92%
total long-term borrowings4
181,003
3,878
2.14%
171,769
3,460
2.01%
173,938
3,752
2.16%
u.s.
156,248
(1,378
)
(0.88)%
153,600
(1,222
)
(0.80)%
144,888
(904
)
(0.62)%
non-u.s.
62,672
0.64%
62,311
0.59%
58,594
0.70%
total other interest-bearing
liabilities5
218,920
(976
)
(0.45)%
215,911
(855
)
(0.40)%
203,482
(495
)
(0.24)%
total interest-bearing liabilities
706,398
5,388
0.76%
739,566
5,557
0.75%
779,527
6,668
0.86%
non-interest-bearing deposits
1,986
other non-interest-bearing
liabilities1
79,251
73,057
86,095
total liabilities3
787,635
813,422
866,277
shareholders equity
preferred stock
10,585
8,585
6,892
common stock
75,729
72,254
70,461
total shareholders equity
86,314
80,839
77,353
total liabilities and shareholders equity
$873,949
$894,261
$943,630
interest rate spread
0.34%
0.46%
0.35%
u.s.
$1,748
0.35%
$2,300
0.44%
$1,934
0.37%
non-u.s.
1,316
0.49%
1,747
0.64%
1,458
0.48%
net interest income and net yield on interest-earning assets
3,064
0.40%
4,047
0.51%
3,392
0.41%
percentage of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities attributable to non-u.s. operations
assets
35.26%
34.07%
36.37%
liabilities
23.46%
26.20%
27.30%
1.
derivative instruments and commodities are included in other non-interest-earning assets and other non-interest-bearing liabilities.
2.
primarily consists of certain receivables from customers and counterparties and cash and securities segregated for regulatory and other purposes.
3.
the impact of adopting asu no.2015-03 was a reduction to both average total assets and average total liabilities of $402million and
$382million for the year ended december2014 and december2013, respectively. see note3 to the consolidated financial statements for further information about asu no.2015-03.
4.
interest rates include the effects of interest rate swaps accounted for as hedges.
5.
substantially all consists of certain payables to customers and counterparties.
goldmansachs2015form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
supplemental financial information
changes in net interest income, volume and rate analysis
the table below presents an analysis of the effect on net interest income of volume and rate
changes. in this analysis,
changes due to volume/rate variance have been allocated to volume.
year ended
december2015versusdecember2014
december2014versusdecember2013
increase (decrease)due to change in:
increase (decrease)due to change in:
$ inmillions
volume
rate
net change
volume
rate
net change
interest-earning assets
u.s.
$10
$(13
)
$(3
)
$(9
)
$(14
)
$(23
)
non-u.s.
(1
)
(1
)
total deposits with banks
(12
)
(3
)
(7
)
(15
)
(22
)
u.s.
(239
)
(225
)
non-u.s.
(55
)
(47
)
(81
)
total securities borrowed, securities purchased under agreements to resell and federal funds
sold
(67
)
(57
)
(124
)
u.s.
(540
)
(442
)
(982
)
(340
)
(308
)
non-u.s.
(73
)
(555
)
(628
)
(229
)
(170
)
(399
)
total financial instruments owned, at fair value
(613
)
(997
)
(1,610
)
(569
)
(138
)
(707
)
u.s.
non-u.s.
(22
)
total loans receivable
u.s.
(103
)
(30
)
(21
)
non-u.s.
(1
)
(82
)
(83
)
(21
)
(11
)
(32
)
total other interest-earning assets
(104
)
(9
)
(113
)
(32
)
(15
)
change in interest income
(198
)
(954
)
(1,152
)
(247
)
(209
)
(456
)
interest-bearing liabilities
u.s.
(75
)
(66
)
non-u.s.
(6
)
total interest-bearing deposits
(70
)
(54
)
u.s.
(72
)
(92
)
(36
)
non-u.s.
(83
)
(33
)
(116
)
(49
)
(60
)
(109
)
total securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to repurchase
(155
)
(101
)
(141
)
(4
)
(145
)
u.s.
(55
)
(129
)
(184
)
non-u.s.
(121
)
(117
)
(238
)
(268
)
(202
)
(470
)
total financial instruments sold, but not yet purchased, at fair value
(176
)
(246
)
(422
)
(231
)
(82
)
(313
)
u.s.
(29
)
(12
)
non-u.s.
(8
)
(6
)
(3
)
total short-term borrowings
(37
)
(18
)
u.s.
(66
)
(242
)
(308
)
non-u.s.
(6
)
(5
)
total long-term borrowings
(45
)
(247
)
(292
)
u.s.
(23
)
(133
)
(156
)
(69
)
(249
)
(318
)
non-u.s.
(64
)
(42
)
total other interest-bearing liabilities
(21
)
(100
)
(121
)
(47
)
(313
)
(360
)
change in interest expense
(132
)
(37
)
(169
)
(403
)
(708
)
(1,111
)
change in net interest income
$(66
)
$(917
)
$(983
)
$156
$499
$655
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
supplemental financial information
deposits
the table below presents a summary of the firms interest-bearing deposits.
year ended december
$ inmillions
average balances
u.s.
savings
$44,486
$41,785
$39,411
time
28,577
20,810
21,288
total u.s.
73,063
62,595
60,699
non-u.s.
demand
5,703
4,571
4,613
time
8,182
5,998
4,270
total non-u.s.
13,885
10,569
8,883
total
$86,948
$73,164
$69,582
average interest rates
u.s.
savings
0.27%
0.23%
0.30%
time
0.83%
0.91%
1.09%
total u.s.
0.48%
0.46%
0.58%
non-u.s.
demand
0.19%
0.18%
0.22%
time
0.53%
0.65%
0.59%
total non-u.s.
0.39%
0.44%
0.39%
total
0.47%
0.46%
0.56%
short-term and other borrowed funds
the table below presents a summary of the firms securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to repurchase, and short-term
borrowings. these borrowings generally mature within one year of the financial statement date and include borrowings that are redeemable at the option of the holder within one year of the financial statement date.
as of december
$ inmillions
securities loaned and securities sold under agreements to repurchase
amounts outstanding at year-end
$89,683
$93,785
$183,527
average outstanding during the year
89,662
131,911
178,686
maximum month-end outstanding
97,466
178,049
196,393
weighted average interest rate
during the year
0.37%
0.33%
0.32%
at year-end
0.39%
0.31%
0.28%
short-term borrowings
amounts outstanding at year-end1
$57,020
$60,099
$61,981
average outstanding during the year
57,190
64,592
60,926
maximum month-end outstanding
60,522
68,570
66,977
weighted average interest rate2
during the year
0.75%
0.69%
0.65%
at year-end
0.80%
0.68%
0.89%
1.
includes short-term secured financings of $14.23billion, $15.56billion and $17.29billion as of december2015, december2014 and
december2013, respectively.
2.
the weighted average interest rates for these borrowings include the effect of hedging activities.
loan portfolio
the table below presents a summary of the firms loans receivable. loans receivable are classified as u.s. and non-u.s. based on the
location of the legal entity in which such loans are held.
as of december
$ inmillions
u.s.
corporate loans
$19,909
$14,020
$6,910
$2,187
$104
loans to private wealth management clients
12,824
10,989
6,545
4,057
3,040
loans backed by commercial real estate
3,186
1,876
loans backed by residential real estate
2,187
other loans
3,495
total u.s.
41,601
28,017
14,182
6,489
3,742
non-u.s.
corporate loans
loans to private wealth management clients
1,137
loans backed by commercial real estate
2,085
loans backed by residential real estate
other loans
total non-u.s.
4,220
1,149
total loans receivable, gross
45,821
29,166
15,034
6,503
3,764
allowance for loan losses
u.s.
non-u.s.
total allowance for loan losses
total loans receivable
$45,407
$28,938
$14,895
$6,479
$3,756
allowance for loan losses
the table below presents changes in the allowance for loan losses. in the table below, provisions and allowance for loan losses primarily
relate to corporate loans and loans extended to private wealth management clients that are held in legal entities located in the u.s.
as of december
$ inmillions
allowance for loan losses
balance, beginning of period
$228
$139
$24
$8
$5
charge-offs
(1
)
(3
)
provision for loan losses
balance, end of period
$414
$228
$139
$24
$8
goldmansachs2015form10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
supplemental financial information
maturities and sensitivity to changes in interest rates
the table below presents the firms gross loans receivable by tenor and a distribution of such loans receivable between fixed and floating
interest rates.
maturities and sensitivity to changes ininterest rates as of december2015
$ inmillions
lessthan1year
1 - 5years
greaterthan 5years
total
u.s.
corporate loans
$1,382
$14,042
$4,485
$19,909
loans to private wealth management clients
9,742
3,042
12,824
loans backed by commercial real estate
2,658
3,186
loans backed by residential real estate
2,187
other loans
2,478
3,495
total u.s.
11,922
23,180
6,499
41,601
non-u.s.
corporate loans
loans to private wealth management clients
1,137
1,137
loans backed by commercial real estate
1,670
2,085
loans backed by residential real estate
other loans
total non-u.s.
1,563
2,073
4,220
total loans receivable, gross
13,485
25,253
7,083
45,821
loans at fixed interest rates
1,279
2,212
loans at variable interest rates
13,469
24,336
5,804
43,609
total loans receivable, gross
$13,485
$25,253
$7,083
$45,821
cross-border outstandings
cross-border outstandings are based on the federal financial institutions examination councils (ffiec) guidelines for reporting
cross-border information and represent the amounts that the firm may not be able to obtain from a foreign country due to country-specific events, including unfavorable economic and political conditions, economic and social instability, and changes
in government policies.  credit exposure represents the potential for loss due to the default or deterioration in credit quality of a
counterparty or an issuer of securities or other instruments the firm holds and is measured based on the potential loss in an event of non-payment by a counterparty. credit exposure is reduced through the effect of risk mitigants, such as netting
agreements with counterparties that permit the firm to offset receivables and payables with such counterparties or obtaining collateral from counterparties. the table below does not include all the effects of such risk mitigants and does not
represent the firms credit exposure.
the table below presents cross-border outstandings and commitments for each country in which
cross-border outstandings exceed 0.75% of consolidated assets in accordance with the ffiec guidelines and include cash, receivables, securities purchased under agreements to resell, securities borrowed and cash financial instruments, but exclude
derivative instruments. securities purchased under agreements to resell and securities borrowed are presented gross, without reduction for related securities collateral held. margin loans (included in receivables) are presented based on the amount
of collateral advanced by the counterparty. substantially all commitments in the tables below consist of commitments to extend credit and forward starting resale and securities borrowing agreements.
$ inmillions
banks
governments
other
total
commitments
as of december2015
cayman islands
$1
$
$39,603
$39,604
$3,046
france
5,596
2,904
23,854
32,354
4,795
japan
10,254
10,882
21,433
9,684
germany
4,072
7,652
8,481
20,205
5,008
united kingdom
2,170
11,361
13,573
15,075
italy
4,326
3,691
2,647
10,664
2,634
canada
1,173
8,290
9,716
1,404
china
2,189
6,069
8,512
as of december2014
cayman islands
$2
$
$35,829
$35,831
$2,658
france
4,730
4,932
18,261
27,923
12,214
japan
13,862
10,763
24,998
11,413
germany
5,362
4,479
10,629
20,470
4,631
united kingdom
1,870
8,821
10,973
11,755
italy
3,331
4,173
2,215
9,719
china
2,474
1,952
4,984
9,410
as of december2013
cayman islands
$12
$1
$35,969
$35,982
$1,671
japan
23,026
11,981
35,130
5,086
france
12,427
2,871
16,567
31,865
12,060
germany
5,148
4,336
7,793
17,277
4,716
spain
7,002
2,281
2,491
11,774
1,069
united kingdom
2,688
7,321
10,226
19,014
netherlands
1,785
5,786
8,111
1,962
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item9.changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial disclosure  there were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure during the last two years.  item9a.controls and procedures
as of the end of the period covered by this report, an evaluation was carried out by goldman sachs management, with the participation of
our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rule13a-15(e) under the exchange act). based upon that evaluation, our chief executive officer and chief
financial officer concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this report. in addition, no change in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in rule13a-15(f)
under the exchange act) occurred during the fourth quarter of our year ended december31,2015 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting and the report of independent registered public accounting firm are set
forth in partii, item8 of the 2015 form10-k.  item9b.other information
on february18,2016, the board of directors of the goldman sachs group, inc. (board) approved an amendment to our amended
and restated by-laws solely to specify that a group of funds that are under common management and funded primarily by a single employer or a group of investment companies as defined in the investment company act of 1940 will be
considered one eligible holder for purposes of the companys proxy access bylaw.
part iii
item10.directors, executive officers and corporate governance
information relating to our executive officers is included on page 45 of the 2015 form10-k. information relating to our directors,
including our audit committee and audit committee financial experts and the procedures by which shareholders can recommend director nominees, and our executive officers will be in our definitive proxy statement for our 2016 annual meeting of
shareholders, which will be filed within 120days of the end of 2015 (2016 proxy statement) and is incorporated herein by reference. information relating to our code of business conduct and ethics, which applies to our senior financial
officers, is included under available information in parti, item1 of the 2015 form10-k.
item11.executive compensation
information relating to our executive officer and director compensation and the compensation committee of the board will be in the 2016 proxy
statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
item12.security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters  information relating to security ownership of certain beneficial
owners of our common stock and information relating to the security ownership of our management will be in the 2016 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
the following table provides information as of december31,2015, the last day of 2015, regarding securities to be issued on exercise
of outstanding stock options or pursuant to outstanding restricted stock units and securities remaining available for issuance under our equity compensation plans that were in effect during 2015.
plan
category
numberof securitiesto be issueduponexercise
ofoutstandingoptions andrights (a)
weightedaverageexerciseprice ofoutstandingoptions (b)
number ofsecuritiesremainingavailableforfutureissuanceunder equitycompensationplans (c)
equity
compensation
plans
approvedby
securityholders
thegoldman sachsamended and restated stock incentive plan (2015)
42,572,669
$128.79
83,805,880
equity
compensation
plans not
approvedby
securityholders
none
total
42,572,669
83,805,880
in the table above:
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (2015)(2015 sip) was approved by our shareholders at our 2015 annual meeting of
shareholders. the 2015 sip replaced the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (2013) (2013 sip) previously in effect, and applies to awards granted on or after the date of approval. the 2013 sip was approved by our shareholders at
our 2013 annual meeting of shareholders and was a successor plan to the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (2003 sip). the 2003 sip was approved by our shareholders at our 2003 annual meeting of shareholders and was a successor
plan to the goldman sachs 1999 stock incentive plan (1999 sip), which was approved by our shareholders immediately prior to our initial public offering in may1999.
the number of securities to be issued upon exercise of outstanding options and rights includes: (i)14,756,275 shares of common stock that may
be issued upon exercise of outstanding options and (ii)27,816,394shares that may be issued pursuant to outstanding restricted stock units. these awards are subject to vesting and other conditions to the extent set forth in the respective
award agreements, and the underlying shares will be delivered net of any required tax withholding.
the weighted average exercise price of outstanding options relates only to the options described above. shares underlying restricted stock units
are deliverable without the payment of any consideration, and therefore these awards have not been taken into account in calculating the weighted average exercise price.
the number of securities remaining available for future issuance under equity compensation plans represents shares remaining to be issued under the
2015 sip, excluding shares reflected in column (a). if any shares of common stock underlying awards granted under the 2015 sip or 2013 sip are not delivered due to forfeiture, termination or cancellation or are surrendered or withheld, those shares
will again become available to be delivered under the 2015 sip. shares available for grant are also subject to adjustment for certain changes in corporate structure as permitted under the 2015 sip. there are no shares remaining to be issued under
the 1999 sip,2003 sip or 2013 sip other than those reflected in column (a).
item13.certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence
information regarding certain relationships and related transactions and director independence will be in the 2016 proxy statement and is
incorporated herein by reference.  item14.principal accounting fees and services
information regarding principal accounting fees and services will be in the 2016 proxy statement and is incorporated herein by
reference.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
part iv
item15. exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a) documents filed as part of this report:
1. consolidated financial statements
the consolidated financial statements required to be filed in the 2015 form10-k are included in partii, item8 hereof.
2. exhibits
2.1
plan of incorporation (incorporated by reference to the corresponding exhibit to the registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-74449)).
3.1
restated certificate of incorporation of the goldman sachs group, inc., amended as of april28,2015 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3.1 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended march31,2015).
3.2
amended and restated by-laws of the goldman sachs group, inc., amended as of february18,2016.
4.1
indenture, dated as of may19,1999, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by
reference to exhibit6 to the registrants registration statement on form8-a, filed on june29,1999).
4.2
subordinated debt indenture, dated as of february20,2004, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.2 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november28,2003).
4.3
warrant indenture, dated as of february14,2006, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.34 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.3 to form s-3, filed on march1,2006).
4.4
senior debt indenture, dated as of december4,2007, among gs finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as guarantor, and
the bank of new york, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.69 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.10 to form s-3, filed on december4,2007).
4.5
senior debt indenture, dated as of july16,2008, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york mellon, as trustee
(incorporated by reference to exhibit4.82 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.11 to form s-3 (no.333-130074), filed on july17,2008).
4.6
senior debt indenture, dated as of october10,2008, among gs finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as guarantor, and
the bank of new york mellon, as trustee (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.70 to the registrants registration statement on form s-3 (no.333-154173), filed on october10,2008).
4.7
first supplemental indenture, dated as of february20,2015, among gs finance corp., as issuer, the goldman sachs group, inc., as
guarantor, and the bank of new york mellon, as trustee, with respect to the senior debt indenture, dated as of october10,2008 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.7 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
4.8
ninth supplemental subordinated debt indenture, dated as of may20,2015, between the goldman sachs group, inc. and the bank of new york
mellon, as trustee, with respect to the subordinated debt indenture, dated as of february20,2004 (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed on may22,2015).
certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt securities of the registrant and its subsidiaries are omitted pursuant to
item 601(b)(4)(iii) of regulation s-k. the registrant hereby undertakes to furnish to the sec, upon request, copies of any such instruments.
10.1
the goldman sachs amended and restated stock incentive plan (2015) (incorporated by reference to annex b to the registrants definitive proxy
statement on schedule14a, filed on april10,2015).
10.2
the goldman sachs amended and restated restricted partner compensation plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the
registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended february24,2006).
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
10.3
form of employment agreement for participating managing directors (applicable to executive officers) (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.19 to the registrants registration statement on form s-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.4
form of agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.20 to the registrants
registration statement on form s-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.5
tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7,1999, by and among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various parties (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.25 to the registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.6
amended and restated shareholders agreement, effective as of january15,2015, among the goldman sachs group, inc. and various
parties (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.6 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.7
instrument of indemnification (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.27 to the registrants registration statement on forms-1 (no.333-75213)).
10.8
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.28 tothe registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26,1999).
10.9
form of indemnification agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.44 tothe registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended november26,1999).
10.10
form of indemnification agreement, dated as of july5,2000 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants
quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,2000).
10.11
amendment no.1, dated as of september5,2000, to the tax indemnification agreement, dated as of may7,1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.3 tothe registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,2000).
10.12
letter, dated february6,2001, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr.james a. johnson (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.65 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november24,2000).
10.13
letter, dated december18,2002, from the goldman sachs group, inc. tomr.william w. george (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.39 to theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november29,2002).
10.14
form of amendment, dated november27,2004, to agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated may7,1999
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.32 to theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended
november26,2004).
10.15
the goldman sachs group, inc. non-qualified deferred compensation plan for u.s. participating managing directors (terminated as of
december15,2008) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.36 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november30,2007).
10.16
form of year-end option award agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.36 to theregistrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended november28,2008).
10.17
amendments to 2005 and 2006year-end rsu and option award agreements (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.44 to
theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november30,2007).
10.18
form of non-employee director option award agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.34 to theregistrants annual report
on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2009).
10.19
form of non-employee director rsu award agreement (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.21 to theregistrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.20
ground lease, dated august23,2005, between battery park city authority d/b/a/ hugh l. carey battery park city authority, as landlord,
and goldman sachs headquarters llc, as tenant (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to theregistrants current report on form8-k, filed on august26,2005).
10.21
general guarantee agreement, dated january30,2006, made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to certain obligations of goldman,
sachs & co. (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.45 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november25,2005).
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
10.22
goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance policy and certificate with metropolitan life insurance company for participating managing
directors (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended
august25,2006).
10.23
form of goldman, sachs & co. executive life insurance policy with pacific life & annuity company for participating managing directors,
including policy specifications and form of restriction on policy owners rights (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended august25,2006).
10.24
form of second amendment, dated november25,2006, to agreement relating to noncompetition and other covenants, dated
may7,1999, as amended effective november27,2004 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.51 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november24,2006).
10.25
description of pmd retiree medical program (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.2 to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended february29,2008).
10.26
letter, dated june28,2008, from the goldman sachs group, inc. to mr. lakshmi n. mittal (incorporated by reference to exhibit99.1
to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed on june30,2008).
10.27
general guarantee agreement, dated december1,2008, made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to certain obligations of goldman
sachs bank usa (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.80 to the registrants post-effective amendment no.2 to forms-3, filed on march19,2009).
10.28
guarantee agreement, dated november28,2008 and amended effective as of january1,2010, between the goldman sachs group, inc.
and goldman sachs bank usa (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.51 to the registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2009).
10.29
form of one-time rsu award agreement (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.32 to theregistrants annual report on
form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.30
amendments to certain non-employee director equity award agreements (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.69 to the registrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended november28,2008).
10.31
form of year-end rsu award agreement (not fully vested) (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.36 to theregistrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.32
form of year-end rsu award agreement (fully vested) (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.37 to theregistrants
annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.33
form of year-end rsu award agreement (base and/or supplemental) (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.38 to
theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.34
form of year-end short-term rsu award agreement (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.39 to theregistrants annual
report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.35
form of year-end restricted stock award agreement (fully vested) (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.41 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2013).
10.36
form of year-end restricted stock award agreement (base and/or supplemental) (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.41 to
theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.37
form of year-end short-term restricted stock award agreement (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.42 to
theregistrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.38
form of fixed allowance rsu award agreement (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.43 to theregistrants annual report
on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.39
general guarantee agreement, dated march2,2010, made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to the obligations of goldman sachs
execution & clearing, l.p. (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q for the period ended march31,2010).
10.40
form of deed of gift (incorporated by reference to the registrants quarterly report on form10-q
for the period ended june30,2010).
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
the goldman sachs group, inc. and subsidiaries
10.41
the goldman sachs long-term performance incentive plan, dated december17,2010 (incorporated by reference to the registrants
current report on form8-k, filed on december23,2010).
10.42
form of performance-based restricted stock unit award agreement (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed on december23,2010).
10.43
form of performance-based option award agreement (incorporated by reference to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed on
december23,2010).
10.44
form of performance-based cash compensation award agreement (pre-2015) (incorporated by reference to the registrants current report on
form8-k, filed on december23,2010).
10.45
amended and restated general guarantee agreement, dated november21,2011, made by the goldman sachs group, inc. relating to certain
obligations of goldman sachs bank usa (incorporated by reference to exhibit4.1 to the registrants current report on form8-k, filed on november21,2011).
10.46
form of aircraft time sharing agreement (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.61 to the registrants annual report on form10-k
for the fiscal year ended december31,2011).
10.47
description of compensation arrangements with executive officer (incorporated by reference to the registrants quarterly report on
form10-q for the period ended june30,2012).
10.48
the goldman sachs group, inc. clawback policy, effective as of january1,2015 (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.53 to the
registrants annual report on form10-k for the fiscal year ended december31,2014).
10.49
form of non-employee director rsu award
agreement.
10.50
form of one-time rsu award agreement.
10.51
form of year-end rsu award agreement (not fully
vested).
10.52
form of year-end rsu award agreement (fully
vested).
10.53
form of year-end rsu award agreement (base and/or
supplemental).
10.54
form of year-end short-term rsu award
agreement.
10.55
form of year-end restricted stock award agreement (not fully vested).
10.56
form of year-end restricted stock award agreement (fully
vested).
10.57
form of year-end short-term restricted stock award
agreement.
10.58
form of fixed allowance rsu award agreement.
10.59
form of fixed allowance deferred cash award
agreement.
10.60
form of performance-based restricted stock unit award
agreement.
10.61
form of performance-based cash compensation award
agreement.
10.62
form of signature card for equity awards.
12.1
statement re: computation of ratios of earnings to fixed charges and ratios of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends.
21.1
list of significant subsidiaries of the goldman sachs group, inc.
23.1
consent of independent registered public accounting firm.
31.1
rule13a-14(a) certifications.
32.1
section 1350 certifications.*
99.1
report of independent registered public accounting firm on selected financial data.
99.2
debt and trust securities registered under section 12(b) of the exchange act.
interactive data files pursuant to rule405 of regulation s-t: (i) the consolidated statements of
earnings for the years ended december31,2015, december31,2014 and december31,2013, (ii) the consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the years ended december31,2015,
december31,2014 and december31,2013, (iii) the consolidated statements of financial condition as of december31,2015 and december31,2014, (iv) the consolidated statements of changes in
shareholders equity for the years ended december31,2015, december31,2014 and december31,2013, (v) the consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended december31,2015,
december31,2014 and december31,2013, and (vi) the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
this exhibit is a management contract or a compensatory plan or
arrangement.
*this information is furnished and not filed for purposes of sections11 and 12 of the
securities act of 1933 and section18 of the securities exchange act of1934.
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to
be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
the goldman sachs group, inc.
by:
/s/
harvey m. schwartz
name:
harvey m. schwartz
title:
chief financial officer
date: february19,2016
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of
the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
capacity
date
/s/lloyd c. blankfein
lloyd c. blankfein
director, chairman and chief executive officer (principal executive officer)
february19,2016
/s/m. michele
burns m. michele burns
director
february19,2016
/s/gary d.
cohn gary d. cohn
director
february19,2016
/s/mark a.
flaherty mark a. flaherty
director
february19,2016
/s/william w.
george william w. george
director
february19,2016
/s/james a.
johnson james a. johnson
director
february19,2016
/s/lakshmi n.
mittal lakshmi n. mittal
director
february19,2016
/s/adebayo o.
ogunlesi adebayo o. ogunlesi
director
february19,2016
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
ii-1
table of contents
/s/peter
oppenheimer peter oppenheimer
director
february19,2016
/s/debora l.
spar debora l. spar
director
february19,2016
/s/mark e.
tucker mark e. tucker
director
february19,2016
/s/david a.
viniar david a. viniar
director
february19,2016
/s/mark o.
winkelman mark o. winkelman
director
february19,2016
/s/harvey m. schwartz
harvey m. schwartz
chief financial officer(principal financial officer)
february19,2016
/s/sarah e.
smith sarah e. smith
principal accounting officer
february19,2016
ii-2
goldmansachs2015form 10-k
