10-k
annualreport.htm
annual report on form 10-k
annual report on form 10-k
united
states
securities
and exchange commission
washington,
d.c. 20549
________________
form
10-k
[x]annual
report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended
january 30, 2005
or
[_]transition
report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
commission
file number: 0-23985
nvidia
corporation
(exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
94-3177549
(state
or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s.
employer
incorporation
or organization)
identification
no.)
san tomas expressway
santa
clara, california 95050
(408)
486-2000
(address,
including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of principal
executive offices)
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
none
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act:
common
stock, $.001 par value per share
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be
filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months, and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days.yesxno o
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulation s-k is not contained herein and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this
form 10-k. o
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in the
exchange rule 12b-2) yes xno o
the
aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the
registrant as of july 23, 2004 was approximately $1,958,779,998 (based on the
closing sales price of the registrants common stock on july 23, 2004). shares
of common stock held by each current executive officer and director and by each
person who is known by the registrant to own 5% or more of the outstanding
common stock have been excluded from this computation in that such persons may
be deemed to be affiliates of the registrant. share ownership information of
certain persons known by the registrant to own greater than 5% of the
outstanding common stock for purposes of the preceding calculation is based
solely on information on schedule 13g filed with the commission and is as of
july 23, 2004. this determination of affiliate status is not a conclusive
determination for other purposes.
the
number of shares of common stock outstanding as of march 4, 2005 was
169,926,282.
documents
incorporated by reference
the
registrant has incorporated by reference portions of its proxy statement for its
2005 annual meeting of stockholders to be filed by may 31, 2005.
nvidia
corporation
table
of contents
page
part
i
item
1.
business
item
2.
properties
item
3.
legal
proceedings
item
4.
submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
part
ii
item
5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer
repurchases of equity securities
item
6.
selected
financial data
item
7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item
7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
item
8.
consolidated
financial statements and supplementary data
item
9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item
9a.
controls
and procedures
item
9b.
other
information
part
iii
item
10.
directors
and executive officers of the registrant
item
11.
executive
compensation
item
12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
item
13.
certain
relationships and related transactions
item
14.
principal
accounting fees and services
part
iv
item
15.
exhibits,
financial statement schedules
signatures
part
i
item
1. business
forward-looking
statements
when
used in this annual report on form 10-k (the report), the words believes,
plans, estimates, anticipates, expects, intends, allows, can,
will and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking
statements. these are statements that relate to future periods and include
statements relating to our corporate strategies, the features, capabilities,
performance, benefits, production and availability of our products and
technologies, our license with intel
corporation, the anticipated date of shipments of intel corporation-based mcp
products, the importance of design wins, the importance and benefits of certain
relationships, our employees, market share, our research and development, our
backlog, seasonality of our products, our expectations regarding competition and
our competitive position, development of new products, entry into new product
segments, intellectual property, intellectual property litigation, payment of
dividends, sufficiency of our facilities, revenue, revenue mix, taxes,
evaluation of repatriation of foreign earnings, pci express, our gross margin,
inventories, product life cycles, average selling prices, our wmp business,
acceptance of our technology and products, our critical accounting policies,
xbox revenue, expenses, mix of expenses, capital expenditures, cash balances,
results of operations, currency exchange rates, the impact of recent accounting
pronouncements, business acquisitions, and our reliance on a limited number of
customers. forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties
that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. these
risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, those risks discussed
below and under item 7, managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations-business risks, as well as
unanticipated decreases in average selling prices of a particular product, our
inability to decrease inventory purchase commitments in a meaningful time frame,
reduction in demand for or market acceptance of our products or our customers
products, defects in our products, the impact of competitive pricing pressure,
new product announcements or introductions by our competitors, disruptions in
our relationships with taiwan semiconductor manufacturing company, united
microelectronics corporation, international business machines corporation,
chartered semiconductor manufacturing, and other key suppliers, fluctuations in
general economic conditions, failure to achieve design wins, the seasonality of
the pc and our other product segments, international and political conditions,
the concentration of sales of our products to a limited number of customers,
unforeseen reductions in demand for our products, our ability to safeguard our
intellectual property, delays in the development of new products, delays in
volume production of our products, and developments in and expenses related to
litigation. these forward-looking statements speak only as of the date hereof.
we expressly disclaim any obligation or undertaking to release publicly any
updates or revisions to any forward-looking statements contained herein to
reflect any change in our expectations with regard thereto or any change in
events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statement is based.
in
the sections of this report entitled business  and managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operation all references to
nvidia, we, us, our or the company mean nvidia corporation and its
subsidiaries, except where it is made clear that the term means only the parent
company.
nvidia,
geforce, sli, goforce, nvidia quadro, nvidia nforce, turbocache, purevideo and
the nvidia logo are our trademarks or registered trademarks in the united states
and other countries that are used in this document. we also refer to trademarks
of other corporations and organizations in this document.
overview
nvidia
corporation is a worldwide leader in graphics and digital media processors
dedicated to creating products that enhance the interactive experience on
consumer and professional computing platforms. we design, develop and market
graphics processing units, or gpus, media and communications processors, or
mcps, wireless media processors, or wmps, and related software. our products are
integral to a wide variety of visual computing platforms, including enterprise
personal computers, or pcs, consumer pcs, professional workstations, notebook
pcs, personal digital assistants, cellular phones, game consoles and digital
media centers. we were incorporated in california in april 1993 and
reincorporated in delaware in april 1998. our objective is to be one of the most
important and influential technology companies in the world.
original
equipment manufacturers, or oems, original design manufacturers, or odms,
add-in-card manufacturers, system builders and consumer electronics companies
worldwide utilize nvidia digital media processors as a core component of their
entertainment and business solutions. our award-winning gpus deliver superior
performance and crisp visual quality for pc-based applications such as
manufacturing, science, e-business, entertainment and education. our
critically-acclaimed mcps perform highly demanding multimedia processing for
secure broadband connectivity, communications and breakthrough audio
capabilities. our wmps deliver a great visual experience by accelerating
graphics and video applications while implementing design techniques that result
in high performance and ultra-low power consumption.
industry
environment and our business
gpu
business
programmable
directx 9 shader model 3.0 gpus.
the
combination of the programmable gpu with microsoft corporations, or
microsofts, directx 9 high-level shading language are known as directx 9 gpus.
the flexibility and power of directx 9 gpus can enhance high-definition digital
video, image processing and editing for digital photographs, as well as bring a
cinematic look to computer graphics. technology and market leadership in this
generation of gpus is a key element of our corporate strategy. in fiscal 2005,
our strategy was to regain architectural and technology leadership by leading
the industry with the first gpu to support directx 9 shader model 3.0 - the
geforce 6 series of gpus. beginning with the geforce 6800 for the enthusiast
desktop segment, we introduced a complete family of geforce 6 gpus, including
the geforce 6600 for the performance segment and geforce 6200 for the mainstream
segment. driven by next generation games such as id softwares doom 3 and valve
softwares half-life 2, consumer awareness and demand grew for our geforce 6
family throughout our fiscal year. the geforce 6 architecture is also the
foundation for our most current notebook and workstation gpu families.
mcp
business
mcps. the
nvidia nforce family of products represents our mcps for advanced micro devices,
inc., or amd,-based desktop, notebook, workstation pcs and servers. the
nvidia nforce architecture is also the foundation for our chipset that we sell
to microsoft for the microsoft xbox gaming console. to date, the nvidia nforce
family of mcps has received hundreds of editorial recommendations, including
more than 50 prestigious editors choice awards. nvidia nforce2 products are
designed to offer best-in-class performance and feature rich media and
communications support for amd sempron platforms. nvidia nforce3
products, which consist of the nvidia nforce3, nvidia nforce3 professional and
nvidia nforce3 go, are designed to complement the latest 64-bit cpus while
delivering innovative technologies for networking, storage and system
performance. in
october 2004, we introduced the nvidia nforce4 mcp, a new family of performance
pci express mcps for amd64 computing environments. in january 2005, we
introduced the nvidia nforce professional mcp family, the industrys only
pci-express core-logic solutions for amd opteron processor-based server and
workstation platforms. the nvidia nforce3, nvidia nforce4 and nvidia nforce
professional families are designed to provide high-speed system performance,
unparalleled secure networking and advanced storage solutions for amd64-based
desktop, workstation and server platforms. on november 19, 2004, we announced a
broad, multi-year cross-license agreement with intel corporation, or intel. the
agreement spans multiple product lines and product generations, and includes a
multi-year chipset agreement that grants us a license to implement intels
front-side bus technology. we
believe that this agreement opens a significant opportunity for us to bring our
nvidia nforce brand to the intel segment. we expect to commence shipments of our
first intel-based mcp product during the first quarter of fiscal
2006.
wmp
business
wmps. since
our acquisition of mediaq in fiscal 2004, our nvidia goforce wmp family has
grown to include six new wmps, including the goforce3d 4800, goforce3d 4500,
goforce 4000, goforce 3000, goforce 2150 and goforce 2000. the goal of every
device in the nvidia goforce product family is to provide a high-performance,
visually rich multimedia experience on cellular phones and handheld devices.
these products deliver a great visual experience by accelerating graphics and
video applications, while supporting the most demanded features and
capabilities. goforce media processors implement innovative design techniques,
both inside the chips and at the system level, resulting in high performance and
long battery life. these technologies enhance visual display capabilities,
improve connectivity and minimize chip and system-level power consumption. with
innovative technologies, such as ultra-low power digital media processors, we
believe future cellular phones will be able to receive television programs,
record digital video like a camcorder, enable video phone calls and be a
portable game player. we see an exciting opportunity to use our resources and
expertise in digital media processing to offer products for the multimedia
handset era.
our
products
we have
three major product groups: gpus, mcps and wmps. our gpu and mcp product lines
are primarily incorporated into traditional consumer and professional computing
platforms, including consumer pcs, notebook pcs, workstations, servers and video
game consoles. our wmp product line is primarily incorporated into
multimedia-rich cellular phones. each of our product lines is designed to
provide the advanced processing of a combination of graphics and high-definition
video, audio, communications, networking security and storage. our products are
designed to support and deliver the maximum performance for the most current
standards as determined by each industry segment, and to provide a comprehensive
set of features that enhance the overall operation and compatibility of each
platform they support.
gpus.our gpu
products support desktop pcs, notebook pcs and professional workstations. we
have three major families of gpus: geforce, go and nvidia quadro.
geforce. the
geforce family represents our desktop gpus and includes the geforce 6, geforce
fx and geforce4 families. our most advanced gpu family is the geforce 6 series.
introduced in july 2004, the geforce 6 architecture is our second generation
fully programmable cinematic gpu and is our first gpu to support the microsoft
directx 9 shader model 3.0 standard. our geforce 6800 ultra gpu is one of the
semiconductor industrys most complex application specific integrated circuits,
or asics. the geforce 6800 ultra gpu contains over 230 million transistors and
is the industrys only mainstream gpu to incorporate 32-bit floating-point
precision. the geforce 6800 class of gpus is designed for the enthusiast
consumer segment. in august 2004, we introduced the geforce 6600 gpu, which is
designed for the performance consumer segment, and in october 2004, we
introduced the geforce 6200 gpu, which is designed for the mainstream consumer
segment. in
december 2004, we launched our geforce 6200 gpu with turbocache technology.
turbocache technology is a new, patent pending hardware and software technology
that we believe is redefining the price/performance metrics for mainstream pcs.
turbocache technology allows the gpu to render directly to system memory instead
of using local frame buffer memory on the graphics card, thereby lowering
on-board memory requirements and enabling oems and system builders to deliver
entry-level pcs with advanced gpu features and performance levels far superior
to those of integrated graphics. the
geforcefx and geforce4 currently deliver a balance of performance and features
for the mainstream accelerated graphics port-based, or agp-based, pc
segments.
geforce
go and nvidia quadro go. the
geforce go and nvidia quadro go families represent our notebook gpus and include
the geforce 6 go, geforce fx go, geforce4 go, nvidia quadrofx go and nvidia
quadro4 go gpus. these gpus are designed to deliver desktop graphics performance
and features for multiple notebook configurations from desktop replacements,
multimedia notebooks and thin-and-lights to mobile workstations. the geforce go
products are designed to serve the needs of both corporate and consumer users.
the nvidia quadro go products are designed to serve the needs of workstation
professionals in the area of product design and digital content creation.
nvidia
quadro. the
nvidia quadro branded products are robust, high-performance workstation
solutions for the professional user that are available for the high-end,
mid-range, entry-level and multi-display product lines. the nvidia quadro
family, which consists of the nvidia quadro fx, nvidia quadro4 and the nvidia
quadro nvs workstation solutions are designed to meet the needs of a number of
workstation applications such as industrial product design, digital content
creation, non-linear video editing, scientific and medical visualization,
general purpose business and financial trading. nvidia quadro products are fully
certified by several software developers for all professional workstation
applications, and are designed to deliver the graphics performance and precision
required by professional applications.
other. in
addition to the production launch of the geforce 6 family during fiscal 2005, we
also introduced a number of technology initiatives that are designed to extend
the reach of our gpus and expand the reach of the pc. we
created the industry-standard mobile pci-express module, or mxm, notebook gpu
module, which is designed to enable faster adoption of gpus in notebooks. we
invented scalable link interface, or sli, which brought extreme multi-gpu
graphics to enthusiasts and enabled a new class of pcs called gaming
supercomputers. purevideo technology is the pc industrys first programmable
video architecture and brings consumer electronics quality video to pcs.
turbocache technology introduced the first frame buffer-less gpu, making modern
gpus more affordable as they are burdened with less dynamic random-access memory
cost. each of these innovations are industry firsts and have
received industry-wide support and acclaim.
mcps.
our mcp
product family, known as nvidia nforce, supports desktop pcs, notebook pcs,
professional workstations and servers. we also provide a derivative of the
nvidia nforce2 chipset for the microsoft xbox video game console.
nvidia
nforce. the
nvidia nforce family represents our mcps for amd-based desktop pcs, notebook
pcs, workstations and servers includes the nvidia nforce2, nvidia nforce3,
nvidia nforce4 and nvidia nforce professional. we define a mcp as a single-chip
or chipset that can off-load system functions, such as audio processing and
network communications, and perform these operations independently from the host
central processing unit, or cpu. the nvidia nforce2 integrates a comprehensive
set of multimedia capabilities, such as two-dimensional, or 2d,
three-dimensional, or 3d, digital video disc, or dvd, high-definition
television, or hdtv, dolby digital audio playback and fast broadband and
networking communications. nvidia nforce2 is a two-chip solution, which includes
either a system platform processor, or spp, or an integrated graphics processor,
or igp, combined with a mcp. the nvidia nforce2 family is designed to be
compatible with amds sempron microprocessors. the nvidia nforce2 configuration
is determined by the oem or system builder. the nvidia nforce3 and nvidia
nforce4 families are single-chip mcps, designed to be compatible with amd64 and
opteron 64-bit cpus. the nvidia nforce3 products which consist of the nvidia
nforce3, nvidia nforce3 professional and nvidia nforce3 go, are designed to
complement the latest 64-bit cpus while delivering innovative technologies for
networking, storage and system performance. nvidia nforce4 products, which
consist of nvidia nforce4 and nvidia nforce4 professional, are designed to
provide sli and pci express support for amd64 and opteron-based platforms.
xbox.
our xbox
platform processor supports microsofts xbox video game console.the xbox
platform processor features dual-processing architecture, which includes our gpu
designed specifically for the xbox, or xgpu, and our mcp to power the xboxs
standout graphics, audio and networking capabilities. the xgpu is a programmable
3d processor that contains more that 60 million transistors. the mcp is based on
two powerful digital signal processors with 4 billion operations per second
dedicated to 3d audio and network processing. the mcp performs the processing
for the broadband networking functions and high-speed peripherals.
wmps.
our wmp
product family, known as goforce, supports handheld personal digital assistants,
or pdas, and cellular phones.
goforce.
the
goforce family represents our wmps for a wide range of cellular and handheld
devices. the goforce 2100 and 2150 are two of the first wmps to offer hardware
acceleration engines for 2d graphics to manufacturers that support liquid
crystal display, or lcd, screen resolutions up to 320 x 240 pixels. the goforce
3000 and 4000 offer a host of advanced features for cellular phones and pdas,
including support for up to 3-megapixel image capture, accelerated graphics for
gaming, and motion joint photographic experts group, or jpeg, capture and
playback. our goforce 3d 4000, 4500 and 4800 wmps are the first to provide
programmable 3d shaders, along with high-quality multi-megapixel still image and
video processing in a single-chip package. using dedicated hardware accelerator
engines, the goforce family delivers high performance multimedia applications
and drives high-resolution displays, while extending handheld battery life
through a variety of unique power management techniques.
our
strategy
we design
our gpus, mcps and wmps to enable our universe of pc oems, odms, system
builders, motherboard and add-in board manufacturers, and cellular phone and
consumer electronics oems, to build award-winning products by delivering
state-of-the-art features, performance, compatibility and power efficiency while
maintaining competitive prices. we believe that by developing 3d graphics,
high-definition video and media communications solutions that provide superior
performance and address the key requirements of each of the product segments we
serve, we will accelerate the adoption of high-definition digital media
platforms and devices throughout these segments. we combine scalable
architectural technology with mass market economies-of-scale to deliver a
complete family of products that spans performance workstations to consumer pcs
to mulitmedia-rich cellular phones.
our
objective is to be the leading supplier of performance gpus, mcps and wmps for a
broad range of desktop pcs, workstations, notebooks, video game consoles,
internet appliances, handhelds and any future computing device with a display.
our current focus is on the desktop pc, workstation, notebook pc, servers,
mulitmedia-rich cellular phones and video game console product lines, and we
plan to expand into other product lines. our strategy to achieve this objective
includes the following key elements:
build
award-winning, architecturally-compatible 3d graphics, high-definition video,
media communications and ultra-low power product families for the pc, handheld
and digital entertainment platforms.our
strategy is to achieve market share leadership in these platforms by providing
award-winning performance at every price point. by developing 3d graphics,
high-definition video and media communications solutions that provide superior
performance and address the key requirements of these platforms, we believe that
we will accelerate the adoption of 3d graphics and rich digital media.
target
leading oems, odms and system builders.our
strategy is to enable our leading pc, handheld and consumer electronics oems,
odms and major system builder customers to differentiate their products in a
highly competitive marketplace by using our digital media processors. we believe
that design wins with these industry leaders provide market validation of our
products, increase brand awareness and enhance our ability to penetrate
additional leading customer accounts. in addition, we believe that close
relationships with oems and odms will allow us to better anticipate and address
customer needs with future generations of our products.
sustain
technology and product leadership in 3d graphics and high-definition video, and
media communications and ultra-low power.we
are focused on using our advanced engineering capabilities to accelerate the
quality and performance of 3d graphics and high-definition video, media
communications and ultra-low power processing in pcs and handheld devices. a
fundamental aspect of our strategy is to actively recruit the best 3d graphics
and high-definition video, networking and communications engineers in the
industry, and we believe that we have assembled an exceptionally experienced and
talented engineering team. our research and development strategy is to focus on
concurrently developing multiple generations of gpus, mcps and wmps using
independent design teams. as we have in the past, we intend to use this strategy
to achieve new levels of graphics, networking and communications features and
performance and ultra-low power designs, enabling our customers to achieve
award-winning performance in their products.
increase
market share.we
believe that substantial market share will be important to achieving success. we
intend to achieve a leading share of the market by devoting substantial
resources to building award-winning families of products for a wide range of
applications.
use
our expertise in digital multimedia.we
believe the synergy created by the combination of 3d graphics and
high-definition video and the internet will fundamentally change the way people
work, learn, communicate and play. we believe that our expertise in
high-definition graphics and system architecture positions us to help drive this
transformation. we are using our expertise in the processing and transmission of
high-bandwidth digital media to develop products designed to address the
requirements of high-bandwidth concurrent multimedia.
sales
and marketing
our
worldwide sales and marketing strategy is a key part of our objective to become
the leading supplier of performance gpus, mcps and wmps for pcs, handheld
devices and consumer electronics platforms. our sales and marketing teams work
closely with each industrys respective oems, odms, system integrators,
motherboard manufacturers, add-in board manufacturers and industry trendsetters,
collectively our channel, to define product features, performance, price and
timing of new products. members of our sales team have a high level of technical
expertise and product and industry knowledge to support a competitive and
complex design win process. we also employ a highly skilled team of application
engineers to assist the channel in designing, testing and qualifying system
designs that incorporate our products. we believe that the depth and quality of
our design support are key to improving the channels time-to-market,
maintaining a high level of customer satisfaction within the channel and
fostering relationships that encourage customers to use the next generation of
our products.
in the
gpu and mcp segments we serve, the sales process involves achieving key design
wins with leading oems and major system integrators and supporting the product
design into high volume production with key odms, motherboard manufacturers and
add-in board manufacturers. these design wins in turn influence the retail and
system integrator channel that is serviced by add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers. our distribution strategy is to work with a number of leading
independent contract equipment manufacturers, or cems, odms, motherboard
manufacturers, add-in board manufacturers and distributors each of which has
relationships with a broad range of major oems and/or strong brand name
recognition in the retail channel. in the wmp segments we serve, the sales
process primarily involves achieving key design wins directly with the leading
handheld oems and supporting the product design into high-volume production.
currently, we sell a significant majority of our digital media processors
directly to distributors, cems, odms, motherboard manufacturers and add-in board
manufacturers, which then sell boards and systems with our products to leading
oems, retail outlets and to a large number of system integrators. although a
small number of our customers represent the majority of our revenue, their end
customers include a large number of oems and system integrators throughout the
world.
as a
result of our channel strategy, our sales are focused on a small number of
customers. sales to edom technology co., ltd., or edom, accounted for 18% and
sales to microsoft accounted for 13% of our total revenue for fiscal 2005. edom
is an independent distributor.
to
encourage software title developers and publishers to develop games optimized
for platforms utilizing our products, we seek to establish and maintain strong
relationships in the software development community. engineering and marketing
personnel interact with and visit key software developers to promote and discuss
our products, as well as to ascertain product requirements and solve technical
problems. our developer program makes products available to developers prior to
volume availability in order to encourage the development of software titles
that are optimized for our products.
backlog
our sales
are primarily made pursuant to standard purchase orders. the quantity of
products purchased by our customers as well as shipment schedules are subject to
revisions that reflect changes in both the customers requirements and in
manufacturing availability. the semiconductor industry is characterized by short
lead time orders and quick delivery schedules. in light of industry practice and
experience, we believe that only a small portion of our backlog is
non-cancelable and that the dollar amount associated with the non-cancelable
portion is not significant. we do not believe that a backlog as of any
particular date is indicative of future results.
seasonality
our
industry is largely focused on the consumer products market. due to the
seasonality in this market, we typically expect to see stronger revenue growth
in the second half of the calendar year related to the back-to-school and
holiday seasons.
manufacturing
we do not
directly manufacture semiconductor wafers used for our products. instead we
utilize what is known as a fabless manufacturing strategy for all product-line
operating segments whereby we employ world-class suppliers for all phases of the
manufacturing process, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and
packaging. this strategy uses the expertise of industry-leading suppliers that
are certified by the international organization for standardization, or iso, in
such areas as fabrication, assembly, quality control and assurance, reliability
and testing. in addition, this strategy allows us to avoid many of the
significant costs and risks associated with owning and operating manufacturing
operations. our suppliers are also responsible for procurement of most of the
raw materials used in the production of our products. as a result, we can focus
our resources on product design, additional quality assurance, marketing and
customer support.
we
utilize taiwan semiconductor manufacturing corporation, or tsmc, international
business machines corporation, or ibm,
chartered semiconductor manufacturing, or chartered, and united microelectronics
corporation, or umc, to produce our semiconductor wafers. we then utilize
independent subcontractors to perform assembly, testing and packaging of our
products.
our gpus,
mcps and wmps are assembled, tested and packaged by advanced semiconductor
engineering, amkor technology, stats chippac incorporated and siliconware
precision industries company ltd. we receive semiconductor products from our
subcontractors, perform incoming quality assurance and then ship them to cems,
distributors, motherboard and add-in board manufacturer customers from our santa
clara, california warehouse and third-party warehouse in hong kong. generally,
these manufacturers assemble and test the boards based on our design kit and
test specifications, and then ship the products to retailers, system integrators
or oems as motherboard and add-in board solutions.
inventory
and working capital
our management focuses considerable attention on managing our inventories and
other working-capital-related items. we manage inventories by communicating with
our customers and then using our industry experience to forecast demand on a
product-by-product basis. we then place manufacturing orders for our products
that are based on this forecasted demand.
the
quantity of products actually purchased by our customers as well as shipment
schedules are subject to revisions that reflect changes in both the customers
requirements and in manufacturing availability. we
generally maintain substantial inventories of our products because the
semiconductor industry is characterized by short lead time orders and quick
delivery schedules.
research
and development
we
believe that the continued introduction of new and enhanced products designed to
deliver leading 3d graphics, high definition video, audio, ultra-low power
communications, storage, and secure networking performance and features is
essential to our future success. our research and development strategy is to
focus on concurrently developing multiple generations of gpus, mcps and wmps
using independent design teams. our research and development efforts are
performed within specialized groups consisting of software engineering, hardware
engineering, very large scale integration, or vlsi, design engineering, process
engineering, architecture and algorithms. these groups act as a pipeline
designed to allow the efficient simultaneous development of multiple generations
of products.
a
critical component of our product development effort is our partnerships with
leaders in the computer aided design, or cad, industry. we invest significant
resources in the development of relationships with industry leaders, including
cadence design systems, inc., and synopsys, inc., often assisting these
companies in the product definition of their new products. we believe that
forming these relationships and utilizing next-generation development tools to
design, simulate and verify our products will help us remain at the forefront of
the 3d graphics market and develop products that utilize leading-edge technology
on a rapid basis. we believe this approach assists us in meeting the new design
schedules of pc manufacturers.
we have
substantially increased our engineering and technical resources from fiscal
2004, and have 1,231 full-time employees engaged in research and development as
of january 30, 2005, compared to 1,057 employees as of january 25, 2004. during
fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, we incurred research and development expenditures of
$335.1 million, $270.0million and $224.9 million, respectively.
competition
the
market for gpus, mcps and wmps for pcs, handhelds and consumer electronics is
intensely competitive and is characterized by rapid technological change,
evolving industry standards and declining average selling prices. we believe
that the principal competitive factors in this market are performance, breadth
of product offerings, access to customers and distribution channels,
backward-forward software support, conformity to industry standard apis,
manufacturing capabilities, price of digital media processors and total system
costs of add-in boards or motherboards. we expect competition to increase both
from existing competitors and new market entrants with products that may be less
costly than ours, or may provide better performance or additional features not
provided by our products. in addition, it is possible that new competitors or
alliances among competitors could emerge and acquire significant market
share.
we expect
substantial competition from intels publicized focus on moving to selling
platform solutions dominated by intel products, such as the centrino platform.
an additional significant source of competition is from companies that provide
or intend to provide gpu, mcp and wmp solutions for the pc, consumer electronics
and handheld segments. our competitors include the following:
suppliers
of mcps that incorporate a combination of 3d graphics, networking, audio,
communications and input/output, or i/o, functionality as part of their
existing solutions, such as ati technologies, inc., or ati, broadcom
corporation, or broadcom, intel, silicon integrated systems, inc. and via
technologies, inc., or via;
suppliers
of standalone desktop gpus that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as
part of their existing solutions, such as ati, creative technology, matrox
electronics systems ltd. and xgi technology,
inc.;
suppliers
of standalone notebook gpus that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as
part of their existing solutions, such as ati, silicon motion corporation,
and the joint venture formed by sonicblue incorporated (formerly s3
incorporated) and via; and
suppliers
of wmps for handheld devices that incorporate advanced graphics
functionality as part of their existing solutions, such as ati, renesas
technology, broadcom and seiko-epson.
if and to
the extent we offer products outside of the pc, consumer electronics and
handheld segments, we may face competition from some of our existing
competitors, as well as from companies with which we currently do not compete.
we cannot accurately predict if we will compete successfully in any new segments
we may enter.
patents
and proprietary rights
we rely
primarily on a combination of patents, trademarks, trade secrets, employee and
third-party nondisclosure agreements and licensing arrangements to protect our
intellectual property in the united states and internationally. our issued
patents have expiration dates from september 4, 2007 to december 11, 2022. we
have numerous patents issued and pending in the united states and in foreign
countries. our patents and pending patent applications relate to technology used
by us in connection with our products, including our digital media processors.
we also rely on international treaties and organizations and foreign laws to
protect our intellectual property. we continuously assess whether and where to
seek formal protection for particular innovations and technologies based on such
factors as: the commercial significance of our operations and our competitors
operations in particular countries and regions; the location in which our
products are manufactured; our strategic technology or product directions in
different countries; and the degree to which intellectual property laws exist
and are meaningfully enforced in different jurisdictions.
our
pending patent applications and any future applications may not be approved. in
addition, any issued patents may not provide us with competitive advantages or
may be challenged by third parties. the enforcement of patents by others may
harm our ability to conduct our business. others may independently develop
substantially equivalent intellectual property or otherwise gain access to our
trade secrets or intellectual property. our failure to effectively protect our
intellectual property could harm our business. we have licensed technology from
third parties for incorporation in our digital media processors, and expect to
continue to enter into license agreements for future products. these licenses
may result in royalty payments to third parties, the cross licensing of
technology by us or payment of other consideration. if these arrangements are
not concluded on commercially reasonable terms, our business could suffer.
employees
as of
january 30, 2005 we had 2,101 employees, 1,231 of whom were engaged in research
and development and 870 of whom were engaged in sales, marketing, operations and
administrative positions. none of our employees are covered by collective
bargaining agreements, and we believe our relationships with our employees are
good.
financial
information by business segment and geographic data
during
the second quarter of fiscal 2005, our chief operating decision maker, the chief
executive officer, began reviewing financial information presented on an
operating segment basis for purposes of making operating decisions and assessing
financial performance. we now report three product-line operating segments: the
gpu business, which is composed of products that support desktop pcs, notebook
pcs and professional workstations; the mcp business, which is composed of nvidia
nforce and xbox products; and the wmp business, which supports handheld personal
digital assistants and cellular phones. in addition to these operating segments,
we have the all other category that includes human resources, legal, finance,
general administration and corporate marketing expenses that we do not allocate
to our other operating segments. all other also includes the results of
operations of other miscellaneous operating segments that are neither
individually reportable, nor aggregated with another operating segment. revenue
in the all other category is primarily derived from sales of memory. the
information included in note 15 of the notes to the consolidated financial
statements is hereby incorporated by reference.
executive
officers of the registrant
the
following sets forth certain information regarding our executive officers, their
ages and their positions as of january 30, 2005:
name
age
position
jen-hsun
huang
president,
chief executive officer and director
marvin
d. burkett
chief
financial officer
jeffrey
d. fisher
executive
vice president, worldwide sales
david
m. shannon
vice
president, general counsel
di
ma
vice
president, operations
daniel
f. vivoli
executive
vice president, marketing
jen-hsun
huang co-founded
nvidia in april 1993 and has served as its president, chief executive officer
and a member of the board of directors since its inception. from 1985 to 1993,
mr. huang was employed at lsi logic corporation, a computer chip manufacturer,
where he held a variety of positions, most recently as director of coreware, the
business unit responsible for lsis system-on-a-chip strategy. from 1983 to
1985, mr. huang was a microprocessor designer for advanced micro devices, a
semiconductor company. mr. huang holds a b.s.e.e. degree from oregon state
university and an m.s.e.e. degree from stanford university.
marvin
d. burkett joined
nvidia as chief financial officer in september 2002. from february 2000 until
joining nvidia, mr. burkett was a financial consultant and served as chief
financial officer of arcot systems, a security software company.from 1998
to 1999, mr. burkett was the executive vice president and chief financial
officer of packard bell nec. mr. burkett also previously spent 26 years at
advanced micro devices, inc., or amd, where he held a variety of positions
including chief financial officer, senior vice president and corporate
controller. mr. burkett holds b.s. and m.b.a. degrees from the university of
arizona.
jeffrey
d. fisher has been
the executive vice president, worldwide sales of nvidia since july 1994. he has
over 20 years of sales and marketing experience in the semiconductor industry.
mr. fisher holds a b.s.e.e. degree from purdue university and an m.b.a. degree
from santa clara university.
david
m. shannon joined
nvidia in august 2002 as vice president and general counsel. from 1993 to 2002,
mr. shannon held various counsel positions at intel, including the most recent
position of vice president and assistant general counsel. mr. shannon also
practiced for eight years in the law firm of gibson dunn and crutcher, focusing
on complex commercial and high-technology related litigation. mr. shannon holds
b.a. and j.d. degrees from pepperdine university.
di
ma was vice
president of operations from july 2000 through january 30, 2005. on january 31,
2005, dr. ma concluded his employment at nvidia. from 1990 to 2000, dr. ma was
with standard microsystems, most recently serving as the senior vice president
of operations. previously, dr. ma held management positions in engineering at
motorola inc., or motorola, and was an adjunct professor at state university of
new york. dr. ma holds a b.s. in physics from the national taiwan university and
an m.s. degree and a ph.d. in electrical engineering from the state university
of new york.
daniel
f. vivoli has been
executive vice president of marketing since december 1997. from 1988 to december
1997, mr. vivoli held management positions, most recently as vice president of
product marketing, at silicon graphics, inc., a computing technology company.
from 1983 to 1988, mr. vivoli held various marketing positions at
hewlett-packard company. mr. vivoli holds a b.s.e.e. degree from the university
of illinois at champaign-urbana.
available
information
our
annual report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on
form 8-k and, if applicable, amendments to those reports filed or furnished
pursuant to section 13(a) of the exchange act are available free of charge on or
through our internet website, http://www.nvidia.com, as soon as reasonably
practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to,
the securities and exchange commission. our website and the information
contained therein as connected thereto is not intended to be incorporated into
the annual report on form 10-k.
item
2. properties
our
headquarters complex is located on a leased site in santa clara, california and
is comprised of five buildings. additionally, we lease three other buildings in
santa clara with one used as warehouse space and the other two used as lab
space. outside of santa clara, we lease space in austin, texas; berkeley,
california; beaverton, oregon; bedford, massachusetts; bellevue, washington;
chandler, arizona; durham, north carolina; greenville, south carolina; fort
collins, colorado; honolulu, hawaii; and redmond, washington. these facilities
are used as design centers and/or sales and administrative offices.
outside
of the united states, we lease space in singapore; taipei, taiwan; hsin chu,
taiwan; yokohama, japan; seoul, korea; beijing, china; shanghai, china; wanchai,
hong kong; bangalore, india; paris, france; moscow, russia; munich, germany; and
theale, england. these facilities are used primarily to support our customers
and operations and as sales and administrative offices. in addition, we lease
space in wurselen, germany, which is used primarily as a design
center.
we
believe that we currently have sufficient facilities to conduct our operations
for the next twelve months, although we expect to lease additional facilities
throughout the world as our business requires. for additional information
regarding obligations under leases, see note 12 to the consolidated financial
statements under the subheading lease obligations, which information is hereby
incorporated by reference.
item
3. legal proceedings
3dfx
on
december 15, 2000, nvidia corporation and one of our indirect subsidiaries
entered into an agreement to purchase certain graphics chip assets from 3dfx.
the 3dfx asset purchase closed on april 18, 2001. in may 2002, we were served
with a complaint filed by the landlord of 3dfxs san jose, california commercial
real estate lease. in october 2002, 3dfx filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection in the united states bankruptcy court for the northern district of
california. in december 2002, we were served with a complaint filed by the
landlord of 3dfxs austin, texas commercial real estate lease. the landlords
complaints both assert claims for, among other things, interference with
contract, successor liability and fraudulent transfer. the landlords are
seeking to recover, among other things, amounts owed on their leases in the
aggregate amount of approximately $10 million. in march 2003, we were served
with a complaint filed by the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to
represent the interests of the 3dfx bankruptcy estate. the trustees complaint
asserts claims for, among other things, successor liability and fraudulent
transfer. the trustees complaint seeks additional payments from us, the amount
of which has not been quantified. the landlords actions have been removed to
the bankruptcy court from the superior court of california and consolidated with
the trustees action for purposes of discovery. discovery is currently
proceeding and no trialdate has
been set. we believe the claims asserted against us are without merit and we
will continue to defend ourselves vigorously.
opti
incorporated
on
october 19, 2004, opti incorporated, or opti, filed a complaint for patent
infringement against nvidia in the united states district court for the eastern
district of texas. opti asserts that unspecified nvidia chipsets infringe five
united states patents held by opti. opti seeks unspecified damages for our
conduct, attorneys fees and triple damages for alleged willful infringement by
nvidia. nvidia filed a response to this complaint in december 2004. discovery
has not begun and no trial date has been set. we believe the claims asserted
against us are without merit and we will continue to defend ourselves
vigorously.
american
video graphics
in august
2004, a texas limited partnership named american video graphics, lp, or avg,
filed three separate complaints for patent infringement against various
corporate defendants (not including nvidia) in the united states district court
for the eastern district of texas. avg initially asserted that each of the
approximately thirty defendants sells products that infringe one or more of
seven separate patents that avg claims relate generally to graphics processing
functionality. each of the three lawsuits targeted a different group of
defendants; one case involves approximately twenty of the leading personal
computer manufacturers, the pc makers case, one case involves the three leading
video game console makers, the game console case, and one case involves
approximately ten of the leading video game publishers, the game publishers
case. in november 2004, nvidia sought and was granted permission to intervene in
two of the three pending avg lawsuits, the pc makers case and the game console
case. nvidias complaint in intervention alleges both that the patents in suit
are invalid and that, to the extent avgs claims target nvidia products, the
asserted patents are not infringed. two other leading suppliers of graphics
processing products, intel and ati, have also intervened in the cases, ati in
both the pc makers and game console case, and intel in the pc makers case.
after
some consensual reconfigurations proposed by the various parties, in january
2005, the district court judge entered docket control and discovery orders in
the three lawsuits. the pc makers case now involves four separate patents and is
currently scheduled for trial beginning on september 11, 2006. the game console
case involves a single patent and is currently scheduled for trial beginning on
december 4, 2006. we believe that, to the extent avgs infringement allegations
target functionality that may be performed by nvidia products, those claims are
without merit, and we will continue to defend ourselves and our products
vigorously.
we are
subject to other legal proceedings, but we do not believe that the ultimate
outcome of any of these proceedings will have a material adverse effect on our
financial position or overall trends in results of operations. however, if an
unfavorable ruling were to occur in any specific period, there exists the
possibility of a material adverse impact on the results of operations of that
period.
item
4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
no
matters were submitted to a vote of our security holders during the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2005.
part
ii
item
5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder
matters
and issuer repurchases of equity securities
our
common stock is traded on the nasdaq national market under the symbol nvda.
public trading of our common stock began on january 22, 1999. prior to that,
there was no public market for our common stock. as of march 4, 2005, we had
approximately 452 stockholders of record, not including those shares held in
street or nominee name.
the
following table sets forth for the periods indicated the high and low sales
price for our common stock as quoted on the nasdaq national market:
high
low
year
ended january 29, 2006
first
quarter (through march 4, 2005)
$29.60
$22.60
year
ended january 30, 2005
fourth
quarter
$24.96
$13.14
third
quarter
$15.89
$9.30
second
quarter
$24.11
$14.40
first
quarter
$27.35
$20.63
year
ended january 25, 2004
fourth
quarter
$25.88
$17.08
third
quarter
$21.47
$15.26
second
quarter
$27.75
$13.55
first
quarter
$14.83
$9.33
dividend
policy
we have
never paid and do not expect to pay cash dividends for the foreseeable future.
equity
compensation plan information
information
regarding our equity compensation plans, including both stockholder approved
plans and non-stockholder approved plans, will be contained in our definitive
proxy statement with respect to our annual meeting of stockholders under the
caption "compensation-equity compensation plan information," and is incorporated
by reference into this report.
issuer
purchases of equity securities
on august
9, 2004, we announced a stock repurchase program under which we may purchase up
to $300.0 million of our common stock over a three year period through august
2007. the repurchases will be made in the open market or in privately negotiated
transactions, from time to time, in compliance with rule 10b-18 under the
securities exchange act of 1934, subject to market conditions, applicable legal
requirements and other factors. our stock repurchase program does not obligate
us to acquire any particular amount of common stock and may be suspended at any
time at our discretion. the repurchases will be funded from our available
working capital. during fiscal 2005, we repurchased 2.1 million shares for a
total cost of approximately $24.6 million. we did not repurchase any shares
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005.
period
total
number of shares purchased
average
price paid per share
total
number of shares purchased as part of publicly announced plans of
programs
approximate
dollar value of shares that may yet be purchased under the plans or
programs
july
26, 2004 through august 22, 2004
1,075,000
$
10.57
1,075,000
$
288,642,283
august
23, 2004 through september 19, 2004
819,253
$
12.83
819,253
$
278,133,053
september
20, 2004 through october 24, 2004
190,100
$
14.61
190,100
$
275,356,213
total
2,084,353
$
11.82
(1
)
2,084,353
(1)
represents average price paid per share during the third quarter of fiscal
2005.
item
6. selected financial data
the
following selected financial data should be read in conjunction with our
financial statements and the notes thereto, and with item 7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. the
consolidated statement of income data for the years ended january 30, 2005,
january 25, 2004 and january 26, 2003 and the consolidated balance sheet data as
of january 30, 2005 and january 25, 2004 have been derived from and should be
read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the
notes thereto included herein. the consolidated statement of income data for the
years ended january 27, 2002 and january 28, 2001 is derived from audited
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto which are not included
in this annual report on form 10-k. the consolidated balance sheet data as of
january 26, 2003, january 27, 2002 and january 28, 2001 is derived from audited
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto which are not included
in this annual report on form 10-k.
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
january
27,
january
28,
(a, b)
(c, d)
(e, f)
(in
thousands, except per share data)
consolidated
statement of income data:
revenue
$
2,010,033
$
1,822,945
$
1,909,447
$
1,369,471
$
735,264
gross
profit
$
649,486
$
528,878
$
576,012
$
519,238
$
272,879
income
from operations
$
113,593
$
90,157
$
143,986
$
241,732
$
128,135
income
before income tax expense
$
125,445
$
86,673
$
150,557
$
252,749
$
144,808
income
tax expense
$
25,089
$
12,254
$
59,758
$
75,825
$
46,339
net
income
$
100,356
$
74,419
$
90,799
$
176,924
$
98,469
basic
net income per share
$
0.60
$
0.46
$
0.59
$
1.24
$
0.75
diluted
net income per share
$
0.57
$
0.43
$
0.54
$
1.03
$
0.62
shares
used in basic per share computation
166,062
160,924
153,513
143,015
130,998
shares
used in diluted per share computation
176,558
172,707
168,393
171,074
159,294
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
january
27,
january
28,
(in
thousands)
consolidated
balance sheet data:
cash,
cash equivalents and marketable securities
$
670,045
$
604,043
$
1,028,413
$
791,377
$
674,275
total
assets
$
1,628,536
$
1,399,344
$
1,617,015
$
1,503,174
$
1,016,902
capital
lease obligations, less current portion
--
$
$
4,880
$
5,861
$
deferred
revenue
$
11,500
--
--
$
70,193
$
200,000
deferred
income tax liability
$
20,754
$
8,609
--
--
--
long-term
debt
--
--
$
300,000
$
300,000
$
300,000
long-term
liabilities
$
8,358
$
4,582
--
--
--
total
stockholders equity
$
1,178,268
$
1,051,185
$
932,687
$
763,819
$
407,107
cash
dividends declared per common share
--
--
--
--
--
___________________________________________________________________________________________
(a)
fiscal 2004 included a charge of $3.5 million related to the write-off of
acquired research and development expense from the purchase of mediaq, inc. that
had not yet reached technological feasibility and has no alternative future
use.
(b)
fiscal 2004 included a charge of $13.1 million in connection with our
convertible subordinated debenture redemption.
(c)
fiscal 2003 included $40.4 million in additional revenue related to our
settlement of our arbitration with microsoft regarding xbox
pricing.
(d)
fiscal 2003 included a charge for stock option exchange expenses of $61.8
million related to personnel associated with cost of revenue (for manufacturing
personnel), research and development and sales, general and administrative of
$6.2 million, $35.4 million and $20.2 million, respectively.
(e)
fiscal 2002 included $10.0 million of acquisition charges attributable to
expenses related to our acquisition of assets from 3dfx.
(f)
fiscal 2002 included a charge of $3.7 million related to our relocation from our
previous headquarters.
item
7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and
results
of operations
the
following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of
operations should be read in conjunction with selected financial data, our
consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto, and the business
risks section at the end of this item 7, as well as other cautionary statements
and risks described elsewhere in this annual report, before deciding to
purchase, hold or sell shares of our common stock.
overview
our
company
nvidia
corporation is a worldwide leader in graphics and digital media processors
dedicated to creating products that enhance the interactive experience on
consumer and professional computing platforms. we design, develop and market
graphics processing units, or gpus, media and communications processors, or
mcps, wireless media processors, or wmps, and related software. our products are
integral to a wide variety of visual computing platforms, including enterprise
personal computers, or pcs, consumer pcs, professional workstations, notebook
pcs, personal digital assistants, cellular phones, game consoles and digital
media centers. we were incorporated in california in april 1993 and
reincorporated in delaware in april 1998. our objective is to be one of the most
important and influential technology companies in the world.
recent
developments
sony
computer entertainment inc.
in
december 2004, we announced that sony computer entertainment inc., or scei, and
nvidia are jointly developing a custom gpu incorporating our next-generation
geforce gpu and sceis system solutions for sceis next generation playstation.
the
collaboration includes licensing and royalties for the next generation
playstation as well as all derivatives, including next generation digital
consumer electronics devices. in addition, we are licensing to scei software
development tools for creating shaders and advanced graphics capabilities. for
fiscal 2006, we expect to recognize revenue of approximately $30 million from
development and software license fees associated with this collaboration.
depending on the ultimate success of this next generation platform, we expect to
generate, starting in fiscal 2007, revenue ranging from $50 million to $100
million annually from technology license fees and royalties over a four year
period, with the possibility of additional royalties for several years
thereafter. the additional royalty stream will depend on the use and success of
our technology in future digital consumer electronics devices such as digital
televisions and media servers.
intel
cross-license agreement
on
november 19, 2004,nvidiaand intel announced that the companies
signed a broad, multi-year patent cross-license agreement spanning multiple
product lines and product generations. additionally, the companies signed a
multi-year chipset agreement granting nvidia a license to implement intel's
front-side bus technology. we believe that this agreement opens a significant
opportunity for us to bring our nvidia nforce brand to the intel segment. we
expect to commence shipments of our first intel-based mcp product during the
first quarter of fiscal 2006.
geforce
6 series
in april
2004, we announced our latest flagship gpu architecture, the geforce 6 series.
the geforce 6 series offers a number of new features, including a faster
architecture than our geforce fx series, compliance with many of the latest
software standards and on-chip video processors for high-definition encoding and
decoding and direct-to-television playback. the geforce 6 series offers more
flexibility for game designers and graphic artists, while increasing performance
over our previous top-end product, the geforce fx 5950. during the second
quarter of fiscal 2005, we launched the production shipment of the geforce 6800
ultra, 6800 gt and 6800, the industrys first gpus to support microsofts
directx 9 shader model 3.0. during the third quarter of fiscal 2005, we launched
the production shipment of the geforce 6600 gt and 6600, which are intended for
the mainstream market, and the geforce 6200, which delivers the geforce 6 series
architecture and performance to the value pc segment. in december 2004, we
introduced a version of the geforce 6200 with turbocache technology. nvidia
turbocache technology is a new, patent pending hardware and software technology,
which allows a gpu to render directly to system memory instead of using local
memory on the graphics card. many of the worlds leading pc oems, system
builders, and add-in card partners have announced plans to build systems and
graphics cards utilizing the geforce 6200 with turbocache technology.
in
december 2004, we announced nvidia purevideo technology, which brings consumer
electronics quality video to pcs. purevideo technology eliminates the need for
separate hardware or chipsets and takes the load off the pcs multi-purpose cpu.
new notebooks and media centers powered by geforce 6 with purevideo technology
are expected to be introduced to the market soon.
peripheral
component interconnect express, or pci express
the
transition to pci express was central to our gpu and mcp objectives during
fiscal 2005. industry adoption of pci express was slower than expected during
our fiscal 2005.
in
february 2004, we announced a top-to-bottom family of pci express gpus. by using
a pci express high-speed interconnect, or hsi, which is a complex piece of
networking technology that performs high-speed bi-directional interconnect
protocol conversion, we were able to transform our geforce family of gpus into
pci express compatible gpus. in june 2004, we executed on our strategy to
deliver a full line of gpus ready to support pci express chipsets. our first pci
express graphics solutions, the geforce pcx series, were released for retail
sale during the second quarter of fiscal 2005. in september 2004, we announced
thegeforce 6600 gt and the geforce 6600. in october 2004, we announced the
geforce 6200,our first native pci expressgpus. in november 2004, we
announced the launch of geforce go 6800 gpu, our first native pci express gpu
for notebook pcs.
in may
2004, we announced the mobile pci express module specification, or mxm. mxm was
jointly developed by nvidia and leading notebook pc manufacturers in an effort
to accelerate the adoption of pci express-based notebooks in all market
segments. mxm is an open design specification that supports a wide range of
graphics solutions from any gpu manufacturer, allowing system integrators
maximum flexibility for build-to-order with various graphics solutions. mxm also
serves as the primary delivery vehicle for our geforce go 6 series of gpus.
in august
2004, we announced that pci-sig, the special interest group responsible for
conventional pci, pci-x and pci express industry-standard i/o technologies, had
added our pci express technology-based products to the pci-sig integrators list,
including gpus designed for workstations, desktop pcs and notebook pcs.
in
february 2005, we announced the nvidia quadro fx go 1400 mobile gpu for pci
express, which provides the performance, programmability, precision and quality
that cad, dcc and scientific applications require.
wmp
business
during
the first quarter of fiscal 2005, motorola, inc. announced their decision to
incorporate our goforce 4000 in their upcoming new line of 3g multimedia phones.
in july 2004, we announced that samsung electronics co., or samsung, had
selected our goforce 2100 media processor for the sch-m500 mobile intelligent
terminal by samsung, or mits, phone. we now have design wins with three of the
world's top five cellular phone oems - motorola, samsung and lg electronics,
inc. in september 2004, we unveiled the goforce 3d 4500, the world's first 3d
wmp. in february 2005, we announced the goforce 3d 4800. over the next several
years, we expect digital media processing technology to play a critical role in
the cellular phone industry.
scalable
link interface technology
in june
2004, we unveiled a new scalable
link interface, or sli,
technology that takes advantage of the increased bandwidth of the pci express
bus architecture to allow two nvidia-based graphics cards to operate in a single
pc or workstation. pci express-based pcs and workstations based on nvidia sli
technology became available in the second half of fiscal 2005 from pc and
workstation manufacturers.
nvidia
nforce
during
the first quarter of fiscal 2005, we launched production of the nvidia nforce3
250gb mcp, the first single-chip mcp to offer gigabit ethernet, dual independent
serial advanced technology attachment, or sata, controllers, industry leading
redundant array of independent disks, or raid, features and hardware security
processing. in june 2004, we announced the release of the nvidia nforce3 ultra
mcp, a mcp for motherboards and pc systems based on the amd64 computing
platform. in october 2004, we introduced the nvidia nforce4 mcps, our new family
of high-end pci express-based mcps for amd64 computing environments. nvidia
nforce4 mcps provide the platform technology that is designed to power this
year's fastest gaming, enthusiast, and digital media pcs and motherboards,
driving the pci express transition.
in
january 2005, we introduced nvidia nforce professional mcps, which currently are
the only pci express core-logic solutions for amd opteron processor-based server
and workstation platforms. the nvidia nforce professional mcp family includes
the nvidia nforce professional 2200 and the 2050 mcp.
share-based
payment
since
inception, we have used stock options and our employee stock purchase program as
fundamental components of our compensation packages. to date we generally have
not recognized compensation cost for employee stock options or shares sold
pursuant to our employee stock purchase program. we believe that these
incentives directly motivate our employees and, through the use of vesting,
encourage our employees to remain with us. in december 2004, the financial
accounting standards board issued sfasno.123(r), share-based
payment, or
sfasno. 123(r). sfas no. 123(r) is effective for interim or annual periods
beginning after june15, 2005, and requires that we record compensation
expense for stock options and our employee stock purchase plan using the fair
value of those awards. expensing these incentives in future periods will
materially and adversely affect our reported operating results as the
stock-based compensation expense would be charged directly against our reported
earnings. to the extent that sfas no. 123(r) makes it more expensive to grant
stock options or to continue to have an employee stock purchase program, we may
decide to incur increased cash compensation costs.
repatriation
legislation
the
american jobs creation act of 2004 was signed into law on october 22, 2004. this
act creates a temporary incentive for united states multinationals to repatriate
accumulated income earned outside the united states at a federal effective tax
rate of 5.25%. on december 21, 2004, the financial accounting standards board,
or fasb, issued fasb staff position no. fas 109-2, accounting
and disclosure guidance for the foreign earnings repatriation provision within
the american jobs creation act of 2004, which
allows an enterprise time beyond the financial reporting period of enactment to
evaluate the effect of the act on its plan for reinvestment or repatriation of
foreign earnings.we have
started an evaluation of the effects of the repatriation provision; however, we
do not expect to be able to complete this evaluation until after congress or the
treasury department provide additional clarifying language on key elements of
the provision. we have not provided for united states income taxes on a
cumulative total of approximately $174.7 million of undistributed earnings as of
january 30, 2005 for certain non-united states subsidiaries as we intended to
reinvest these earnings indefinitely in operations outside of the united states.
we are currently in the process of evaluating whether or not, and to what
extent, if any, this provision may benefit us. we expect to complete such
evaluation before the end of fiscal 2006. the range of possible amounts that we
are considering for repatriation under this provision is between zero and $500
million. the potential range of related income tax expense is between zero and
$27 million.
future
objectives and challenges
gpu
business
during
fiscal 2005, we committed ourselves to recapture technology leadership in our
gpu business, while creating an architecture that is cost efficient.
with our
geforce 6 family, we captured a significant share of the performance gpu
segment, and we are now focused on using that technology leadership position
into the mainstream and value gpu segments. by the end of fiscal 2005, we had a
top-to-bottom product line that supports shader model 3.0 and with sli, mxm,
hsi, turbocache technology and purevideo technology. now, we are focused on
growing our gpu business.
pci
express
pci
express is expected to enable a new level of performance for high bandwidth
applications like graphics and networking. the transition to pci express, which
is extremely complex, is central to our gpu and mcp objectives this fiscal year.
we initiated this transition by creating our geforce pcx series of gpus, using
hsi technology. during the second quarter of fiscal 2005, we executed on our
strategy to deliver a full line of gpus ready to support pci express chipsets.
the transition to pci express was central to our gpu and mcp objectives during
fiscal 2005. industry adoption of pci express was slower than expected during
our fiscal 2005 and there is no assurance that the adoption rate will increase
during fiscal 2006. our first pci express graphics solutions, the geforce pcx
series, was released for retail sale during the second quarter of fiscal 2005.
we expected to ramp up sales of our pci express products during the second
quarter of fiscal 2005, but as a result of intels delayed pci express chipset
production, followed by its product recall, the performance desktop segment was
impacted by stalling our customers production ramp of our geforce pcx gpus.
during the third quarter of fiscal 2005, we announced and ramped up sales of
thegeforce 6600 gt, geforce 6600 and the geforce 6200,our first
native pci expressgpus.
gross
margin improvement
during
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, our gross margin was 34.2%, an increase of
4.9% from our gross margin of 29.3% for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004. our
gross margin was 32.3% for fiscal 2005, an increase of 3.3% from our gross
margin of 29.0% for fiscal 2004. these improvements in our gross margin reflect
our continuing focus on delivering cost effective product architectures,
enhancing business processes and driving profitable growth. we expect gross
margin to improve by approximately 0.5% to 1.0% during the first quarter of
fiscal 2006 as our geforce 6 product family becomes an increasing portion of our
revenue and as our nvidia nforce3 and nvidia nforce4 product revenue continues
to increase.
wmp
business
our wmp
objective is to lead the multimedia handheld era by building exciting products
that use our expertise, resources, and investments in digital media processing
combined with our low power technology. our wmp business achieved record revenue
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005 and is expected to achieve substantial
revenue levels in fiscal 2006. with the wmps on our roadmap, we anticipate that
future cellular phones will be able to receive television programs, record
digital video like a camcorder, enable video phone calls, and be portable game
players.
critical
accounting policies and estimates
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are
based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states.
the preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and
judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, cost
of revenue, expenses and related disclosure of contingencies. on an on-going
basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue
recognition, accounts receivable, inventories, long-lived assets, goodwill,
income taxes and contingencies. we base our estimates on historical experience
and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the
circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about
the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
we
believe the following critical accounting policies affect our significant
judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial
statements. our management has discussed the development and selection of these
critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our board
of directors and the audit committee has reviewed our disclosures relating to
our critical accounting policies and estimates in this report.
revenue
recognition
product
revenue
we
recognize revenue from product sales when persuasive evidence of an arrangement
exists, the product has been delivered, the price is fixed and determinable and
collection is reasonably assured. for all sales, we use a binding purchase order
and in certain cases we use a contractual agreement as evidence of an
arrangement. we consider delivery to occur upon shipment provided title and risk
of loss have passed to the customer. at the point of sale, we assess whether the
arrangement fee is fixed and determinable and whether collection is reasonably
assured. if we determine that collection of a fee is not reasonably assured, we
defer the fee and recognize revenue at the time collection becomes reasonably
assured, which is generally upon receipt of cash.
our
policy on sales to distributors is to defer recognition of revenue and related
cost of revenue until the distributors resell the product.
we record
estimated reductions to revenue for customer programs at the time revenue is
recognized. our customer programs primarily involve rebates, which are designed
to serve as sales incentives to resellers of our products in various target
markets. we account for rebates in accordance with emerging issues task force
issue 01-9, or eitf 01-9, accounting
for consideration given by a vendor to a customer (including a reseller of the
vendors products) and, as
such, we accrue for 100% of the potential rebates and do not apply a breakage
factor. unclaimed rebates, which historically have not been significant, are
reversed to revenue upon expiration of the rebate. rebates typically expire six
months from the date of the original sale.
our
customer programs also include marketing development funds, or mdfs. we account
for mdfs as either a reduction of revenue or an operating expense in accordance
with eitf 01-9. mdfs represent monies paid to retailers, system builders, oems,
distributors and add-in card partners that are earmarked for market segment
development and expansion and typically are designed to support our partners
activities while also promoting nvidia products. if market conditions decline,
we may take actions to increase amounts offered under customer programs,
possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time such
programs are offered.
we also
record a reduction to revenue by establishing a sales return allowance for
estimated product returns at the time revenue is recognized, based primarily on
historical return rates. however, if product returns for a particular fiscal
period exceed historical return rates we may determine that additional sales
return allowances are required to properly reflect our estimated exposure for
product returns.
license
and development revenue
for
license arrangements that require significant customization of our intellectual
property components, we generally recognize license revenue using the
percentage-of-completion method of accounting over the period that services are
performed. for all license and service arrangements accounted for under the
percentage-of-completion method, we determine progress to completion based on
actual direct labor hours incurred to date as a percentage of the estimated
total direct labor hours required to complete the project. we periodically
evaluate the actual status of each project to ensure that the estimates to
complete each contract remain accurate. a provision for estimated losses on
contracts is made in the period in which the loss becomes probable and can be
reasonably estimated. to date, we have not recorded any such losses. costs
incurred in advance of revenue recognized are recorded as deferred costs on
uncompleted contracts. if the amount of revenue recognized exceeds the amounts
billed to customers, the excess amount is recorded as unbilled accounts
receivable. if the amount billed exceeds the amount of revenue recognized, the
excess amount is recorded as deferred revenue. revenue recognized in any period
is dependent on our progress toward completion of projects in progress.
significant management judgment and discretion are used to estimate total direct
labor hours. any changes in or deviations from these estimates could have a
material effect on the amount of revenue we recognize in any period.
investment
impairments
we review
all of our investments quarterly for indicators of impairment. for
non-marketable equity securities, the impairment analysis requires significant
judgment to identify events or circumstances that would likely have a
significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investment. the indicators
that we use to identify those events or circumstances include the investees
revenue and earnings trends relative to predefined milestones and overall
business prospects, factors related to the investees ability remain in
business, such as the investees liquidity, and the investees receipt of
additional funding at a lower valuation.
investments
identified as having an indicator of impairment are subject to further analysis
to determine if the investment is other than temporarily impaired, in which case
we write the investment down to its impaired value. when an investee is not
considered viable from a financial point of view, we write down the entire
investment since we consider the estimated fair market value to be nominal. if
an investee obtains additional funding at a valuation lower than our carrying
amount or requires a new round of equity funding to stay in operation and the
new funding does not appear imminent, we presume that the investment is other
than temporarily impaired, unless specific facts and circumstances indicate
otherwise. impairments of investments in our portfolio, primarily impairments of
non-marketable equity securities, were nil in fiscal 2005 and 2004.
accounts
receivable
we
maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts receivable for estimated losses
resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments.
management determines this allowance, which consists of an amount identified for
specific customer issues as well as an amount based on general estimated
exposure. our overall estimated exposure excludes significant amounts that are
covered by credit insurance and letters of credit. if the financial condition of
our customers, the financial institutions providing letters of credit, or our
credit insurance carrier were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of
their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required that could
adversely affect our operating results. furthermore, there can be no assurance
that we will be able to obtain credit insurance in the future. our current
credit insurance agreement expires on december 31, -----2005.
as of
january 30, 2005, our allowance for doubtful accounts receivable was $1.5
million and our gross accounts receivable balance was $336.2 million. of the
$336.2 million, $68.0 million was covered by credit insurance and $22.4 million
was covered by letters of credit. as a percentage of our gross accounts
receivable balance, our allowance for doubtful accounts receivable has ranged
between 0.4% and 1.5% during fiscal 2004 and 2005. as of january 30, 2005, our
allowance for doubtful accounts receivable represented 0.4% of our gross
accounts receivable balance. if our allowance for doubtful accounts receivable
would have been recorded at 1.5% of our gross accounts receivable balance, then
our allowance for doubtful accounts receivable balance at january 30, 2005 would
have been approximately $4.9 million, rather than the actual balance of $1.5
million.
inventories
inventory
cost is computed on an adjusted standard basis (which approximates actual cost
on an average or first-in, first-out basis). we write down our inventory for
estimated lower of cost or market, obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal
to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value
based upon assumptions about future demand, future product purchase commitments,
estimated manufacturing yield levels and market conditions. if actual market
conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, or if our
future product purchase commitments to our suppliers exceed our forecasted
future demand for such products, additional future inventory write-downs may be
required that could adversely affect our operating results. if actual market
conditions are more favorable, we may have higher gross margins when products
are sold. sales to date of such products have not had a significant impact on
our gross margin. as of january 30, 2005, our inventory reserve was $33.7
million. as a percentage of our gross inventory balance, our inventory reserve
has ranged between 8.8% and 13.4% during fiscal 2004 and 2005. as of january 30,
2005, our inventory reserve represented 9.6% of our gross inventory balance. if
our inventory reserve would have been recorded at 13.4% of our gross inventory
balance, then our inventory reserve balance at january 30, 2005 would have been
approximately $46.8 million, rather than the actual balance of $33.7 million.
inventory reserves once established are not reversed until the related inventory
has been sold or scrapped.
valuation
of long-lived assets
we review
long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangible assets subject
to amortization, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. we utilize a two-step
approach to testing long-lived assets for impairment. the first step tests for
possible impairment indicators. if an impairment indicator is present, the
second step measures whether the asset is recoverable based on a comparison of
the carrying amount of the asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows
expected to be generated by the asset. if the carrying amount of an asset
exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by
the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of
the asset. our review requires the use of judgment and estimates. no such
impairment charges have occurred to date. however, future events or
circumstances may result in a charge to earnings if we determine that the
carrying value of a long-lived asset is not recoverable.
goodwill
our
impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting unitin
which the goodwill resides to its carrying value. we
determined that our reporting units are equivalent to our operating segments for
the purposes of completing ourstatement of
financial accounting standards no. 142, or sfas no. 142, goodwill and other
intangible assets, impairment test. we utilize a
two-step approach to testing goodwill for impairment. the first step tests for
possible impairment by applying a fair value-based test. the second step, if
necessary, measures the amount of such an impairment by applying fair
value-based tests to individual assets and liabilities. we elected to perform
our annual goodwill impairment review during the fourth quarter of each fiscal
year. we completed our most recent annual impairment test during the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2005 and concluded that there was no impairment. however,
future events or circumstances may result in a charge to earnings in future
periods due to the potential for a write-down of goodwill in connection with
such tests.
income
taxes
statement
of financial accounting standards no. 109, or sfas no. 109, accounting
for income taxes,
establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effect of
income taxes. in accordance with sfas no. 109, we recognize federal, state and
foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on our estimate of taxes payable
or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax jurisdiction. we also recognize
federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets or liabilities, as appropriate,
for our estimate of future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and
carryforwards; and we record a valuation allowance to reduce any deferred tax
assets by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available evidence and
judgment, are not expected to be realized.
our
calculation of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on
certain estimates and judgments and involves dealing with uncertainties in the
application of complex tax laws. our estimates of current and deferred tax
assets and liabilities may change based, in part, on added certainty or finality
to an anticipated outcome, changes in accounting or tax laws in the united
states, or foreign jurisdictions where we operate, or changes in other facts or
circumstances. in addition, we recognize liabilities for potential united states
and foreign income tax contingencies based on our estimate of whether, and the
extent to which, additional taxes may be due. if we determine that payment of
these amounts is unnecessary or if the recorded tax liability is less than our
current assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax benefit or
additional income tax expense in our financial statements.
as of
january 30, 2005, we had a valuation allowance of $190.6 million. of the total
valuation allowance, $145.7 million is attributable to certain net operating
loss and tax credit carryforwards resulting from the exercise of employee stock
options. the tax benefit of these net operating loss and tax credit
carryforwards, if and when realization is sustained, will be accounted for as a
credit to stockholders' equity. of the remaining valuation allowance at january
30, 2005, $19.9 million relates to federal and state tax attributes acquired in
certain acquisitions for which realization of the related deferred tax assets
was determined not more likely than not to be realized due, in part, to
potential utilization limitations as a result of ownership changes; and $25.0
million relates to certain state deferred tax assets that management determined
are not more likely than not to be realized due, in part, to projections of
future taxable income. to the extent realization of the deferred tax assets
related to certain acquisitions becomes probable, recognition of these tax
benefits would first reduce goodwill to zero, then reduce other non-current
intangible assets related to the acquisition to zero with any remaining benefit
reported as a reduction to income tax expense. to the extent realization of the
deferred tax assets related to certain state tax benefits becomes probable, we
would recognize an income tax benefit in the period such asset is more likely
than not to be realized.
contingencies
we are
subject to the possibility of various loss contingencies arising in the ordinary
course of business. we consider the likelihood of loss or impairment of an asset
or the incurrence of a liability, as well as our ability to reasonably estimate
the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. an estimated loss
contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a
liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated.
we regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether
such accruals should be adjusted and whether new accruals are required.
results
of operations
the
following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain items in our
consolidated statements of income expressed as a percentage of
revenue.
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
revenue
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
cost
of revenue
67.7
71.0
69.5
cost
of revenue related to stock option exchange
--
--
0.3
gross
profit
32.3
29.0
30.2
operating
expenses:
research
and development
16.7
14.8
11.8
sales,
general and administrative
10.0
9.1
7.9
in-process
research and development
--
0.2
--
stock
option exchange
--
--
2.9
total
operating expenses
26.7
24.1
22.6
income
from operations
5.6
4.9
7.6
interest
and other income, net
0.6
0.5
0.3
convertible
debenture redemption expense
--
(0.7)
--
income
before income tax expense
6.2
4.7
7.9
income
tax expense
1.2
0.6
3.1
net
income
5.0%
4.1%
4.8%
fiscal
years ended january 30, 2005, january 25, 2004 and january 26, 2003
revenue
during
the second quarter of fiscal 2005, we began reporting three product-line
operating segments: the gpu business, which is composed of products that support
desktop pcs, notebook pcs and professional workstations; the mcp business, which
is composed of nvidia nforce products and xbox related products; and the wmp
business, which is comprised of goforce products that support handheld personal
digital assistants and cellular phones. please refer to note 15 of the notes to
the consolidated financial statements for further information.
revenue
was $2.01 billion in fiscal 2005, compared to $1.82 billion in fiscal 2004,
which represented an increase of 10%. the revenue increase from fiscal 2004 to
fiscal 2005 was primarily the result of increased sales of our nvidia quadro
workstation products, increased memory sales, increased sales of our handheld
products, increased sales of our notebook gpu products, and increased sales of
our desktop products, offset by decreased sales of our xbox products. the
increase in sales of our nvidia quadro workstation products in fiscal 2005 was
due to unit sales volume increases, and an increase in average selling prices as
a result of increased board sales. the increase in memory sales in fiscal 2005
was a result of the alignment of memory sales with the introduction of our
geforce 6 products during the period. the increase in handheld sales in fiscal
2005 was primarily due to our acquisition of mediaq, inc. in october 2003, which
represented our initial entry into the handheld market and to sales of our
goforce 4000 product. the increase in notebook gpu sales in fiscal 2005 resulted
from sales of our geforce fx go notebook gpu products outpacing the decline in
our older notebook gpu product lines during the period. the increase in desktop
products in fiscal 2005 was a result of a significant increase in sales of our
high-end desktop products, offset by a slight decrease in mainstream desktop
products. high-end desktop sales increased in fiscal 2005 primarily due to unit
volume increases primarily related to our geforce 6800 and 6600 products. the
decrease in mainstream desktop sales in fiscal 2005 was mainly due to
competitive pricing in the mainstream consumer segment offset by the ramp of
product sales of our geforce 6200 with turbocache technology during the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2005. sales of our xbox products have historically fluctuated
based on the timing of orders from microsoft. revenue from sales to microsoft in
fiscal 2005 was slightly lower than fiscal 2004 due to unit sales volume
increases offset by a lower average sales price. during fiscal 2004, microsoft
announced that it had entered into an agreement with one of our competitors to
develop technology for future xbox products and services. the impact that this
announcement may have on our future revenue from microsoft is uncertain, but we
anticipate that we will not achieve historical levels of xbox revenue in fiscal
2006.
fiscal
2005 was a 53-week year, compared to fiscal 2004 which was a 52-week year, and
we believe that this extra week may have had a positive impact on our revenue in
fiscal 2005. however, we are not able to quantify the effect of the slightly
longer year on our revenue.
revenue
was $1.82 billion in fiscal 2004, compared to $1.91 billion in fiscal 2003,
which represented a decrease of 5%. this revenue decrease was primarily the
result of a significant decrease in sales of xbox processors to microsoft,
offset by growth in our gpu, mcp and wmp products.
revenue
from sales to customers outside of the united states and other americas
accounted for 76%, 75% and 68% of total revenue for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. revenue by geographic region is allocated to individual countries
based on the location to which the products are initially billed even if the
foreign cems and add-in board and motherboard manufacturers revenue is
attributable to end customers in a different location. the increase in the
percentage of revenue from sales to customers outside of the united states and
other americas for fiscal 2005 as compared to fiscal 2004 and for fiscal 2004 as
compared to fiscal 2003 is primarily due to decreased sales of xgpus and mcps
used in the microsoft xbox product, which are billed to microsoft in the united
states.
sales to
microsoft accounted for approximately 13% of our revenue for fiscal 2005. our
three other largest customers accounted for approximately 36% of our revenue for
fiscal 2005. sales to microsoft accounted for approximately 15% of our revenue
for fiscal 2004. our three other largest customers accounted for approximately
45% of our revenue for fiscal 2004. in fiscal 2003, sales to microsoft accounted
for approximately 23% of our revenue. our three other largest customers
accounted for approximately 41% of our revenue for fiscal 2003.
gross
profit
gross
profit consists of total revenue, net of allowances, less cost of revenue. cost
of revenue consists primarily of the cost of semiconductors purchased from
subcontractors, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging,
manufacturing support costs, including labor and overhead associated with such
purchases, final test yield fallout, inventory provisions and shipping costs.
gross margin is the ratio of gross profit to revenue. our gross margin can vary
in any period depending on the mix of types of products sold.
our gross
margin was 32%, 29% and 30% in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. gross
margin improved during fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004 as a result of three
primary factors. first, during fiscal 2004 our geforce fx series of gpu products
had experienced lower gross margins than previous series of geforce gpu
products, such as the geforce 4 series. company-wide efforts were made to drive
down cost and improve gross margin and, as a result, during fiscal 2005, we were
able to improve our gross margin. in addition, in fiscal 2005, we realized
increased sales of our performance geforce fx desktop gpu products and began
shipping our geforce 6 series gpus, which are among our highest gross margin
products. finally, revenue from our nvidia quadro workstation products, which
typically provide the highest gross margins of any of our products, increased as
a percentage of our total revenue during fiscal 2005. this increase in our mix
of revenue toward higher-margin products led to a positive impact on overall
gross margin. these improvements in our gross margin reflect our continuing
focus on delivering cost effective product architecture, enhancing business
process and driving profitable growth. we expect gross margin to improve by
approximately 0.5% to 1.0% during the first quarter of fiscal 2006 as our
geforce 6 product family comprises an increasing portion of our revenue and as
nvidia nforce product revenue continues to increase.
gross
margin for fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2003 decreased primarily due to a
shift in the mix of product sales to our geforce fx products. our geforce fx
products generally experienced lower gross margins than previous geforce
products. this decrease was offset by an increase in gross margin on sales of
xbox processors in fiscal 2004, which resulted from the pricing settlement with
microsoft that we announced on february 6, 2003.
operating
expenses
research
and development
year
ended
year
ended
jan.
30,
jan.
25,
$
%
jan.
25,
jan.
26,
$
%
change
change
change
change
(in
thousands)
research
and development:
salaries
and related benefits
$
171.6
$
137.6
$
34.0
%
$
137.6
$
104.4
$
33.2
%
computer
software and lab equipment
41.1
36.9
4.2
%
36.9
33.4
3.5
%
new
product development
29.0
18.6
10.4
%
18.6
29.0
(10.4
)
(36
%)
facility
expense
31.4
28.3
3.1
%
28.3
26.3
2.0
%
depreciation
and amortization
56.1
44.6
11.5
%
44.6
26.9
17.7
%
other
5.9
4.0
1.9
%
4.0
4.9
(0.9
)
(18
%)
total
$
335.1
$
270.0
$
65.1
%
$
270.0
$
224.9
$
45.1
%
research
and development as a percentage of net revenue
%
%
%
%
research
and developments expenses increased by $65.1 million, or 24%, from fiscal 2004
to fiscal 2005 primarily due to a $34.0 million increase related to 174
additional personnel and a $10.4 million increase in new product developments
costs related to an overall increase in the number of product tape-outs and in
prototype materials. depreciation and amortization increased $11.5 million due
to emulation hardware and software programs that were purchased during fiscal
2004, resulting in a full year of depreciation in fiscal 2005 compared to a
partial year of depreciation in fiscal 2004. computer software and equipment
increased $4.2 million primarily due to increased allocation of information
technology expenses and facilities increased $3.1 million due to increased
facilities expense allocation, both based on the growth in headcount.
research
and development expenses increased by $45.1 million, or 20%, from fiscal 2003 to
fiscal 2004 primarily due to a $33.2 million increase related to additional
personnel, including approximately 60 employees that we hired as a part of our
acquisition of mediaq and a $17.7 million increase in depreciation and
amortization, offset by a $10.4 million decrease in new product development
costs.
we
anticipate that we will continue to devote substantial resources to research and
development, and we expect these expenses to increase in absolute dollars in the
foreseeable future due to the increased complexity and the greater number of
products under development. research and development expenses are likely to
fluctuate from time to time to the extent we make periodic incremental
investments in research and development and these investments may be independent
of our level of revenue.
sales,
general and administrative
year
ended
year
ended
jan.
30,
jan.
25,
$
%
jan.
25,
jan.
26,
$
%
change
change
change
change
(in
thousands)
sales,
general and administrative:
salaries
and related benefits
$
94.7
$
76.3
$
18.4
%
$
76.3
$
63.4
$
12.9
%
advertising
and promotions
66.6
47.2
19.4
%
47.2
39.6
7.6
%
legal
and accounting fees
12.6
12.6
--
--
12.6
20.0
(7.4
)
(37
%)
facility
expense
9.6
8.3
1.3
%
8.3
6.8
1.5
%
depreciation
and amortization
13.0
14.6
(1.6
)
(11
%)
14.6
11.4
3.2
%
other
4.3
6.2
(1.9
)
(31
%)
6.2
10.3
(4.1
)
(40
%)
total
$
200.8
$
165.2
$
35.6
%
$
165.2
$
151.5
$
13.7
%
sales,
general and administrative as a percentage of net revenue
%
%
%
%
sales,
general and administrative expenses increased $35.6 million, or 22%, from fiscal
2004 to fiscal 2005 primarily due to an $18.4 million increase related to 88
additional personnel and a $19.4 million increase in advertising and promotion
costs for tradeshows and new product launches and other marketing costs,
including travel and customer samples. these increases were offset by a decrease
of $1.9 million in other expenses during the period, including a reduction in
the allowance for doubtful accounts.
sales,
general and administrative expenses increased $13.7 million, or 9%, from fiscal
2003 to fiscal 2004 primarily due to a $12.9 million increase in salaries and
related benefits related to additional personnel, a $7.6 million increase in
advertising and promotions costs for tradeshows and marketing development and a
$3.2 million increase in computer software and equipment related to the
enhancement of our computer systems and the depreciation and amortization of new
equipment. these increases were offset by a $7.4 million decrease in legal fees
related to higher legal fees incurred during fiscal 2003 for various issues that
have since been resolved, including an inquiry by the securities and exchange
commission, the microsoft arbitration and shareholder lawsuits.
in-process
research and development
in
connection with our acquisition of mediaq in august 2003, we wrote-off $3.5
million of in-process research and development expense, or ipr&d, that had
not yet reached technological feasibility and has no alternative future use. in
accordance with sfas no. 2, accounting
for research and development costs, as
clarified by fin 4, applicability
of sfas no. 2 to business combinations accounted for by the purchase method an
interpretation of sfas no. 2,amounts
assigned to ipr&d meeting the above-stated criteria must be charged to
expense as part of the allocation of the purchase price.
interest
income and interest expense
interest
income consists of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities. interest income decreased from $18.6 million to $11.4 million from
fiscal 2004 to fiscal 2005 primarily due to the result of lower overall balances
of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and due to lower market
interest rates. interest income decreased from $23.2 million to $18.6 million
from fiscal 2003 to fiscal 2004 primarily due to lower overall balances of cash,
cash equivalents and marketable securities in fiscal 2004 when compared to
fiscal 2003. this overall decrease was caused by the redemption of our $300.0
million 4% convertible subordinated debentures due 2007, or the notes, in
october 2003.
interest
expense primarily consists of interest incurred as a result of capital lease
obligations and, prior to the redemption in october 2003, interest on the notes.
interest expense decreased from $12.0 million to $0.2 million from fiscal 2004
to fiscal 2005. interest expense decreased from $16.5 million to $12.0 million
from fiscal 2003 to fiscal 2004. these decreases were primarily due to the
redemption of the notes.
other
income (expense), net
other
income and expense primarily consists of realized gains and losses on the sale
of marketable securities. other income decreased by $2.4 million
fromfiscal 2004 to fiscal 2005 primarily due to $2.5 million of realized
gains on the sale of marketable securities during fiscal 2004 as a result of our
liquidation of a significant portion of our marketable securities portfolio in
order to obtain the cash required to redeem the notes in october 2003. this
decrease was offset by a $1.0 million realized gain during fiscal 2005 related
to the receipt of cash and marketable securities as part of an investment
exchange.
stock
option exchange
on
september 26, 2002, we commenced an offer, or the offer, to our employees to
exchange outstanding stock options with exercise prices equal to or greater than
$27.00 per share, or eligible options. theoffer
was implemented in order to improve employee morale by realigning the cash and
equity components of our compensation programs, eliminate significant
out-of-the-money options and reduce the number of outstanding stock options
relative to the number of shares outstanding, or "options overhang", thereby
reducing future potential dilution to existing stockholders. stock
options to purchase an aggregate of approximately 20,615,000 shares were
eligible for tender at the commencement of the offer, representing approximately
39% of our outstanding stock options as of the commencement date of the offer.
only employees of nvidia or one of our subsidiaries as of september 26, 2002 who
continued to be employees through the offer termination date of october 24, 2002
were eligible to participate in the offer. employees who were on medical,
maternity, workers compensation, military or other statutorily protected leaves
of absence, or a personal leave of absence, were also eligible to participate in
the offer. employees who were terminated on or before the offer termination date
of october 24, 2002, were not eligible to participate in the offer. in addition,
our chief executive officer and chief financial officer and members of our board
of directors were not eligible to participate in this offer.
eligible
employees who participated in the offer received, in exchange for the
cancellation of eligible options, a fixed amount of consideration, represented
by fully vested, non-forfeitable common stock less applicable withholding taxes,
equal to the number of shares underlying such eligible options, multiplied by
$3.20, less the amount of applicable tax withholdings, divided by $10.46, the
closing price of our common stock as reported on the nasdaq national market on
october 24, 2002. we concluded that the consideration paid for the eligible
options represented "substantial consideration" as required by issue 39(f) of
eitf issue no. 00-23 "issues relating to accounting for stock compensation under
apb opinion no. 25 and fasb interpretation no. 44," as the $3.20 per eligible
option was at least the fair value for each eligible option, as determined using
the black-scholes option-pricing model. in determining the fair value of the
eligible options using the black-scholes option-pricing model, we used the
following assumptions: (i) the expected remaining life was deemed to be the
remaining term of the options, which was approximately 7.8 years; (ii) a
volatility of 50.0% during the expected life; (iii) a risk-free interest rate of
3.71%; and (iv) no dividends. the amount of $3.20 per eligible option was
established at the commencement of the offer period and remained unchanged
throughout the offer period.
variable
accounting is not required under issue 39(a) of eitf issue no. 00-23 for
eligible options subject to the offer that were not surrendered for
cancellation, because: (i) the shares of our common stock offered as
consideration for the surrendered options were fully vested and non-forfeitable;
and (ii) the number of shares to be received by an employee who accepted the
offer was based on the number of surrendered eligible options multiplied by
$3.20, divided by the fair value of the stock at the date of exchange. we
further concluded that the "look back" and "look forward" provisions of fasb
interpretation no. 44, paragraph 45 did apply to the stock options surrendered
for cancellation. based on the terms of the offer, variable accounting is not
required for any of our outstanding stock options existing at the time of the
offer. we did not grant stock options to any participants in the offer for at
least six months following october 24, 2002. if any stock options were granted
to participants in the offer within the six months following october 24, 2002,
those stock options would have received variable accounting.
on
october 24, 2002, the offer period ended and we were obligated to exchange
approximately 18,843,000 eligible options for total consideration of $61.8
million, consisting of $39.9 million in fully vested, non-forfeitable shares of
our common stock (approximately 3,815,000 shares) and $21.9 million in employer
and employee related taxes. the number of fully vested, non-forfeitable shares
of our common stock to be issued was determined by dividing the total
consideration due (less the amount of applicable tax withholdings) by the
closing price of our common stock on october 24, 2002, of $10.46 per share.
the
shares of our common stock issued in exchange for eligible options were fully
vested. however, a portion of the shares equal to 25% of the total
consideration, based on the closing price of our common stock on the offer
termination date, have a six month holding period, and a portion of the shares
equal to 25% of such total consideration have a one year holding period.
withholding taxes and other charges were deducted from the remaining 50% of the
total consideration, and the shares issued after such withholding did not have a
holding restriction.
income
taxes
we
recognized income tax expense of $25.1 million, $12.3 million and $59.8 million
in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. income tax expense as a percentage
of income before taxes, or our annual effective tax rate, was 20% in fiscal
2005, 14.1% in fiscal 2004 and 39.7% in fiscal 2003.
in the
second quarter of fiscal 2004, we revised our annual effective tax rate for the
year from 30% to 20%. the change in rate was primarily due to federal and state
tax credits and foreign tax rate differentials. in the third and fourth quarters
of fiscal 2004, we had significant items impacting our annual effective tax rate
which included the $3.5 million mediaq ipr&d write-off for which no tax
benefit was recognized, the $75.0 million income tax benefit of certain tax
contingencies as a result of settlement of our federal income tax return exam by
the internal revenue service, or irs, the $38.2 million income tax expense for
the accrual of united states deferred income taxes on previous permanently
reinvested foreign earnings and the $33.6 million income tax expense for the
establishment of a valuation allowance on certain previously recognized state
deferred tax assets determined not more likely than not the be realized due, in
part, to projections of future taxable income. as a result of this change in
rate and the special items incurred during 2004, our annual effective tax rate
for such year was 14.1%. in fiscal 2003, we did not record an income tax benefit
for the third quarter loss before income tax expense as such loss was primarily
attributable to a stock compensation charge for which no income tax benefit may
have been available. as a result, our annual effective tax rate for fiscal 2003
was 39.7%.
as of
january 25, 2004, the irs closed our federal income tax return exam for our
fiscal 2001 and fiscal 2002. during fiscal 2005, the joint committee on
taxation, or the joint committee, completed its review of our irs exam for these
fiscal years and closed such exam with no exception to the conclusions reached
by the irs. accordingly, the results of our exam as recorded in our financial
statements for fiscal 2004 accurately reflected our final settlement reached
with the irs that was subsequently closed, without exception, by the joint
committee during fiscal 2005.
please
refer to note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for
further information regarding the components of our income tax
expense.
convertible
debenture redemption expense
on
october 24, 2003, we fully redeemed the notes. the aggregate principal amount of
the notes outstanding was $300.0 million, which included $18.6 million of notes
that we had purchased in the open market during the three months ended october
26, 2003. the redemption price was equal to approximately 102.7% of the
outstanding principal amount of the notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest up
to, but excluding, the redemption date. in connection with the redemption of the
notes, we recorded a one-time charge in fiscal 2004 of approximately $13.1
million, which included a $7.6 million redemption premium and $5.5 million of
unamortized issuance costs.
liquidity
and capital resources
as of
january 30, 2005, we had $670.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities, an increase of $66.0 million from the end of fiscal 2004. our
portfolio of cash equivalents and marketable securities is managed by several
financial institutions. our investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier
investment grade securities, the diversification of asset type and certain
limits on our portfolio duration.
operating
activities generated cash of $132.2 million, $49.7 million and $265.0 million
during fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. the increase in cash flows from
operating activities in fiscal 2005 when compared to fiscal 2004 was primarily
related to the $25.9 million increase in net income and changes in operating
assets and liabilities. on our consolidated balance sheet, accrued liabilities
increased $37.3 million primarily due to an increase in rebates payable, which
resulted from increased oem business. accounts payable increased $52.9 million
primarily due to purchases from subcontract manufacturers for inventory.
offsetting these increases, our accounts receivable increased $101.1 million
primarily due to increased sales during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005 as
compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004.
investing
activities have consisted primarily of purchases and sales of marketable
securities, purchases of property and equipment, which include leasehold
improvements for our facilities and intangible assets. investing activities used
cash of $152.0 million and provided cash of $88.0 million during fiscal 2005 and
2004, respectively. net cash used by investing activities during fiscal 2005 was
primarily due to $84.7 million of net purchases of marketable securities. in
addition, we used $67.3 million for capital expenditures primarily attributable
to purchases of leasehold improvements for our new data center at our
headquarters campus, new research and development emulation equipment,
technology licenses, software and intangible assets. we expect to spend
approximately $50 million to $70 million for capital expenditures during fiscal
2006, primarily for purchases of software licenses, emulation equipment,
computer and engineering workstations. in addition, we may continue to use cash
in connection with the acquisition of new businesses or assets.
financing
activities provided cash of $13.8 million during fiscal 2005 compared to cash
used of $270.3 million during fiscal 2004. cash provided in fiscal 2005
primarily resulted from $--42.5 million of common stock issued under employee
stock plans, offset by $24.6 million related to our stock repurchase program. in
fiscal 2004, the cash used was primarily due to the $300.0 million redemption of
the notes, which included $18.6 million of notes that we had purchased during
the three months ended october 26, 2003.
stock
repurchase program
on august
9, 2004, we announced a stock repurchase program under which we may purchase up
to $300.0 million of our common stock over a three year period through august
2007. the repurchases will be made in the open market or in privately negotiated
transactions, from time to time, in compliance with rule 10b-18 under the
securities exchange act of 1934, subject to market conditions, applicable legal
requirements and other factors. our stock repurchase program does not obligate
us to acquire any particular amount of common stock and may be suspended at any
time at our discretion. the repurchases will be funded from our available
working capital. during fiscal 2005, we repurchased 2.1 million shares for a
total cost of approximately $24.6 million. we did not repurchase any shares
during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005.
operating
capital and capital expenditure requirements
we
believe that our existing cash balances and anticipated cash flows from
operations will be sufficient to meet our operating, acquisition and capital
requirements for at least the next 12 months. however, there is no assurance
that we will not need to raise additional equity or debt financing within this
time frame. additional financing may not be available on favorable terms or at
all and may be dilutive to our then-current stockholders. we also may require
additional capital for other purposes not presently contemplated. if we are
unable to obtain sufficient capital, we could be required to curtail capital
equipment purchases or research and development expenditures, which could harm
our business. factors that could affect our cash used or generated from
operations and, as a result, our need to seek additional borrowings or capital
include:
decreased
demand and market acceptance for our products and/or our customers
products;
inability
to successfully develop and produce in volume production our
next-generation products;
competitive
pressures resulting in lower than expected average selling prices;
and
new
product announcements or product introductions by our competitors.
for
additional factors see business risks - risks related to our operations - our
operating results are unpredictable and may fluctuate, and if our operating
results are below the expectations of securities analysts or investors, our
stock price could decline.
shelf
registration statement
in
december 2003, we filed a form s-3 with the sec under its "shelf" registration
process. this shelf registration was declared effective by the sec on march 25,
2004. under this shelf registration statement, we may sell common stock,
preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, stock purchase contracts and/or
stock purchase units in one or more offerings up to a total dollar amount of
$500.0 million. unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus
supplement, we intend to use the proceeds for working capital and general
corporate purposes.
3dfx
asset purchase
the 3dfx
asset purchase closed on april 18, 2001. under the terms of the asset purchase
agreement, the cash consideration due at the closing was $70.0 million, less
$15.0 million that was loaned to 3dfx pursuant to a credit agreement dated
december 15, 2000. the asset purchase agreement also provided, subject to the
other provisions thereof, that if 3dfx properly certified that all its debts and
other liabilities had been provided for, then we would have been obligated to
pay 3dfx two million shares of nvidia common stock. if 3dfx could not make such
a certification, but instead properly certified that its debts and liabilities
could be satisfied for less than $25.0 million, then 3dfx could have elected to
receive a cash payment equal to the amount of such debts and liabilities and a
reduced number of shares of our common stock, with such reduction calculated by
dividing the cash payment by $25.00 per share. if 3dfx could not certify that
all of its debts and liabilities had been provided for, or could not be
satisfied, for less than $25.0 million, we would not be obligated under the
agreement to pay any additional consideration for the assets. we are currently
party to litigation relating to certain aspects of the asset purchase and 3dfxs
subsequent bankruptcy in october 2002. please refer to item 3: legal proceedings
for further information regarding this litigation.
contractual
obligations
the
following summarizes our contractual obligations that are both on our balance
sheet and off balance sheet as of january 30, 2005 and the effect such
obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future
periods:
contractual
obligations
total
within
1 year
2-3
years
4-5
years
after
5 years
(in
thousands)
capital
lease obligations, including interest
$
$
$
--
$
--
$
--
operating
leases
191,117
27,534
54,847
52,942
55,794
purchase
obligations (1)
457,273
457,273
--
--
--
other
liabilities reflected on our balance sheet under gaap
4,375
2,000
2,375
--
--
total
contractual obligations
$
653,634
$
487,676
$
57,222
$
52,942
$
55,794
_________________
(1)
represents our inventory purchase commitments as of january 30,
2005.
recently
issued accounting pronouncements
in march
2004, the fasb approved the consensus reached on the emerging issues task force
issue no. 03-1, or eitf 03-1, the
meaning of other-than-temporary impairment and its application to certain
investments. eitf 03-1
provides guidance for identifying impaired investments and new disclosure
requirements for investments that are deemed to be temporarily impaired. on
september 30, 2004, the fasb issued a final staff position eitf issue 03-1-1
that delays the effective date for the measurement and recognition guidance
included in paragraphs 10 through 20 of eitf 03-1. quantitative and qualitative
disclosures required by eitf 03-1 remain effective for fiscal 2005. we do not
believe the impact of adoption of this eitf consensus will have a
material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or
cash flows.
in
november 2004, the fasb issued no. 151, or sfas no. 151, inventory
costs,
an
amendment of arb no. 43, chapter 4. sfas no.
151 amends arb no. 43, chapter 4, to clarify that abnormal amounts of idle
facility expense, freight, handling costs and wasted material (spoilage) should
be recognized as current period charges. in addition, sfas no. 151 requires that
allocation of fixed production overhead to the cost of conversion be based on
the normal capacity of the production facilities. the provision of sfas no. 151
shall be effective for inventory costs incurred during fiscal years beginning
after june 15, 2005. we do not expect the adoption of sfas no. 151 to have a
material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or
cash flows.
in
december 2004, the fasb issued sfas no. 153, or sfas no. 153, exchanges
of nonmonetary assets  an amendment of apb opinion no. 29, accounting for
nonmonetary transactions. sfas
no. 153 eliminates the exception from fair value measurement for nonmonetary
exchanges of similar productive assets in paragraph 21(b) of apb opinion no. 29,
accounting
for nonmonetary transactions, and
replaces it with an exception for exchanges that do not have commercial
substance. sfas no. 153 specifies that a nonmonetary exchange has commercial
substance if the future cash flows of the entity are expected to change
significantly as a result of the exchange. sfas no. 153 is effective for fiscal
periods beginning after june 15, 2005. we do not expect the adoption of sfas 153
to have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of
operations or cash flows.
in
december 2004, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no.
123(r), or sfas no. 123(r), share-based
payment, which
requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all
stock-based compensation payments. sfas no. 123(r) is effective for all interim
and annual periods beginning after june 15, 2005. we are currently evaluating
the impact of sfas no. 123(r) on our operating results and financial condition.
the
adoption of the sfasno. 123(r) fair value method will have a significant
impact on our reported results of operations, although it will have no impact on
our overall financial position. the impact of adoption of sfasno. 123(r)
cannot be predicted at this time because that will depend on the fair value and
number of share-based payments granted in the future. however, had we adopted
sfasno. 123(r) in prior periods, the magnitude of the impact of that
standard would have approximated the impact of statement
of financial accounting standards no. 123, accounting
for stock-based compensation,assuming
the application of the black-scholes model as described in the disclosure of pro
forma net income (loss) and pro forma netincome (loss) per share in
note 1 of
the notes to the consolidated financial statements under the subheading
stock-based compensation.
sfasno. 123(r) also requires the benefits of tax deductions in excess of
recognized compensation cost to be reported as a financing cash flow, rather
than as an operating cash flow as required under current literature. this
requirement will reduce net operating cash flows and increase net financing cash
flows in periods after adoption.
business
risks
in
addition to the risks discussed in item 1. business and "management's
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations," our
business is subject to the risks set forth below.
risks
related to our operations
our
failure to estimate customer demand properly may result in excess or obsolete
inventory or, conversely, may result in inadequate inventory levels, either of
which could adversely affect our financial results.
inventory
purchases are based upon future demand forecasts, which may not accurately
predict the quantity or type of our products that our customers will want in the
future. in forecasting demand, we must make multiple assumptions which may prove
to be incorrect. if there were to be a sudden and significant decrease in demand
for our products, or if there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence
because of rapidly changing technology and customer requirements, we could be
required to write-down our inventory and our gross margin could be adversely
affected. additionally, if we fail to estimate customer demand properly before a
new product is introduced, we may end up with excess inventory levels of older
products, which could result in write-downs of the value of our inventory and
our gross margin could be adversely affected. during the second quarter of
fiscal 2005, demand for our non pci express mainstream desktop products declined
significantly due in large part to unexpected competitive pricing actions taken
by our competition. as a result of these competitive pricing actions, we were
required to reduce the average selling prices of certain of our mainstream
desktop products and our gross margin was adversely affected. if such
competitive pricing actions were to recur in the future, we could be forced to
continue to reduce average selling prices or to write-down our inventory and our
gross margin could be adversely affected. conversely, if we underestimate our
customers demand for our products, we may have inadequate manufacturing
capability and may not be able to obtain sufficient inventory to fill our
customers orders on a timely basis. even if we are able to increase production
levels to meet customer demand, we may not be able to do so in a cost effective
manner. inability to fill our customers' orders on a timely basis could damage
our customer relationships, result in lost revenue, cause a loss in market share
or damage our reputation.
we
order materials in advance of anticipated customer demand. therefore, we have
limited ability to reduce our inventory purchase commitments quickly in response
to any revenue shortfalls.
substantially
all of our sales are made on the basis of purchase orders rather than long-term
agreements. as a result, we may commit resources to the production of products
without having received advance purchase commitments from customers. any
inability to sell products to which we have devoted significant resources could
harm our business. in addition, cancellation or deferral of product orders could
result in our holding excess inventory, which could adversely affect our gross
margin and restrict our ability to fund operations. we may build inventories
during periods of anticipated growth and in connection with selling workstation
boards directly to major original equipment manufacturers, or oems.
additionally, because we typically recognize a substantial portion of our
revenue in the last month of each quarter, we may not be able to reduce our
inventory purchase commitments in a timely manner in response to any revenue
shortfalls. we could be subject to excess or obsolete inventories and be
required to take corresponding inventory write-downs if growth slows or if we
incorrectly forecast product demand. a reduction in demand could negatively
impact our gross margin and financial results.
we
are dependent on key personnel and the loss of these employees could negatively
impact our business.
our
performance is substantially dependent on the performance of our executive
officers and key employees. none of our officers or employees is bound by an
employment agreement, meaning our relationships with our officers and employees
are at will. we do not have "key person" life insurance policies on any of our
employees. the loss of the services of any of our executive officers, technical
personnel or other key employees, particularly jen-hsun huang, our president and
chief executive officer, would harm our business. our success will depend on our
ability to identify, hire, train and retain highly qualified technical and
managerial personnel. our failure to attract and retain the necessary technical
and managerial personnel would harm our business. the integration of new
executives or personnel could disrupt our ongoing operations.
failure
to achieve expected manufacturing yields for existing and/or new products would
reduce our gross margin.
semiconductor
manufacturing yields are a function both of product design, which is developed
largely by us, and process technology, which typically is proprietary to the
manufacturer. since low yields may result from either design or process
technology failures, yield problems may not be effectively determined or
resolved until an actual product exists that can be analyzed and tested to
identify process sensitivities relating to the design rules that are used. as a
result, yield problems may not be identified until well into the production
process. resolution of yield problems would require cooperation by and
communication between us and the manufacturer.
because
of our potentially limited access to wafer fabrication capacity from our
manufacturers, any decrease in manufacturing yields could result in an increase
in our per unit costs and force us to allocate our available product supply
among our customers. this could potentially harm customer relationships, our
reputation, our revenue and our gross profit. our wafer manufacturers may be
unable to achieve or maintain acceptable manufacturing yields in the future. our
inability to achieve planned yields from our wafer manufacturers could harm our
business. we also face the risk of product recalls or product returns resulting
from design or manufacturing defects that are not discovered during the
manufacturing and testing process. a significant number of product returns due
to a defect or recall, could damage our reputation and result in customers
working with our competitors.
to
stay competitive, we may have to invest more resources in research and
development.
if new
competitors, technological advances by existing competitors or other competitive
factors require us to invest significantly greater resources than anticipated in
research and development efforts, our operating expenses would increase. we have
substantially increased our engineering and technical resources and have 1,231
full-time employees engaged in research and development as of january 30, 2005,
compared to 1,057 employees as of january 25, 2004. during fiscal 2005, 2004 and
2003, research and development expenditures represented 17%, 15% and 12% as a
percentage of revenue, respectively. if we are required to invest significantly
greater resources than anticipated in research and development efforts without
an increase in revenue, our operating results would decline. we anticipate that
we will continue to devote substantial resources to research and development,
and we expect these expenses to increase in absolute dollars in the foreseeable
future due to the increased complexity and the greater number of products under
development. research and development expenses are likely to fluctuate from time
to time to the extent we make periodic incremental investments in research and
development and these investments may be independent of our level of
revenue.
our
operating expenses are relatively fixed and we may have limited ability to
reduce operating expenses quickly in response to any revenue shortfalls.
during
fiscal 2005 and 2004, our operating expenses, which are comprised of research
and development expenses and sales, general and administrative expenses,
represented 27% and 24% of our total revenue, respectively. since we typically
recognize a substantial portion of our revenue in the last month of each
quarter, we may not be able to adjust our operating expenses in a timely manner
in response to any revenue shortfalls. if we are unable to reduce operating
expenses quickly in response to any revenue shortfalls it would negatively
impact our financial results.
failure
to transition to new manufacturing process technologies could affect our ability
to compete effectively.
our
strategy is to utilize the most advanced manufacturing process technology
appropriate for our products and available from commercial third-party
foundries. use of advanced processes may have greater risk of initial yield
problems and higher product cost. manufacturing process technologies are subject
to rapid change and require significant expenditures for research and
development. we continuously evaluate the benefits of migrating to smaller
geometry process technologies in order to improve performance and reduce costs.
we currently use 0.15 micron, 0.14 micron, 0.13 micron and 0.11 micron process
technologies for our family of gpus, mcps and wmps. the majority of our newest
gpus, the geforce 6 series, geforce fx and the geforce fx go products are
manufactured in 0.13 micron and 0.11 micron process technology.
we have
experienced difficulty in migrating to new manufacturing processes in the past
and, consequently, have suffered reduced yields, delays in product deliveries
and increased expense levels. we may face similar difficulties, delays and
expenses as we continue to transition our products to smaller geometry
processes. moreover, we are dependent on our relationships with our third-party
manufacturers to migrate to smaller geometry processes successfully. the
inability by us or our third-party manufacturers to transition to new
manufacturing process technologies may adversely affect our operating results
and negatively impact our gross margin.
our
operating results are unpredictable and may fluctuate, and if our operating
results are below the expectations of securities analysts or investors, our
stock price could decline.
many of
our revenue components fluctuate and are difficult to predict, and our operating
expenses are largely independent of revenue in any particular period. it is,
therefore, difficult for us to accurately forecast revenue and profits or
losses. as a result, it is possible that in some quarters our operating results
could be below the expectations of securities analysts or investors, which could
cause the trading price of our common stock to decline, perhaps substantially.
for example, on august 5, 2004, we announced that the operating results for our
second quarter of fiscal 2005 included significantly lower amounts of revenue
and earnings per share than had been expected by securities analysts. our
announcement was followed by a decline in the trading price of our common stock.
conversely, on february 17, 2005, we announced better than expected financial
results for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. this announcement was followed by
an increase in the price of our common stock. we believe that our quarterly and
annual results of operations may continue to be affected by a variety of factors
that could harm our revenue, gross profit and results of operations.
factors
that have affected our results of operations in the past, and could affect our
results of operations in the future, include the following:
demand
and market acceptance for our products and/or our customers products;
the
successful development and volume production of our next-generation
products;
new
product announcements or product introductions by our competitors;
our
ability to introduce new products in accordance with oems design
requirements and design cycles;
changes
in the timing of product orders due to unexpected delays in the
introduction of our customers products;
the
level of growth or decline of the pc industry in
general;
slower
than expected growth of demand for new
technologies;
fluctuations
in the availability of manufacturing capacity or manufacturing yields;
declines
in spending by corporations and consumers related to perceptions regarding
an economic downturn in the united states and international economies;
competitive
pressures resulting in lower than expected average selling prices;
product
rates of return in excess of that forecasted or expected due to quality
issues;
the
rescheduling or cancellation of customer orders;
the
loss of a key customer or the termination of a strategic relationship;
seasonal
fluctuations associated with the pc and consumer products market;
substantial
disruption in our suppliers operations, as a result of a natural
disaster, equipment failure, terrorism or other causes;
supply
constraints for and changes in the cost of the other components
incorporated into our customers products, including memory devices;
our
inability to reduce the manufacturing costs of our products;
legal
and other costs related to defending intellectual property and other types
of lawsuits;
availability
of licenses at commercially reasonable terms for the continued sale or
development of new products;
customer
receivable bad debt write-offs;
costs
associated with the repair and replacement of defective products;
unexpected
inventory write-downs; and
introductions
of enabling technologies to keep pace with faster generations of
processors and controllers.
any one
or more of the factors discussed above could prevent us from achieving our
expected future revenue or net income. accordingly, we believe that
period-to-period comparisons of our results of operations should not be relied
upon as an indication of future performance. in addition, the results of any
quarterly period are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for a
full fiscal year.
risks
related to our products
we
need to develop new products and to manage product transitions in order to
succeed.
our
business depends to a significant extent on our ability to successfully develop
new products for our target segments. our add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers, original design manufacturers, or odms, and major oem customers
typically introduce new system configurations as often as twice per year,
typically based on spring and fall design cycles. accordingly, when our
customers are making their design decisions, our existing products must have
competitive performance levels or we must timely introduce new products in order
to be included in new system configurations. this requires that we do the
following:
anticipate
the features and functionality that consumers will demand;
incorporate
those features and functionalities into products that meet the exacting
design requirements of oems, odms, cems and add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers;
price
our products competitively; and
introduce
the products to the market within the limited window for oems, odms and
add-in board and motherboard manufacturers.
if odms
and oems do not include our products in their systems, they will typically not
use our products in their design systems until at least the next design
configuration. therefore, we endeavor to develop close relationships with our
oems and odms in an attempt to allow us to better anticipate and address
customer needs in new products.
as a
result, we believe that significant expenditures for research and development
will continue to be required in the future. we make these expenditures
independent of the level of purchase commitments from our customers. if our new
products are not adopted by our customers, our business results may be adversely
affected. the success of new product introductions will depend on many factors,
including the following:
proper
new product definition;
timely
completion and introduction of new product designs;
the
ability of ibm, tsmc, umc, chartered and any additional third-party
manufacturers to effectively manufacture our new products in a timely
manner;
dependence
on third-party subcontractors for assembly, testing and packaging of our
products and in meeting product delivery schedules and maintaining product
quality;
the
quality of any new products;
differentiation
of new products from those of our competitors;
market
acceptance of our products and our customers' products; and
availability
of adequate quantity and configurations of various types of memory
products.
a
critical component of our product development effort is our partnerships with
leaders in the computer aided design, or cad, industry. we have invested
significant resources to develop relationships with industry leaders, including
cadence design systems, inc. and synopsys, inc., often assisting these companies
in the product definition of their new products. we believe that forming these
relationships and utilizing next-generation development tools to design,
simulate and verify our products will help us remain at the forefront of the 3d
graphics, communications and networking markets and develop products that
utilize leading-edge technology on a rapid basis. we believe this approach
assists us in meeting the new design schedules of pc oems and cellular phone
manufacturers. if these relationships are not successful, we may not be able to
develop new products in a timely manner, which could result in a loss of market
share, a decrease in revenue and a negative impact on our operating results.
in
addition, our strategy includes utilizing the most advanced semiconductor
process technology appropriate for our products and available from commercial
third-party foundries. use of advanced processes has in the past resulted in
initial yield problems. new products that we introduce may not incorporate the
features and functionality demanded by oems, odms, add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers and consumers of pcs and consumer electronics. even if we are able
to provide the demanded features and functionality, we may not be able to
successfully develop or introduce new products in sufficient volumes within the
appropriate time to meet both the oems design cycles and market demand. we have
in the past experienced delays in the development of some new products. our
failure to successfully develop, introduce or achieve market acceptance for new
digital media processors would harm our business. in particular, during the
first half of fiscal 2004, we experienced delays in the introduction of digital
media processors using our next generation technology. in addition, we expected
to ramp up sales of our pci express products during the second quarter of fiscal
2005, but as a result of intels delayed pci express chipset production,
followed by their product recall, the performance desktop segment was impacted
by stalling our customers production ramp of our geforce pcx gpus. any such
delay in the future or failure of our digital media processors or other
processors to meet or exceed specifications of competitive products could
materially harm our business.
our
failure to identify new market or product opportunities or develop new products
could harm our business.
as our
digital media processors develop and competition increases, we anticipate that
product life cycles at the high end will remain short and average selling prices
will continue to decline. in particular, we expect average selling prices and
gross margins for our digital media processors to decline as each product
matures and as unit volume increases. as a result, we will need to introduce new
products and enhancements to existing products to maintain overall average
selling prices and gross margins. in order for our digital media processors to
achieve high volumes, leading pc oems, odms, and add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers must select our digital media processor for design into their
products, and then successfully complete the designs of their products and sell
them. we may be unable to successfully identify new product opportunities or to
develop and bring to market new products in a timely fashion. in addition, we
cannot guarantee that new products we develop will be selected for design into
pc oems, odms, and add-in board and motherboard manufacturers products, that
any new designs will be successfully completed or that any new products will be
sold. as the complexity of our products and the manufacturing process for our
products increases, there is an increasing risk that we will experience problems
with the performance of our products and that there will be delays in the
development, introduction or volume shipment of our products. we may experience
difficulties related to the production of current or future products or other
factors that may delay the introduction or volume sale of new products we
develop. in addition, we may be unable to successfully manage the production
transition risks with respect to future products. failure to achieve any of the
foregoing with respect to future products or product enhancements could result
in rapidly declining average selling prices, reduced margins and reduced demand
for products or loss of market share. in addition, technologies developed by
others may render our digital media processors non-competitive or obsolete or
result in our holding excess inventory, any of which would harm our
business.
pci
express is central to our gpu as well as mcp strategies and the outcome of this
strategy will impact our business.
pci
express is expected to enable a new level of performance for high bandwidth
applications like graphics and networking. the transition to pci express, which
is extremely complex, is central to our gpu and mcp objectives this fiscal year.
we initiated this transition by creating our geforce pcx series of gpus, using
hsi technology. during the second quarter of fiscal 2005, we executed on our
strategy to deliver a full line of gpus ready to support pci express chipsets.
we expected to ramp up sales of our pci express products during the second
quarter of fiscal 2005, but as a result of intels delayed pci express chipset
production, followed by their product recall, the performance desktop segment
was impacted by stalling our customers production ramp of our geforce pcx gpus.
during the third quarter of fiscal 2005, we announced and ramped up sales of
thegeforce 6600 gt, geforce 6600 and the geforce 6200,our first
native pci expressgpus. in may 2004, we announced the mobile pci express
module specification, or mxm. mxm was jointly developed by nvidia and leading
notebook pc manufacturers in an effort to accelerate the adoption of pci
express-based notebooks in all market segments. mxm is an open design
specification that supports a wide range of graphics solutions from most gpu
manufacturers, allowing system integrators maximum flexibility for
build-to-order with various graphics solutions. mxm also serves as the primary
delivery vehicle for our geforce go 6 series of gpus.
industry
adoption of pci express was slower than we expected during fiscal 2005 and there
is no assurance that the adoption rate will increase during fiscal 2006. if our
pci express compatible products do not meet consumer and/or customer demand or
expectations, our business results could suffer.
we
could suffer a loss of market share if our products contain significant defects.
products
as complex as those we offer may contain defects or experience failures when
introduced or when new versions or enhancements to existing products are
released. we have in the past discovered defects and incompatibilities with
customers hardware in certain of our products and may experience delays or loss
of revenue to correct any new defects or incompatibilities in the future. errors
in new products or releases after commencement of commercial shipments could
result in loss of market share, failure to achieve market acceptance, or loss of
design wins. our products typically go through only one verification cycle prior
to beginning volume production and distribution. as a result, our products may
contain defects or flaws that are undetected prior to volume production and
distribution. if these defects or flaws exist and are not detected prior to
volume production and distribution, we may be required to reimburse customers
for costs to repair or replace the affected products in the field. we may also
be required to incur additional research and development costs to find and
correct the defect, which could divert the attention of our management and
engineers from the development of new products. these costs could be significant
and could adversely affect our business and operating results. we may also
suffer a loss of reputation and/or a loss in our market share, either of which
could materially harm our financial results.
risks
related to our partners
we
sell our products to a small number of customers and our business could suffer
by the loss of these customers.
we have
only a limited number of customers and our sales are highly concentrated.
although a small number of our customers represent the majority of our revenue,
their end customers include a large number of oems and system integrators
throughout the world. our sales process involves achieving key design wins with
leading pc oems and major system builders and supporting the product design into
high volume production with key cems, odms, motherboard and add-in board
manufacturers. these design wins in turn influence the retail and system builder
channel that is serviced by cems, odms, motherboard and add-in board
manufacturers. our distribution strategy is to work with a small number of
leading independent cems, odms, motherboard manufacturers, add-in board
manufacturers and distributors, each of which has relationships with a broad
range of system builders and leading pc oems. currently, we sell a significant
majority of our digital media processors directly to distributors, cems, odms,
motherboard and add-in board manufacturers, which then sell boards with our
graphics processor to leading pc oems, retail outlets and to a large number of
system builders. if we were to lose sales to our pc oems, cems, odms,
motherboard and add-in board manufacturers and were unable to replace the lost
sales with sales to different customers, or if they were to significantly reduce
the number of products they order from us, our revenue may not reach or exceed
the expected level in any period, which could harm our financial condition and
our results of operations.
difficulties
in collecting accounts receivable could result in significant charges against
income, which could harm our business.
our
accounts receivable are highly concentrated and make us vulnerable to adverse
changes in our customers' businesses and to downturns in the economy and the
industry. in addition, difficulties in collecting accounts receivable or the
loss of any significant customer could materially and adversely affect our
financial condition and results of operations. accounts receivable owed by
foreign customers may be difficult to collect. we maintain an allowance for
doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our
customers to make required payments. this allowance consists of an amount
identified for specific customers and an amount based on overall estimated
exposure. as of the end of fiscal 2005, fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003 our
allowance for doubtful accounts represented 0.1%, 0.1% and 0.2% of revenue for
each fiscal quarter, respectively. if the financial condition of our customers
were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make
payments, additional allowances may be required which could adversely affect our
operating results. we may have to record additional reserves or write-offs in
the future, which could negatively impact our financial results.
we
depend on foundries and independent contractors to manufacture our products and
these third parties may not be able to satisfy our manufacturing requirements,
which would harm our business.
we do not
manufacture the semiconductor wafers used for our products and do not own or
operate a wafer fabrication facility. our products require wafers manufactured
with state-of-the-art fabrication equipment and techniques. we utilize tsmc,
ibm, umc and chartered to produce our semiconductor wafers and utilize
independent subcontractors to perform assembly, testing and packaging. our wafer
requirements represent a significant portion of the total production capacity at
ibm. we depend on these suppliers to allocate to us a portion of their
manufacturing capacity sufficient to meet our needs, to produce products of
acceptable quality and at acceptable manufacturing yields, and to deliver those
products to us on a timely basis at acceptable prices. these manufacturers may
be unable to meet our near-term or long-term manufacturing or pricing
requirements. we obtain manufacturing services on a purchase order basis. the
foundries we use have no obligation to provide us with any specified minimum
quantities of product. tsmc, ibm, umc and chartered fabricate wafers for other
companies, including certain of our competitors, and could choose to prioritize
capacity for other users, reduce or eliminate deliveries to us, or increase the
prices that they charge us on short notice. if we are unable to meet customer
demand due to reduced or eliminated deliveries, we could lose sales to
customers, which would negatively impact our revenue and our reputation. because
the lead-time needed to establish a strategic relationship with a new
manufacturing partner could be several quarters, there is no readily available
alternative source of supply for any specific product. in addition, the time and
expense to qualify a new foundry could result in additional expense, diversion
of resources or lost sales any of which would negatively impact our financial
results. we believe that long-term market acceptance for our products will
depend on reliable relationships with tsmc, ibm, umc, chartered and any other
manufacturers we may use to ensure adequate product supply and competitive
pricing to respond to customer demand. any difficulties like these would harm
our business.
we
are dependent on third parties located outside of the united states for
assembly, testing and packaging of our products, which reduces our control over
the delivery and quantity of our products.
our
digital media processors are assembled and tested by siliconware precision
industries company ltd., amkor technology inc., stats chippac incorporated and
advanced semiconductor engineering, inc., all of which are located outside of
the united states. we do not have long-term agreements with any of these
subcontractors. as a result of our dependence on third-party subcontractors for
assembly, testing and packaging of our products, we do not directly control
product delivery schedules or product quality. any product shortages, quality
assurance problems or political instability outside of the united states could
increase the costs of manufacture, assembly or testing of our products, which
could cause our gross margin to decline. due to the amount of time typically
required to qualify assemblers and testers, we could experience significant
delays in the shipment of our products if we are required to find alternative
third parties to assemble or test our products or components. any such delays
could result in a loss of reputation or a decrease in sales to our customers.
we
rely on third-party vendors to supply tools to us for the development of our new
products and we may be unable to obtain the tools necessary to develop these
products.
in the
design and development of new products and product enhancements, we rely on
third-party software development tools. while we currently are not dependent on
any one vendor for the supply of these tools, some or all of these tools may not
be readily available in the future. for example, we have experienced delays in
the introduction of products in the past as a result of the inability of then
available software development tools to fully simulate the complex features and
functionalities of our products. the design requirements necessary to meet
consumer demands for more features and greater functionality from digital media
processors in the future may exceed the capabilities of the software development
tools that are available to us. if the software development tools we use become
unavailable or fail to produce designs that meet consumer demands, our business
could suffer.
we
may not be able to realize the potential financial or strategic benefits of
business acquisitions, which could hurt our ability to grow our business,
develop new products and sell our products.
in the
past we have acquired and invested in other businesses that offered products,
services and technologies that we believed would help expand or enhance our
products and services or help expand our distribution channels. we may enter
into future acquisitions of, or investments in, businesses, in order to
complement or expand our current businesses or enter into a new business
segment. if we do consider an acquisition, strategic alliance or joint venture,
the negotiations could divert managements attention as well as other resources.
for any previous or future acquisition or investment, the following risks could
impair our ability to grow our business and develop new products, and
ultimately, could impair our ability to sell our products and may not lead to
any improvements in our financial results:
difficulty
in combining the technology, products, operations or workforce of the
acquired business with our business;
disruption
of our ongoing businesses;
difficulty
in realizing the potential financial or strategic benefits of the
transaction;
diversion
of managements attention from our
business;
difficulty
in maintaining uniform standards, controls, procedures and
policies;
disruption
of or delays in ongoing research and development
efforts;
diversion
of capital and other resources;
assumption
of liabilities;
difficulties
in entering into new markets in which we have limited or no experience and
where competitors in such market segments have stronger positions; and
impairment
of relationships with employees and customers, or the loss of key
employees as a result of any integration of new businesses and management
personnel.
in
addition, the consideration for any future acquisition could be paid in cash,
shares of our common stock, the issuance of convertible debt securities or a
combination of cash, convertible debt and common stock. if we pay a portion of
the purchase price in cash, our cash reserves would be reduced. if the
consideration is paid with shares of our common stock, or convertible
debentures, the holdings of existing stockholders would be further diluted. we
cannot forecast the number, timing or size of future acquisitions, or the effect
that any such acquisitions might have on our operations or financial
results.
the
impact on our future revenue by microsofts announcement that it has entered
into an agreement with one of our competitors to develop technology for future
xbox products and services is uncertain.
during
fiscal 2004, microsoft announced that it had entered into an agreement with one
of our competitors to develop technology for future xbox products and services.
the impact that this announcement may have on our future revenue from microsoft
is uncertain, but we anticipate that we will not achieve historical levels of
xbox revenue in fiscal 2006. revenue from microsoft during fiscal 2005, fiscal
2004 and fiscal 2003 accounted for 13%, 15% and 23% respectively, of our total
revenue. if our revenue from microsoft declines during fiscal 2006, we will need
to increase revenue from other customers in order to be able to maintain our
current revenue level and operating results. if we do not replace any reduction
in revenue from microsoft with revenue from other customers, our operating
results would be adversely affected.
provisions
in our certificate of incorporation, our bylaws and our agreement with microsoft
could delay or prevent a change in control.
our
certificate of incorporation and bylaws contain provisions that could make it
more difficult for a third party to acquire a majority of our outstanding voting
stock. these provisions include the following:
the
ability of the board of directors to create and issue preferred stock
without prior stockholder approval;
the
prohibition of stockholder action by written consent;
a
classified board of directors; and
advance
notice requirements for director nominations and stockholder proposals.
on march
5, 2000, we entered into an agreement with microsoft in which we agreed to
develop and sell graphics chips and to license certain technology to microsoft
and its licensees for use in the xbox. in the event that an individual or
corporation makes an offer to purchase shares equal to or greater than 30% of
the outstanding shares of our common stock, microsoft has first and last rights
of refusal to purchase the stock. the microsoft provision and the other factors
listed above could also delay or prevent a change in control of nvidia.
risks
related to our competition
the
3d graphics, platform processor and handheld industries are highly competitive
and we may be unable to compete.
the
market for gpus, mcps and wmps for pcs and handhelds is intensely competitive
and is characterized by rapid technological change, evolving industry standards
and declining average selling prices. we believe that the principal competitive
factors in this market are performance, breadth of product offerings, access to
customers and distribution channels, backward-forward software support,
conformity to industry standard application programming interfaces, or apis,
manufacturing capabilities, price of digital media processors and total system
costs of add-in boards and motherboards. we believe that our ability to remain
competitive will depend on how well we are able to anticipate the features and
functions that customers will demand and whether we are able to deliver
consistent volumes of our products at acceptable levels of quality. we expect
competition to increase both from existing competitors and new market entrants
with products that may be less costly than ours, or may provide better
performance or additional features not provided by our products, which could
harm our business. further, we expect substantial competition from intels
publicized focus on moving to selling platform solutions dominated by intel
products, such as the centrino platform.
an
additional significant source of competition is from companies that provide or
intend to provide gpu and mcp solutions for the pc and wmp segments. some of our
competitors may have greater marketing, financial, distribution and
manufacturing resources than we do and may be more able to adapt to customer or
technological changes. our current competitors include the following:
suppliers
of mcps that incorporate a combination of 3d graphics, networking, audio,
communications and input/output, or i/o, functionality as part of their
existing solutions, such as ati, broadcom, intel, silicon integrated
systems, inc. and via;
suppliers
of standalone desktop gpus that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as
part of their existing solutions, such as ati, creative technology, matrox
electronics systems ltd. and xgi technology,
inc.;
suppliers
of standalone notebook gpus that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as
part of their existing solutions, such as ati, silicon motion corporation
and the joint venture of a division of sonicblue incorporated (formerly s3
incorporated) and via; and
suppliers
of wmps for handheld devices that incorporate advanced graphics
functionality as part of their existing solutions, such as ati, renesas
technology, broadcom and seiko-epson.
if and to
the extent we offer products outside of the pc, consumer electronics and
handheld segments, we may face competition from some of our existing competitors
as well as from companies with which we currently do not compete. we cannot
accurately predict if we will compete successfully in any new markets we may
enter. if we are unable to compete in our current and any new markets, our
financial results will suffer.
our
failure to achieve one or more design wins would harm our business.
our
future success will depend in large part on achieving design wins, which entails
having our existing and future products chosen for hardware components or
subassemblies designed by pc oems, odms, and add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers. our add-in board and motherboard manufacturers and major oem and
odm customers typically introduce new system configurations as often as twice
per year, generally based on spring and fall design cycles. accordingly, at the
time our oem and odm customers are making their decisions, our existing products
must have competitive performance levels or we must timely introduce new
products with such performance characteristics, consistent quality, correct
price and an adequate feature-set in order to be included in new system
configurations. our failure to achieve one or more design wins would harm our
business. the process of being qualified for inclusion in an oems product can
be lengthy and could cause us to miss a cycle in the demand of end users for a
particular product feature, which also could harm our business. even if we
achieve a significant number of design wins, there can be no assurance that our
oem and odm customers will actually take the design to production or that the
design will be commercially successful.
our
ability to achieve design wins also depends in part on our ability to identify
and ensure compliance with evolving industry standards. unanticipated changes in
industry standards could render our products incompatible with products
developed by major hardware manufacturers and software developers, including
intel and microsoft. such changes would require us to invest significant time
and resources to redesign our products to ensure compliance with relevant
standards. if our products are not in compliance with prevailing industry
standards for a significant period of time, our ability to achieve design wins
could suffer. if we are unable to achieve new design wins for existing or new
customers, we may lose market share and our operating results would be
negatively impacted.
risks
related to market conditions
we
are dependent on the pc market and the rate of its growth has and may in the
future have a negative impact on our business.
we derive
the majority of our revenue from the sale of products for use in the desktop pc
and notebook pc segments, including professional workstations. we expect to
continue to derive most of our revenue from the sale or license of products for
use in the desktop pc and notebook pc segments in the next several years. a
reduction in sales of pcs, or a reduction in the growth rate of pc sales, will
reduce demand for our products. moreover, changes in demand could be large and
sudden. since pc manufacturers often build inventories during periods of
anticipated growth, they may be left with excess inventories if growth slows or
if they have incorrectly forecast product transitions. in these cases, pc
manufacturers may abruptly suspend substantially all purchases of additional
inventory from suppliers like us until the excess inventory has been absorbed.
if
our products do not continue to be accepted by the pc and consumer electronics
segments or if demand by the pc and consumer electronics segments for new and
innovative products decreases, our business and operating results would suffer.
our
success depends in part upon continued broad adoption of our digital media
processors for 3d graphics in pc and consumer electronics applications. the
market for digital media processors has been characterized by unpredictable and
sometimes rapid shifts in the popularity of products, often caused by the
publication of competitive industry benchmark results, changes in dynamic
random-access memory devices pricing and other changes in the total system cost
of add-in boards, as well as by severe price competition and by frequent new
technology and product introductions. only a small number of products have
achieved broad market acceptance and such market acceptance, if achieved, is
difficult to sustain due to intense competition and frequent new technology and
product introductions. since the pc segment is our core business, our business
would suffer if for any reason our current or future digital media processors do
not continue to achieve widespread acceptance in the pc segment. if we are
unable to complete the timely development of products or if we were unable to
successfully and cost-effectively manufacture and deliver products that meet the
requirements of the pc segment, we may experience a decrease in revenue which
could negatively impact our operating results. additionally, there can be no
assurance that the industry will continue to demand new products with improved
standards, features or performance. if our customers and the market do not
continue to demand new products with increased performance, features,
functionality or standards, sales of our products could decline and our business
and operating results could suffer.
we
are subject to risks associated with international operations which may harm our
business.
a
significant portion of our semiconductor wafers are manufactured, assembled,
tested and packaged by third-parties located outside of the united states.
additionally, we generated 76% of our total revenue from sales to customers
outside of the united states and other americas for the fiscal 2005. revenue
from sales to customers outside of the united states and other americas for
fiscal 2004 and 2003 accounted for 75% and 68% of total revenue, respectively.
the manufacture, assembly, test and packaging of our products outside of the
united states and sales to these customers outside of the united states and
other americas subjects us to a number of risks associated with conducting
business outside of the united states and other americas, including, but not
limited to:
international
economic and political conditions;
unexpected
changes in, or impositions of, legislative or regulatory requirements;
labor
issues in foreign countries;
cultural
differences in the conduct of business;
inadequate
local infrastructure;
delays
resulting from difficulty in obtaining export licenses for certain
technology, tariffs, quotas and other trade barriers and restrictions;
transportation
delays;
longer
payment cycles;
difficulty
in collecting accounts receivable;
fluctuations
in currency exchange rates;
imposition
of additional taxes and penalties;
different
legal standards with respect to protection of intellectual property;
the
burdens of complying with a variety of foreign laws; and
other
factors beyond our control, including terrorism, civil unrest, war and
diseases such as severe acute respiratory syndrome, or sars and bird flu.
if sales
to any of our customers outside of the united states and other americas are
delayed or cancelled because of any of the above factors, our revenue may be
negatively impacted.
we also
have sales offices in several international locations including taiwan, russia,
japan, china, hong kong, germany, france and the united kingdom. we have a
design center in germany and recently opened a design center in india. our
international operations are subject to the many of the risks contained in the
above list. difficulties with our international operations, including finding
appropriate staffing, may divert managements attention and other resources all
of which could negatively impact our operating results.
currently,
all of our arrangements with third-party manufacturers and subcontractors
provide for pricing and payment in united states dollars as are sales to our
customers located outside of the united states and other americas. increases in
the value of the united states dollar relative to other currencies would make
our products more expensive, which would negatively impact our ability to
compete. conversely, decreases in the value of the united states dollar
relative to other currencies could result in our suppliers raising their prices
in order to continue doing business with us. to date, we have not engaged in any
currency hedging activities, although we may do so in the future. fluctuations
in currency exchange rates could harm our business in the future.
hostilities
involving the united states and/or terrorist attacks could harm our business.
the
financial, political, economic and other uncertainties following the terrorist
attacks upon the united states led to a weakening of the global economy.
subsequent terrorist acts and/or the threat of future outbreak or continued
escalation of hostilities involving the united states and iraq or other
countries could adversely affect the growth rate of our revenue and have an
adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. in
addition, any escalation in these events or similar future events may disrupt
our operations or those of our customers, distributors and suppliers, which
could also adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of
operations.
our
business is cyclical in nature and an industry downturn could harm our financial
results.
our
business is directly affected by market conditions in the highly cyclical
semiconductor industry, including alternating periods of overcapacity and
capacity constraints, variations in manufacturing costs and yields, significant
expenditures for capital equipment and product development and rapid
technological change. if we are unable to respond to changes in our industry,
which can be unpredictable and rapid, in an efficient and timely manner, our
operating results could suffer. in particular, from time to time, the
semiconductor industry has experienced significant and sometimes prolonged
downturns characterized by diminished product demand and accelerated erosion of
average selling prices. if we cannot take appropriate actions such as reducing
our costs to sufficiently offset declines in demand during a downturn, our
revenue and earnings will suffer during downturns.
political
instability in taiwan and in the peoples republic of china or elsewhere could
harm our business.
because
of our reliance on tsmc and umc, our business may be harmed by political
instability in taiwan, including the worsening of the strained relations between
the peoples republic of china and taiwan, or if relations between the united
states and the peoples republic of china are strained due to foreign relations
events. if any of our suppliers experienced a substantial disruption in their
operations, as a result of a natural disaster, political unrest, economic
instability, acts of terrorism or war, equipment failure or other cause, could
harm our business.
we
are exposed to fluctuations in the market values of our portfolio investments
and in interest rates.
we invest
in a variety of financial instruments, consisting principally of investments in
commercial paper, money market funds and highly liquid debt securities of
corporations, municipalities and the united states government and its agencies.
these investments are denominated in united states dollars.
we
account for our investment instruments in accordance with sfas no. 115. all of
the cash equivalents and marketable securities are treated as
"available-for-sale" under sfas no. 115. investments in both fixed rate and
floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree of interest rate risk.
fixed rate debt securities may have their market value adversely impacted due to
a rise in interest rates, while floating rate securities may produce less income
than expected if interest rates fall. part of our portfolio includes equity
investments in publicly traded companies, the value of which are subject to
market price volatility. due in part to these factors, our future investment
income may fall short of expectations due to changes in interest rates or if the
decline in fair value of our publicly traded equity investments is judged to be
other-than-temporary. we may suffer losses in principal if forced to sell
securities that decline in market value due to changes in interest rates.
however, because our debt securities are classified as "available-for-sale", no
gains or losses are recognized due to changes in interest rates unless such
securities are sold prior to maturity.
our
stock price may continue to experience significant short-term fluctuations.
the price
of our common stock has fluctuated greatly. these price fluctuations have been
rapid and severe. for example, on august 5, 2004, we announced that the
operating results for our second quarter of fiscal 2005 included significantly
lower amounts of revenue and earnings per share than had been expected by
securities analysts. our announcement was followed by a decline in the trading
price of our common stock. conversely, on february 17, 2005, we announced better
than expected financial results for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. this
announcement was followed by an increase in the price of our common stock. we
believe that our quarterly and annual results of operations may continue to be
affected by a variety of factors that could harm our revenue, gross profit and
results of operations. the price of our common stock may continue to fluctuate
greatly in the future due to factors that are non-company specific, such as the
decline in the united states economy, acts of terror against the united states,
war or due to a variety of company specific factors, including quarter to
quarter variations in our operating results, shortfalls in revenue or earnings
from levels expected by securities analysts and the other factors discussed in
these risk factors.
risks
related to intellectual property, litigation and government action
while
we believe that we currently have adequate internal controls over financial
reporting, we are exposed to risks from recent legislation requiring companies
to evaluate those internal controls.
section404
of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2004 requires our management to report on, and our
independent registered public accounting firm to attest to, the effectiveness of
our internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting. we have
an ongoing program to perform the system and process evaluation and testing
necessary to comply with these requirements. this legislation is relatively new
and neither companies nor accounting firms have significant experience in
complying with its requirements. as a result, we have incurred, and expect to
continue to incur increased expense and to devote additional management
resources to section404 compliance. in the event that our chief executive
officer, chief financial officer or our independent registered public accounting
firm determine that our internal controls over financial reporting are not
effective as defined under section404, investor perceptions of us may be
adversely affected and could cause a decline in the market price of our stock.
expensing
employee stock options in future periods will materially and aversely affect our
reported operating results.
since
inception, we have used stock options and our employee stock purchase program as
fundamental components of our compensation packages. to date we generally have
not recognized compensation cost for employee stock options or shares sold
pursuant to our employee stock purchase program. we believe that these
incentives directly motivate our employees and, through the use of vesting,
encourage our employees to remain with us. in december 2004, the financial
accounting standards board issued sfasno.123(r), share-based
payment, or
sfasno. 123(r). sfas no. 123(r) is effective for interim or annual periods
beginning after june15, 2005, and requires that we record compensation
expense for stock options and our employee stock purchase plan using the fair
value of those awards. expensing these incentives in future periods will
materially and adversely affect our reported operating results as the
stock-based compensation expense would be charged directly against our reported
earnings. to the extent that sfas no. 123(r) makes it more expensive to grant
stock options or to continue to have an employee stock purchase program, we may
decide to incur increased cash compensation costs. in addition, actions that we
may take to reduce the non-cash expense may make it difficult to attract, retain
and motivate employees any of which could adversely affect our competitive
position as well as our business and operating results.
we
are currently involved in patent litigation, which, if not resolved favorably,
could require us to pay damages.
we are
currently involved in patent litigation. on october 19, 2004, opti incorporated,
or opti, filed a complaint for patent infringement against us in the united
states district court for the eastern district of texas. opti asserts that
unspecified nvidia chipsets infringe five united states patents held by opti.
opti seeks unspecified damages for our conduct, attorneys fees and triple
damages because of our alleged willful infringement of these patents. discovery
has not begun and no trial date has been set. we believe the claims asserted
against us are without merit and we will continue to defend ourselves
vigorously.
in august
2004, a texas limited partnership named american video graphics, lp, or avg,
filed three separate complaints for patent infringement against various
corporate defendants (not including nvidia) in the united states district court
for the eastern district of texas. avg initially asserted that each of the
approximately thirty defendants sells products that infringe one or more of
seven separate patents that avg claims relate generally to graphics processing
functionality. each of the three lawsuits targeted a different group of
defendants; one case involves approximately twenty of the leading personal
computer manufacturers, the pc makers case, one case involves the three leading
video game console makers, the game console case, and one case involves
approximately ten of the leading video game publishers, the game publishers
case. in november 2004, nvidia sought and was granted permission to intervene in
two of the three pending avg lawsuits, the pc makers case and the game console
case. nvidias complaint in intervention alleges both that the patents in suit
are invalid and that, to the extent avgs claims target nvidia products, the
asserted patents are not infringed. two other leading suppliers of graphics
processing products, intel and ati, have also intervened in the cases, ati in
both the pc makers and game console case, and intel in the pc makers case.
after
some consensual reconfigurations proposed by the various parties, in january
2005, the district court judge entered docket control and discovery orders in
the three lawsuits. the pc makers case now involves four separate patents and is
currently scheduled for trial beginning on september 11, 2006. the game console
case involves a single patent and is currently scheduled for trial beginning on
december 4, 2006. we believe that, to the extent avgs infringement allegations
target functionality that may be performed by nvidia products, those claims are
without merit, and we will continue to defend ourselves and our products
vigorously.
our
defenses against these suits may be unsuccessful. at this time, we cannot
reasonably estimate the range of any loss or damages resulting from these suits
due to uncertainty regarding the ultimate outcome. if these cases go forward, we
expect that they will result additional legal and other costs, regardless of the
outcome, which could be substantial.
our
industry is characterized by vigorous protection and pursuit of intellectual
property rights or positions that could result in litigation and substantial
costs to us.
the
semiconductor industry is characterized by vigorous protection and pursuit of
intellectual property rights and positions, which have resulted in protracted
and expensive litigation. the digital media processor industry in particular has
been characterized recently by the aggressive pursuit of intellectual property
positions, and we expect our competitors to continue to pursue aggressive
intellectual property positions. the technology that we use to design and
develop our products and that is incorporated into our products may be subject
to claims that it infringes the patents or intellectual property rights of
others. our success is dependent on our ability to develop new products without
infringing or misappropriating the intellectual property rights of others. from
time to time we receive notices or are included in legal actions alleging that
we have infringed patents or other intellectual property rights owned by third
parties. we expect that, as the number of issued hardware and software patents
increases, and as competition in our product lines intensifies, the volume of
intellectual property infringement claims may increase. if infringement claims
are made against us, we may seek licenses under the claimants patents or other
intellectual property rights. however, licenses may not be offered to us at all
or on terms acceptable to us, particularly by competitors. the failure to obtain
a license from a third party for technology used by us could cause us to incur
substantial liabilities and to suspend the manufacture of and sale of one or
more products, which could reduce our revenue and harm our business.
furthermore, we may initiate claims or litigation against third parties for
infringement of our proprietary rights or to establish the validity of our
proprietary rights, which could be costly.
if we
have to initiate a claim, our operating expenses may increase which could
negatively impact our operating results. in order to develop products, we have
licensed technology from third parties for incorporation in our digital media
processors, and expect to continue to enter into license agreements with third
parties for future products. these licenses may result in royalty payments to
third parties, the cross licensing of technology by us or payment of other
consideration. if these arrangements are not concluded on commercially
reasonable terms or at all, our competitive position and our business could
suffer.
we have
agreed to indemnify certain customers for certain claims of infringement arising
out of sale of our products. we may be involved in future lawsuits or other
legal proceedings alleging patent infringement or other intellectual property
rights violations by us or customers that we have agreed to indemnify for
certain claims of infringement arising out of the sale of our products to these
customers. in addition, litigation or other legal proceedings may be necessary
to:
assert
claims of infringement;
enforce
our patents;
protect
our trade secrets or know-how; or
determine
the enforceability, scope and validity of the propriety rights of
others.
regardless
of the outcome, litigation can be very costly and can divert managements
attention from other matters. we may be unsuccessful in defending or pursuing
these lawsuits or claims. an unfavorable ruling could include significant
damages, invalidation of a patent or group of patents, indemnification of
customers, payment of lost profits, or, when it has been sought, injunctive
relief. if one of our patents in invalidated or found to be unenforceable, we
would be unable to license the patent which could result in a loss of revenue.
we or our customers may be required to obtain a license to the other parties
patents or intellectual property. if we fail to obtain a license from a third
party for technology we use or that is used by an indemnified customer, we could
be subject to substantial liabilities or have to suspend or discontinue the
manufacture of and sale of one or more of our products either of which could
reduce our revenue and harm our business. initiation of claims or
indemnification of a customer may increase our operating expenses which could
negatively impact our operating results.
our
ability to compete will be harmed if we are unable to adequately protect our
intellectual property.
we rely
primarily on a combination of patents, trademarks, trade secrets, employee and
third-party nondisclosure agreements and licensing arrangements to protect our
intellectual property in the united states and internationally. we have numerous
patents issued, allowed and pending in the united states and in foreign
countries. our patents and pending patent applications relate to technology used
by us in connection with our products, including our digital media processors.
we also rely on international treaties and organizations and foreign laws to
protect our intellectual property. the laws of certain foreign countries in
which our products are or may be manufactured or sold, including various
countries in asia, may not protect our products or intellectual property rights
to the same extent as by the laws of the united states. this makes the
possibility of piracy of our technology and products more likely. we
continuously assess whether and where to seek formal protection for particular
innovations and technologies based on such factors as: the commercial
significance of our operations and our competitors operations in particular
countries and regions; the location in which our products are manufactured; our
strategic technology or product directions in different countries; and the
degree to which intellectual property laws exist and are meaningfully enforced
in different jurisdictions.
our
pending patent applications and any future applications may not be approved. in
addition, any issued patents may not provide us with competitive advantages or
may be challenged by third parties. the enforcement of patents by others may
harm our ability to conduct our business. others may independently develop
substantially equivalent intellectual property or otherwise gain access to our
trade secrets or intellectual property. our failure to effectively protect our
intellectual property could harm our business. we have licensed technology from
third parties for incorporation in our digital media processors, and expect to
continue to enter into license agreements for future products. these licenses
may result in royalty payments to third parties, the cross licensing of
technology by us or payment of other consideration. if these arrangements are
not concluded on commercially reasonable terms, our business could suffer.
item
7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
interest
rate risk
we invest
in a variety of financial instruments, consisting principally of investments in
commercial paper, money market funds and highly liquid debt securities of
corporations, municipalities and the united states government and its agencies.
these investments are denominated in united states dollars.
we
account for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no. 115, accounting
for certain investments in debt and equity securities. all of
the cash equivalents and marketable securities are treated as
"available-for-sale" under sfas no. 115. investments in both fixed rate and
floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree of interest rate risk.
fixed rate securities may have their market value adversely impacted due to a
rise in interest rates, while floating rate securities may produce less income
than expected if interest rates fall. due in part to these factors, our future
investment income may fall short of expectations due to changes in interest
rates or we may suffer losses in principal if forced to sell securities that
decline in market value due to changes in interest rates. however, because we
classify our debt securities as "available-for-sale," no gains or losses are
recognized due to changes in interest rates unless such securities are sold
prior to maturity. these securities are reported at fair value with the related
unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other comprehensive income,
a component of stockholders equity, net of tax.
as of
january 30, 2005, we performed a sensitivity analysis on our floating and fixed
rate financial investments. according to our analysis, parallel shifts in the
yield curve of both +/-50 basis points would result in changes in fair market
values for these investments of approximately $2.9 million.
exchange
rate risk
we
consider our direct exposure to foreign exchange rate fluctuations to be
minimal. currently, sales and arrangements with third-party manufacturers
provide for pricing and payment in united states dollars, and therefore are not
subject to exchange rate fluctuations. to date, we have not engaged in any
currency hedging activities, although we may do so in the future. fluctuations
in currency exchange rates could harm our business in the future.
item
8. consolidated financial statements and supplementary
data
the
information required by this item is set forth in our consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto included in this annual report.
item
9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
not
applicable.
item
9a. controls and procedures
disclosure
controls and procedures
based on
their evaluation as of january 30, 2005, our management, including our chief
executive officer and chief financial officer, have concluded that our
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rule 13a-15(e) under the
securities exchange act of 1934, or the exchange act) were effective to ensure
that the material information required to be disclosed by us in this annual
report on form 10-k was recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the
time periods specified in the securities and exchange commissions rules and
instructions for form 10-k.
managements
annual report on internal control over financial reporting
our
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal
control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in exchange act
rule13a-15(f). under the supervision and with the participation of our
management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer,
we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over
financial reporting as of january 30, 2005 based on the criteria set forth in
internal
control - integrated framework issued by
the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission. based on
our evaluation under the criteria set forth in internal
control  integrated framework, our
management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was
effective as of january 30, 2005.
our
managements assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over
financial reporting as of january 30, 2005 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public accounting firm, as
stated in their report which is included herein.
changes
in internal control over financial reporting
there
were no changes in our internal controls over financial reporting during our
last fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to
materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
inherent
limitations on effectiveness of controls
our
management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer,
does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our internal
controls, will prevent all error and all fraud. a control system, no matter how
well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute,
assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. further, the design
of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints,
and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. because
of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls
can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud,
if any, within our company have been detected.
item
9b. other information
none.
part
iii
item
10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
identification
of directors
reference
is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the heading
election of directors in our 2005 proxy statement, which information is hereby
incorporated by reference.
identification
of executive officers
reference
is made to the information regarding executive officers appearing under the
heading executive officers of the registrant in part i of this annual report
on form 10-k, which information is hereby incorporated by reference.
identification
of audit committee and financial expert
reference
is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the heading
report of the audit committee of the board of directors in our 2005 proxy
statement, which information is hereby incorporated by reference.
material
changes to procedures for recommending directors
reference
is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the heading
election of directors in our 2005 proxy statement, which information is hereby
incorporated by reference.
compliance
with section 16(a) of the exchange act
reference
is made to the information appearing under the heading section 16(a) beneficial
ownership reporting compliance in our 2005 proxy statement, which information
is hereby incorporated by reference.
code
of ethics
reference
is made to the information appearing under the heading code of ethics in our
2005 proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by reference.
item
11. executive compensation
reference
is made to the information appearing under the heading executive compensation
in our 2005 proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
item
12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
reference
is made to information appearing in our 2005 proxy statement under the heading
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and equity
compensation plan information, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
item
13. certain relationships and related transactions
reference
is made to information appearing in our 2005 proxy statement under the heading
certain transactions, which information is hereby incorporated by reference.
item
14. principal accounting fees and services
reference
is made to information appearing in our 2005 proxy statement, which information
is hereby incorporated by reference.
part
iv
item
15. exhibits, financial statement schedules
page
(a)
1.
consolidated
financial statements
report
of independent registered public accounting firm, pricewaterhousecoopers
llp
report
of independent registered public accounting firm, kpmg llp
consolidated
balance sheets as of january 30, 2005 and january 25, 2004
consolidated
statements of income for the years ended january 30, 2005, january 25,
2004 and january 26, 2003
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity and comprehensive income for the years
ended january 30, 2005, january 25, 2004 and january 26, 2003
consolidated
statements of cash flows for the years ended january 30, 2005, january 25,
2004 and january 26, 2003
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(a)
2.
financial
statement schedules
schedule
ii valuation and qualifying accounts
(a)
3.
exhibits
the
exhibits listed in the accompanying index to exhibits are filed or
incorporated by reference as a part of this annual report.
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
to the
stockholders and board of directors
nvidia
corporation:
we have
completed an integrated audit of nvidia corporations fiscal 2005 consolidated
financial statements and of its internal control over financial reporting as of
january 30, 2005 in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states). our opinions, based on our audit,
are presented below.
consolidated
financial
statements and financial statement schedule
in our
opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the index appearing
under item 15(a)(1) present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of nvidia corporation and its subsidiaries at january 30, 2005, and the
results of their operations and their cash flows for the year then ended in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america. in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement schedule listed in
the index appearing under item 15(a)(2) presents fairly, in all material
respects, the information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the
related consolidated financial statements. these financial statements and the
financial statement schedule are the responsibility of the companys management.
our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based
on our audit. we conducted our audit of these statements in accordance with the
standards of the public
company accounting oversight board(united
states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. an audit of financial statements includes examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates
made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
we believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
internal
control over financial reporting
also, in
our opinion, managements assessment, included in managements annual report on
internal control over financial reporting appearing under item 9a, that the
company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of
january
30, 2005 based on
criteria established in internal
control - integrated framework issued
by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso),
is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on those criteria.
furthermore, in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects,
effective internal control over financial reporting as of january
30, 2005, based
on criteria
established in internal
control - integrated framework issued
by the coso. the
companys management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control
over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting. our responsibility is to express opinions on
managements assessment and on the effectiveness of the companys internal
control over financial reporting based on our audit. we conducted our audit of
internal control over financial reporting in accordance with the standards of
the public company accounting oversight board (united states). those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in
all material respects. an audit of internal control over financial reporting
includes obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, evaluating managements assessment, testing and evaluating the design
and operating effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other
procedures as we consider necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our
audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions.
a
companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles. a companys internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)pertain
to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(ii)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of
the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management
and directors of the company; and (iii)provide reasonable assurance
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or
disposition of the companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements. also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
san jose,
california
march 22,
report
of independent registered public accounting firm
the board
of directors and stockholders
nvidia
corporation:
we have
audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of nvidia corporation and
subsidiaries (the company), as of january 25, 2004, and the related
consolidated statements of income, stockholders equity and comprehensive
income, and cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended
january 25, 2004. in connection with our audits of the consolidated financial
statements, we have also audited the financial statement schedule for the two
years ended january 25, 2004 as listed in the index of item 15. these
consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule are the
responsibility of the companys management. our responsibility is to express an
opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
we
conducted our auditsin
accordance with the standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states). those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement an audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence
supporting the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements.
an audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis
for our opinion.
in our
opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly,
in all material respects, the financial position of nvidia corporation and
subsidiaries as of january 25, 2004, and the results of its operations and their
cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended january 25, 2004,
in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states
of america. also, in our opinion, the related financial statement schedule, when
considered in relation to the consolidated financial statements taken as a
whole, presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth
therein.
/s/
kpmg llp
mountain
view, california
february
12, 2004
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
balance sheets
(in
thousands, except share and per share data)
january
30,
january
25,
assets
current
assets:
cash
and cash equivalents
$
208,512
$
214,422
marketable
securities
461,533
389,621
accounts
receivable, less allowances of $13,153 and $11,731 in 2005 and 2004,
respectively
296,279
196,631
inventories
315,518
234,238
prepaid
expenses and other current assets
19,819
14,539
deferred
income taxes
3,265
3,261
total
current assets
1,304,926
1,052,712
property
and equipment, net
178,955
190,029
deposits
and other assets
9,034
7,731
goodwill
108,107
108,909
intangible
assets, net
27,514
39,963
$
1,628,536
$
1,399,344
liabilities
and stockholders equity
current
liabilities:
accounts
payable
$
238,223
$
185,342
accrued
liabilities
182,077
144,755
current
portion of capital lease obligations
4,015
total
current liabilities
421,156
334,112
deferred
income tax liabilities
20,754
8,609
capital
lease obligations, less current portion
--
long-term
liabilities
8,358
4,582
commitments
and contingent liabilities - see note 12
stockholders
equity:
common
stock, $.001 par value; 1,000,000,000 shares authorized; 169,173,898
shares issued and 167,089,545 outstanding in 2005; and 164,145,787 shares
issued and outstanding in 2004
additional
paid-in capital
636,618
583,481
deferred
compensation
(2,926
)
(5,468
)
treasury
stock
(24,644
)
--
accumulated
other comprehensive income (loss), net
(3,463
)
retained
earnings
572,514
472,158
total
stockholders' equity
$
1,178,268
1,051,185
$
1,628,536
$
1,399,344
see
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of income
(in
thousands, except per share data)
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
revenue
$
2,010,033
$
1,822,945
$
1,909,447
cost
of revenue
1,360,547
1,294,067
1,327,271
cost
of revenue related to stock option exchange (1)
--
--
6,164
gross
profit
649,486
528,878
576,012
operating
expenses:
research
and development
335,104
269,972
224,873
sales,
general and administrative
200,789
165,249
151,485
in-process
research and development
--
3,500
--
stock
option exchange (1)
--
--
55,668
total
operating expenses
535,893
438,721
432,026
income
from operations
113,593
90,157
143,986
interest
income
11,422
18,561
23,246
interest
expense
(164
)
(12,010
)
(16,467
)
other
income (expense), net
3,033
(208
)
convertible
debenture redemption expense
--
(13,068
)
--
income
before income tax expense
125,445
86,673
150,557
income
tax expense
25,089
12,254
59,758
net
income
100,356
$
74,419
$
90,799
basic
net income per share
$
0.60
$
0.46
$
0.59
diluted
net income per share
$
0.57
$
0.43
$
0.54
shares
used in basic per share computation
166,062
160,924
153,513
shares
used in diluted per share computation
176,558
172,707
168,393
___________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) the
$61,832 stock option exchange expense for the year ended january 26, 2003
relates to personnel associated with cost of revenue (for manufacturing
personnel), research and development and sales, general and administrative of
$6,164, $35,417 and $20,251, respectively.
see
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity and
comprehensive
income
(in
thousands, except share data)
accumulated
other
total
additional
deferred
compre-
total stock-
compre-
common stock
paid in
compen-
treasury
hensive
retained
holders
hensive
shares
amount
capital
sation
stock
income
(loss)
earnings
equity
income
balances,
january 27, 2002
149,553,130
$
$
456,621
--
--
$
$
306,940
$
763,819
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
4,421,823
25,483
--
--
--
--
25,487
stock
option exchange offer
3,815,069
39,902
--
--
--
--
39,906
tax
benefit from stock plans
--
--
9,180
--
--
--
--
9,180
deferred
compensation
--
--
--
(156
)
--
--
--
(156
)
unrealized
gain
--
--
--
--
--
5,742
--
5,742
5,742
tax
effect of unrealized gain
--
--
--
--
--
(2,297
)
--
(2,297
)
(2,297
)
cumulative
translation adjustments
--
--
--
--
--
--
net
income
--
--
--
--
--
--
90,799
90,799
90,799
balances,
january 26, 2003
157,790,022
531,186
(156
)
--
3,760
397,739
932,687
94,451
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
6,355,765
37,667
--
--
--
--
37,673
tax
benefit from stock plans
--
--
8,488
--
--
--
--
8,488
deferred
compensation
--
--
6,140
(5,984
)
--
--
--
amortization
of deferred compensation
--
--
--
--
--
--
unrealized
loss
--
--
--
--
--
(4,850
)
--
(4,850
)
(4,850
)
tax
effect of unrealized loss
--
--
--
--
--
1,940
--
1,940
1,940
reclassification
adjustment for net gains included in net income
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
(3,159
)
tax
effect of reclassification adjustment for net gains included in net income
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
net
income
--
--
--
--
--
--
74,419
74,419
74,419
balances,
january 25, 2004
164,145,787
583,481
(5,468
)
--
472,158
1,051,185
68,982
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
5,028,111
42,497
--
--
--
--
42,502
stock
repurchase
(2,084,353
)
--
--
--
(24,644
)
--
--
(24,644
)
tax
benefit from stock plans
--
--
11,845
--
--
--
--
11,845
deferred
compensation
--
--
(1,205
)
1,205
--
--
--
--
amortization
of deferred compensation
--
--
--
1,337
--
--
--
1,337
unrealized
loss
--
--
--
--
--
(5,938
)
--
(5,938
)
(5,938
)
tax
effect of unrealized loss
--
--
--
--
--
1,470
--
1,470
1,470
reclassification
adjustment for net losses included in net income
--
--
--
--
--
--
tax
effect of reclassification adjustment for net losses included in net
income
--
--
--
--
--
(38
)
--
(38
)
(38
)
net
income
--
--
--
--
--
--
100,356
100,356
100,356
balances,
january 30, 2005
167,089,545
$
$
636,618
$
(2,926
)
$
(24,644
)
$
(3,463
)
$
572,514
$
1,178,268
$
96,043
see
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of cash flows
(in
thousands)
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
cash
flows from operating activities:
net
income
$100,356
$74,419
$90,799
adjustments
to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating
activities:
in-process
research and development
--
3,500
--
non-cash
realized gain on investment exchange
(533)
--
--
depreciation
and amortization
102,597
82,016
58,216
net
loss on retirements of property and equipment
--
--
write-off
of convertible debenture issuance costs
--
5,485
--
deferred
income taxes
12,141
55,135
29,768
stock-based
compensation
1,337
(156)
issuance
of common stock in exchange for stock options
--
--
39,906
bad
debt expense
(844)
1,917
tax
benefit from employee stock plans
11,845
8,488
9,180
changes
in operating assets and liabilities:
accounts
receivable
(110,312)
(88,222)
(20,867)
inventories
(81,280)
(85,126)
68,831
prepaid
income taxes
--
--
38,016
prepaid
expenses and other current assets
(5,569)
(2,698)
(4,315)
deposits
and other assets
(1,458)
(3,482)
accounts
payable
52,941
43,506
(72,890)
accrued
liabilities
50,567
(44,746)
26,564
net
cash provided by operating activities
132,200
49,678
265,032
cash
flows from investing activities:
purchases
of marketable securities
(313,760)
(734,642)
(639,500)
sales
and maturities of marketable securities
229,068
1,021,590
422,200
acquisition
of businesses
--
(71,303)
(3,901)
purchases
of property and equipment and intangible assets
(67,261)
(127,604)
(63,123)
release
of restricted cash
--
--
7,000
net
cash provided by (used in) investing activities
(151,953)
88,041
(277,324)
cash
flows from financing activities:
redemption
of convertible debenture
--
(300,000)
--
common
stock issued under employee stock plans
42,502
37,757
25,487
stock
repurchase
(24,644)
--
--
sale
lease back financing
--
--
5,734
principal
payments on capital leases
(4,015)
(8,048)
(4,935)
net
cash provided by (used in) financing activities
13,843
(270,291)
26,286
change
in cash and cash equivalents
(5,910)
(132,572)
13,994
cash
and cash equivalents at beginning of period
214,422
346,994
333,000
cash
and cash equivalents at end of period
$208,512
$214,422
$346,994
supplemental
disclosures of cash flow information:
cash
paid for interest
$163
$15,167
$15,100
cash
paid (refund) for income taxes, net
$763
$(211)
$(35,101)
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of cash flows - (continued)
(in
thousands)
other
non-cash activities:
acquisition
of business - goodwill adjustment
($1,091
)
$
--
$
--
assets
recorded under capital lease arrangements
$
--
$
2,528
$
--
application
of customer advance to accounts receivable
$
(11,508
)
$
(46,866
)
$
(11,797
)
marketable
security received from investment exchange
$
$
--
$
--
asset
retirement obligation
$
4,483
$
--
$
--
unrealized
gains (losses) from marketable securities
$
(5,745
)
$
(4,850
)
$
5,742
deferred
stock-based compensation
$
(1,205
)
$
6,140
$
--
see
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
note
1 - organization and summary of significant accounting
policies
our
company
nvidia
corporation is a worldwide leader in graphics and digital media processors
dedicated to creating products that enhance the interactive experience on
consumer and professional computing platforms. we design, develop and market
graphics processing units, or gpus, media and communications processors, or
mcps, wireless media processors, or wmps and related software. our products are
integral to a wide variety of visual computing platforms, including enterprise
personal computers, or pcs, consumer pcs, professional workstations, notebook
pcs, personal digital assistants, cellular phones, game consoles and digital
media centers. we were incorporated in california in april 1993 and
reincorporated in delaware in april 1998. our objective is to be one of the most
important and influential technology companies in the world.
fiscal
year
we
operate on a 52 or 53-week year, ending on the sunday nearest january 31. fiscal
2005 was a 53-week year,compared to fiscal 2004 which was a 52-week year.
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005 was a 14-week quarter, compared to the fourth
quarter of fiscal 2004 which was a 13-week quarter.
reclassifications
certain
prior year balances were reclassified to conform to the current year
presentation.
principles
of consolidation
our
consolidated financial statements include the accounts of nvidia corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries. all material intercompany balances and
transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
use
of estimates
the
preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states requires management to make estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting
period. actual results could differ from those estimates. on an on-going basis,
we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition,
accounts receivable, inventories, income taxes and contingencies. these
estimates are based on historical facts and various other assumptions that we
believe are reasonable.
cash
and cash equivalents
we
consider all highly liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of
three months or less at the time of purchase to be cash equivalents. as of
january 30, 2005, our cash and cash equivalents were $208.5 million, which
includes $164.4 million invested in money market funds.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
marketable
securities
we
account for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no. 115, accounting for certain
investments in debt and equity securities. all of our cash equivalents and
marketable securities are treated as available-for-sale under sfas no. 115.
cash equivalents consist of financial instruments which are readily convertible
into cash and have original maturities of three months or less
at the time of acquisition. marketable securities consist primarily of highly
liquid investments with a maturity of greater than three months when purchased.
part of our portfolio includes equity investments in publicly traded companies.
we classify our marketable securities at the date of acquisition in the
available-for-sale category as our intention is to convert them into cash for
operations. these securities are reported at fair value with the related
unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other comprehensive income
(loss), a component of stockholders equity, net of tax. realized gains and
losses on the sale of marketable securities are determined using the
specific-identification method.
inventories
inventory
cost is computed on an adjusted standard basis (which approximates actual cost
on an average or first-in, first-out basis). we write down our inventory for
estimated lower of cost or market, obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal
to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value
based upon assumptions about future demand, future product purchase commitments,
estimated manufacturing yield levels and market conditions. if actual market
conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, or if our
future product purchase commitments to our suppliers exceed our forecasted
future demand for such products, additional future inventory write-downs may be
required that could adversely affect our operating results. if actual market
conditions are more favorable, we may have higher gross margins when products
are sold. sales to date of such products have not had a significant impact on
our gross margin. inventory reserves once established are not reversed until the
related inventory has been sold or scrapped.
property
and equipment
property
and equipment are stated at cost. depreciation is computed using the
straight-line method based on estimated useful lives, generally three to five
years. depreciation expense includes the amortization of assets recorded under
capital leases. leasehold improvements and assets recorded under capital leases
are amortized over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful life of
the asset.
debt
financing costs
in
connection with the notes, see note 12, we incurred certain direct issuance
costs from third parties who performed services that assisted in the closing of
the transaction. these issuance costs were included in our consolidated balance
sheet under deposits and other assets and were amortized on a straight line
basis over the term of the financing. on october 24, 2003, we fully redeemed the
notes. in connection with the redemption, we recorded a $13.1 million charge in
fiscal 2004, which included the write-off of $5.5 million of unamortized
issuance costs.
advertising
expenses
we
expense advertising costs in the period in which they are incurred. advertising
expenses for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 were approximately $15.2 million, $11.3
million and $6.8 million, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
revenue
recognition
product
revenue
we
recognize revenue from product sales when persuasive evidence of an arrangement
exists, the product has been delivered, the price is fixed and determinable and
collection is reasonably assured. for all sales, we use a binding purchase order
and in certain cases we use a contractual agreement as evidence of an
arrangement. we consider delivery to occur upon shipment provided title and risk
of loss have passed to the customer based on the shipping terms. at the point of
sale, we assess whether the arrangement fee is fixed and determinable and
whether collection is reasonably assured. if we determine that collection of a
fee is not reasonably assured, we defer the fee and recognize revenue at the
time collection becomes reasonably assured, which is generally upon receipt of
cash.
our
policy on sales to distributors is to defer recognition of revenue and related
cost of revenue until the distributors resell the product.
we record
estimated reductions to revenue for customer programs at the time revenue is
recognized. our customer programs primarily involve rebates, which are designed
to serve as sales incentives to resellers of our products in various target
markets. we account for rebates in accordance with emerging issues task force
issue 01-9, or eitf 01-9, accounting
for consideration given by a vendor to a customer (including a reseller of the
vendors products) and, as
such, we accrue for 100% of the potential rebates and do not apply a breakage
factor. unclaimed rebates, which historically have not been significant, are
reversed to revenue upon expiration of the rebate. rebates typically expire six
months from the date of the original sale.
our
customer programs also include marketing development funds, or mdfs. we account
for mdfs as either a reduction of revenue or an operating expense in accordance
with eitf 01-9. mdfs represent monies paid to retailers, system builders, oems,
distributors and add-in card partners that are earmarked for market segment
development and expansion and typically are designed to support our partners
activities while also promoting nvidia products.
if market
conditions decline, we may take actions to increase amounts offered under
customer programs, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at
the time such programs are offered.
we also
record a reduction to revenue by establishing a sales return allowance for
estimated product returns at the time revenue is recognized, based primarily on
historical return rates. however, if product returns for a particular fiscal
period exceed historical return rates we may determine that additional sales
return allowances are required to properly reflect our estimated exposure for
product returns.
license
and development revenue
for
license arrangements that require significant customization of our intellectual
property components, we generally recognize license revenue using the
percentage-of-completion method of accounting over the period that services are
performed. for all license and service arrangements accounted for under the
percentage-of-completion method, we determine progress to completion based on
actual direct labor hours incurred to date as a percentage of the estimated
total direct labor hours required to complete the project. we periodically
evaluate the actual status of each project to ensure that the estimates to
complete each contract remain accurate. a provision for estimated losses on
contracts is made in the period in which the loss becomes probable and can be
reasonably estimated. to date, we have not recorded any such losses. costs
incurred in advance of revenue recognized are recorded as deferred costs on
uncompleted contracts. if the amount of revenue recognized exceeds the amounts
billed to customers, the excess amount is recorded as unbilled accounts
receivable. if the amount billed exceeds the amount of revenue recognized, the
excess amount is recorded as deferred revenue. revenue recognized in any period
is dependent on our progress toward completion of projects in progress.
significant management judgment and discretion are used to estimate total direct
labor hours. any changes in or deviations from these estimates could have a
material effect on the amount of revenue we recognize in any period.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
concentration
of credit risk
financial
instruments that potentially subject us to concentrations of credit risk consist
primarily of cash equivalents, marketable securities and trade accounts
receivable. all marketable securities are held in our name, managed by several
investment managers and held by one major financial institution under a
custodial arrangement. two customers accounted for approximately --27% of our
accounts receivable balance at january 30, 2005. we perform ongoing credit
evaluations of our customers financial condition and maintain an allowance for
potential credit losses. this allowance consists of an amount identified for
specific customers and an amount based on overall estimated exposure. our
overall estimated exposure excludes amounts covered by credit insurance and
letters of credit.
impairment
of long-lived assets
in
accordance with statement of financial accounting standards no.144, or
sfas no. 144, accounting
for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, long-lived
assets, such as property and equipment and intangible assets subject to
amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be
recoverable. recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a
comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future
cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. if the carrying amount of an
asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is
recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the
fair value of the asset. fair value is determined based on the estimated
discounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. assets and
liabilities to be disposed of would be separately presented in the consolidated
balance sheet and the assets would be reported at the lower of the carrying
amount or fair value less costs to sell, and would no longer be depreciated.
rent
expense
we
recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease period and have
accrued for rent expense incurred, but not paid.
accounting
for asset retirement obligations
in fiscal
2004, we adopted statement of financial accounting standards no. 143, or sfas
no. 143, accounting
for asset retirement obligations, which
addresses financial accounting and reporting for obligations associated with the
retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement
costs. sfas no. 143 applies to legal obligations associated with the retirement
of long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development
and/or normal use of the assets. sfas no. 143 requires that the fair value of a
liability for an asset retirement obligation be recognized in the period in
which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. the
fair value of the liability is added to the carrying amount of the associated
asset and this additional carrying amount is depreciated over the life of the
asset. during
fiscal 2005, we completed leasehold improvements at our headquarters facility in
santa clara, california and recorded a liability of $4.5 million to return the
property to its original condition upon lease termination in fiscal year
2013.
income
taxes
statement
of financial accounting standards no. 109, or sfas no. 109, accounting
for income taxes,
establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effect of
income taxes. in accordance with sfas no. 109, we recognize federal, state and
foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on our estimate of taxes payable
or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax jurisdiction. we also recognize
federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets or liabilities, as appropriate,
for our estimate of future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and
carryforwards; and we record a valuation allowance to reduce any deferred tax
assets by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available evidence and
judgment, are not expected to be realized.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
our
calculation of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on
certain estimates and judgments and involves dealing with uncertainties in the
application of complex tax laws. our estimates of current and deferred tax
assets and liabilities may change based, in part, on added certainty or finality
to an anticipated outcome, changes in accounting or tax laws in the united
states, or foreign jurisdictions where we operate, or changes in other facts or
circumstances. in addition, we recognize liabilities for potential united states
and foreign income tax contingencies based on our estimate of whether, and the
extent to which, additional taxes may be due. if we determine that payment of
these amounts is unnecessary or if the recorded tax liability is less than our
current assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax benefit or
additional income tax expense in our financial statements,
accordingly.
fair
value of financial instruments
the
carrying value of cash, cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable
and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values due to their relatively
short maturities as of january 30, 2005 and january 25, 2004. marketable
securities are comprised of available-for-sale securities that are reported at
fair value with the related unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated
other comprehensive income (loss), a component of stockholders equity, net of
tax. fair value of the marketable securities is determined based on quoted
market prices.
foreign
currency translation
we use
the united states dollar as our functional currency. foreign currency monetary
assets and liabilities are remeasured into united states dollars at
end-of-period exchange rates. non-monetary assets and liabilities, including
inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, property and equipment,
deposits and other assets and equity, are remeasured at historical exchange
rates. revenue and expenses are remeasured at average exchange rates in effect
during each period, except for those expenses related to the previously noted
balance sheet amounts, which are remeasured at historical exchange rates. gains
or losses from foreign currency remeasurement are included in other income
(expense), net and to date have not been significant.
comprehensive
income
comprehensive
income consists of net income and other comprehensive income or loss. other
comprehensive income or loss components include unrealized gains or losses on
available-for-sale securities, net of tax.
goodwill
effective
fiscal 2003, we completed the adoption of statement of financial accounting
standards no. 142, or sfas no. 142, goodwill
and other intangible assets. as
required by sfas no.142, we discontinued amortizing the remaining balances
of goodwill as of the beginning of fiscal 2003. all remaining and future
acquired goodwill will be subject to impairment tests annually, or earlier if
indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair-value-based approach. our
impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting unitin
which the goodwill resides to its carrying value. we
determined that our reporting units are equivalent to our operating segments for
the purposes of completing oursfas no.
142 impairment test. we utilize a two-step approach to
testing goodwill for impairment. the first step tests for possible impairment by
applying a fair value-based test. the second step, if necessary, measures the
amount of such an impairment by applying fair value-based tests to individual
assets and liabilities. we elected to perform our annual goodwill impairment
review during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. we completed our most
recent annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005 and
concluded that there was no impairment. however, future events or circumstances
may result in a charge to earnings due to the potential for a write-down of
goodwill in connection with such tests.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
stock-based
compensation
statement
of financial accounting standards no. 148, or sfas no. 148, accounting
for stock-based compensation - transition and disclosure, amends
the disclosure requirements of statement of financial accounting standards no.
123, or sfas no. 123, accounting
for stock-based compensation, to
require more prominent disclosures in both annual and interim financial
statements regarding the method of accounting for stock-based compensation and
the effect of the method used on reported results.
we use
the intrinsic value method, as prescribed by accounting principles board opinion
no. 25, accounting
for stock issued to employees, to
account for our stock-based employee compensation plans. as such, compensation
expense is recorded if on the date of grant the current fair value per share of
the underlying stock exceeds the exercise price per share. compensation cost for
our stock-based compensation plans as determined consistent with sfas no. 123,
would have decreased net income to the pro forma amounts indicated below:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands, except per share data)
net
income, as reported
$
100,356
$
74,419
$
90,799
add:
stock-based employee compensation expense included in reported net income,
net of related tax effects
1,070
--
add:
stock option exchange expense included in reported net income, net of
related tax effects
--
--
37,285
deduct:
compensation expense determined under fair value based method for stock
options exchanged on october 25, 2002, net of related tax
effects
--
--
(167,714
)
deduct:
stock-based employee compensation expense determined under fair value
based method for all awards, net of related tax effects
(87,071
)
(74,513
)
(37,698
)
pro
forma net income (loss)
$
14,355
$
$
(77,328
)
basic
net income per share - as reported
$
0.60
$
0.46
$
0.59
basic
net income (loss) per share - pro forma
$
0.09
$
0.00
$
(0.50
)
diluted
net income per share - as reported
$
0.57
$
0.43
$
0.54
diluted
net income (loss) per share - pro forma
$
0.08
$
0.00
$
(0.50
)
for the
purpose of the pro forma calculation, the fair value of options granted under
the our stock option plans has been estimated at the date of grant using the
black-scholes option pricing model with the following assumptions:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
risk
free interest rate
3.0%
2.4%
3.8%
volatility
75%
- 80%
80%
88%
dividend
yield
--
--
--
for the
first three quarters of fiscal 2005, we used a volatility factor of 80%. during
the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, we used a volatility factor of 75%. for the
purpose of the pro forma calculation, the weighted-average per share fair value
of options granted during the years ended january 30, 2005, january 25, 2004 and
january 26, 2003 was approximately $14.10, $9.43 and $18.29, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
for the
purpose of the pro forma calculation the fair value of shares purchased under
our employee stock purchase plan, or the purchase plan, has been estimated at
the date of purchase using the black-scholes option pricing model with the
following assumptions:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
weighted
average expected life (in months)
risk
free interest rate
1.9%
1.7%
3.7%
volatility
80%
80%
88%
dividend
yield
--
--
--
for the
purpose of the pro forma calculation, the weighted-average fair value of shares
purchased under the purchase plan during the year ended january 30, 2005,
january 25, 2004 and january 26, 2003 was approximately $5.28, $3.76 and $14.27,
respectively.
net
income per share
basic net
income per share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding during the period. diluted net income per share is computed using
the weighted average number of common and dilutive common equivalent shares
outstanding during the period, using the treasury stock method. under the
treasury stock method, the effect of stock options outstanding is not included
in the computation of diluted net income per share for periods when their effect
is anti-dilutive. the following is a reconciliation of the numerators and
denominators of the basic and diluted net income per share computations for the
periods presented:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands, except per share data)
numerator:
numerator
for basic and diluted net income per share
$
100,356
$
74,419
$
90,799
denominator:
denominator
for basic net income per share, weighted average shares
166,062
160,924
153,513
effect
of dilutive securities:
stock
options outstanding
10,496
11,783
14,880
denominator
for diluted net income per share, weighted average shares
176,558
172,707
168,393
net
income per share:
basic
net income per share
$
0.60
$
0.46
$
0.59
diluted
net income per share
$
0.57
$
0.43
$
0.54
diluted
net income per share does not include the effect of the following anti-dilutive
common equivalent shares:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands)
stock
options outstanding
13,740
7,906
5,892
convertible
subordinated debentures (equivalent common shares upon assumed
conversion)
--
--
6,472
13,740
7,906
12,364
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
the
weighted-average price of stock options excluded from the computation of diluted
earnings per share was $27.86, $29.63 and $32.45 for the years ended january 30,
2005, january 25, 2004 and january 26, 2003, respectively. the convertible
subordinated debentures were convertible into shares of common stock at a
conversion price of $46.36 per share and were anti-dilutive for the year ended
january 26, 2003. the convertible subordinated debentures were redeemed on
october 24, 2003.
recently
issued accounting pronouncements
in march
2004, the fasb approved the consensus reached on the emerging issues task force
issue no. 03-1, or eitf 03-1, the
meaning of other-than-temporary impairment and its application to certain
investments. eitf 03-1
provides guidance for identifying impaired investments and new disclosure
requirements for investments that are deemed to be temporarily impaired. on
september 30, 2004, the fasb issued a final staff position eitf issue 03-1-1
that delays the effective date for the measurement and recognition guidance
included in paragraphs 10 through 20 of eitf 03-1. quantitative and qualitative
disclosures required by eitf 03-1 remain effective for fiscal 2005. we do not
believe the impact of adoption of this eitf consensus will have a
material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or
cash flows.
in
november 2004, the fasb issued no. 151, or sfas no. 151, inventory
costs,
an
amendment of arb no. 43, chapter 4. sfas no.
151 amends arb no. 43, chapter 4, to clarify that abnormal amounts of idle
facility expense, freight, handling costs and wasted material (spoilage) should
be recognized as current period charges. in addition, sfas no. 151 requires that
allocation of fixed production overhead to the cost of conversion be based on
the normal capacity of the production facilities. the provision of sfas no. 151
shall be effective for inventory costs incurred during fiscal years beginning
after june 15, 2005. we do not expect the adoption of sfas no. 151 to have a
material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or
cash flows.
in
december 2004, the fasb issued sfas no. 153, or sfas no. 153, exchanges
of nonmonetary assets  an amendment of apb opinion no. 29, accounting for
nonmonetary transactions. sfas
no. 153 eliminates the exception from fair value measurement for nonmonetary
exchanges of similar productive assets in paragraph 21(b) of apb opinion no. 29,
accounting
for nonmonetary transactions, and
replaces it with an exception for exchanges that do not have commercial
substance. sfas no. 153 specifies that a nonmonetary exchange has commercial
substance if the future cash flows of the entity are expected to change
significantly as a result of the exchange. sfas no. 153 is effective for the
fiscal periods beginning after june 15, 2005. we do not expect the adoption of
sfas 153 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial position,
results of operations or cash flows.
in
december 2004, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no.
123(r), or sfas no. 123(r), share-based
payment, which
requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all
stock-based compensation payments. sfas no. 123(r) is effective for all interim
and annual periods beginning after june 15, 2005. we are currently evaluating
the impact of sfas no. 123(r) on our operating results and financial condition.
the
adoption of the sfasno. 123(r) fair value method will have a material and
adverse impact on our reported results of operations, although it will have no
impact on our overall financial position. the impact of adoption of
sfasno. 123(r) cannot be predicted at this time because that will depend
on the fair value and number of share-based payments granted in the future.
however, had we adopted sfasno. 123(r) in prior periods, the magnitude of
the impact of that standard would have approximated the impact of statement
of financial accounting standards no. 123, accounting
for stock-based compensation,assuming
the application of the black-scholes model as described in the disclosure of pro
forma net income (loss) and pro forma net income (loss) per share in
note 1 of
the notes to the consolidated financial statements under the subheading
stock-based compensation.
sfasno. 123(r) also requires the benefits of tax deductions in excess of
recognized compensation cost to be reported as a financing cash flow, rather
than as an operating cash flow as required under current literature. this
requirement will reduce net operating cash flows and increase net financing cash
flows in periods after adoption.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
note
2 - acquisition of mediaq, inc.
on august
19, 2003, we completed the acquisition of mediaq, inc., or mediaq, a leading
provider of graphics and multimedia technology for wireless mobile devices. our
primary reasons for the acquisition of mediaq, inc. were to accelerate our entry
into the handheld devices market, use mediaqs two-dimensional, or 2d, and low
power capabilities, allowing us to continue to focus on three-dimensional, or
3d, and advanced video efforts, use existing mediaq channel and design wins, and
enhance mediaqs pda business through our existing oem and odm channels.
the
aggregate purchase price consisted of cash consideration of approximately $71.3
million, including $1.3 million of direct acquisition costs. following is a
summary of estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities
assumed:
fair
market value
straight-linedepreciation/amortization
period
(in
thousands)
accounts
receivable
$
1,505
--
inventories
4,066
--
other
assets
--
property
and equipment
1,460
months - 3 years
deferred
income tax assets
1,601
--
in-process
research and development
3,500
--
goodwill
52,913
--
intangible
assets:
existing
technology
13,100
1 -
3 years
customer
relationships
2,100
months
backlog
months
non-compete
agreement
months
total
assets acquired
$
81,318
current
liabilities
$
(1,767
)
--
current
liabilities recognized in connection with the business
combination
(1,868
)
--
long-term
deferred income tax liabilities
(6,380
)
--
total
liabilities assumed
$
(10,015
)
net
assets acquired
$
71,303
the
amount of the purchase price allocated to purchased in-process research and
development, or ipr&d, represents the value assigned to research and
development projects of mediaq that had commenced but had not yet reached
technological feasibility and have no alternative future use. in accordance with
sfas no. 2, accounting
for research and development costs, as
clarified by fin 4, applicability
of fasb statement no. 2 to business combinations accounted for by the purchase
method an interpretation of fasb statement no. 2, amounts
assigned to ipr&d meeting the above-stated criteria were charged to expense
as part of the allocation of the purchase price.
the pro
forma results of operations have not been presented for the acquisition of
mediaq because the effect of this acquisition was not considered
material.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
note
3 - 3dfx
the 3dfx
asset purchase closed on april 18, 2001. under the terms of the asset purchase
agreement, the cash consideration due at the closing was $70.0 million, less
$15.0 million that was loaned to 3dfx pursuant to a credit agreement dated
december 15, 2000. the asset purchase agreement also provided, subject to the
other provisions thereof, that if 3dfx properly certified that all its debts and
other liabilities had been provided for, then we would have been obligated to
pay 3dfx two million shares of nvidia common stock. if 3dfx could not make such
a certification, but instead properly certified that its debts and liabilities
could be satisfied for less than $25.0 million, then 3dfx could have elected to
receive a cash payment equal to the amount of such debts and liabilities and a
reduced number of shares of our common stock, with such reduction calculated by
dividing the cash payment by $25.00 per share. if 3dfx could not certify that
all of its debts and liabilities had been provided for, or could not be
satisfied, for less than $25.0 million, we would not be obligated under the
agreement to pay any additional consideration for the assets. we are currently
party to litigation relating to certain aspects of the asset purchase and 3dfxs
subsequent bankruptcy in october 2002. please refer to note 12 of the notes to
the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding this
litigation.
the 3dfx
asset purchase price of $70.0 million and direct transaction costs of $4.2
million were allocated based on fair values presented below. upon the adoption
of statement of financial accounting standards no. 142, or sfas no. 142,
approximately $3.0 million of intangible assets previously allocated to
workforce in place were reclassified into goodwill in fiscal 2003. in addition,
amortization of goodwill ceased in accordance with sfas no. 142.
fair
market value
straight-line
amortization period
(in
thousands)
(years)
property
and equipment
$
2,433
1-2
trademarks
11,310
goodwill
60,418
--
total
$
74,161
the final
allocation of the purchase price of the 3dfx assets is contingent upon the
amount of and circumstances surrounding additional consideration, if any, that
we may pay related to the 3dfx asset purchase.
note
4 - goodwill
the
carrying amount of goodwill is as follows:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands)
3dfx
$
50,326
$
50,326
$
50,326
mediaq
52,913
53,695
--
other
4,868
4,888
3,901
total
goodwill
$
108,107
$
108,909
$
54,227
in fiscal
2005, the amount allocated to mediaq goodwill changed to $52,913 as a result of
additional information that became available. this information was primarily
related to liabilities that were less than originally estimated at the time of
acquisition.
during
the second quarter of fiscal 2005, our chief operating decision maker, the chief
executive officer, began reviewing financial information presented on an
operating segment basis for purposes of making operating decisions and assessing
financial performance. we reassigned goodwill to the affected reporting
units by using a "relative fair value" allocation approach. the amount of
goodwill allocated to our gpu, mcp, wmp and all other segments as of january 30,
2005, was $78.1 million, $11.4 million, $11.6 million and $7.0 million,
respectively. please
refer to note 15for further segment information.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
note
5 - amortizable intangible assets
we are
currently amortizing our intangible assets with definitive lives over periods
ranging from 1 to 5 years. the components of our amortizable intangible assets
are as follows:
year
ended
year
ended
january
30, 2005
january
25, 2004
gross
carrying amount
accumulated
amortization
net
carrying amount
gross
carrying amount
accumulated
amortization
net
carrying amount
(in
thousands)
technology
licenses
$
17,236
$
(9,841
)
$
7,395
$
15,178
$
(7,161
)
$
8,017
patents
23,260
(15,400
)
7,860
19,319
(8,992
)
10,327
acquired
intellectual property
27,086
(18,578
)
8,508
27,067
(10,590
)
16,477
trademarks
11,310
(8,544
)
2,766
11,310
(6,283
)
5,027
other
1,494
(509
)
(135
)
total
intangible assets
$
80,386
$
(52,872
)
$
27,514
$
73,124
$
(33,161
)
$
39,963
amortization
expense associated with intangible assets for the years ended january 30, 2005,
january 25, 2004 and january 26, 2003was $19.7 million, $16.2 million and
$9.6 million,respectively. future amortization expense for the net
carrying amount of intangible assets at january 30, 2005 is estimated to be
$15.8 million in fiscal 2006, $8.9 million in fiscal 2007, $2.6 million in
fiscal 2008, and the remaining amortization expense of $0.2 million in fiscal
2009.
note
6 - marketable securities
we
account for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no. 115, accounting
for certain investments in debt and equity securities. all of
our cash equivalents and marketable securities are treated as
available-for-sale under sfas no. 115. cash equivalents consist of financial
instruments which are readily convertible into cash and have original maturities
of three months or less at the time of acquisition. marketable securities
consist primarily of highly liquid investments with a maturity of greater than
three months when purchased and some equity investments. we classify our
marketable securities at the date of acquisition in the available-for-sale
category as our intention is to convert them into cash for operations. these
securities are reported at fair value with the related unrealized gains and
losses included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a component of
stockholders equity, net of tax. realized gains and losses on the sale of
marketable securities are determined using the specific-identification method.
net realized losses for fiscal 2005 were $0.4 million. net realized gains for
fiscal 2004 and 2003 were $2.9 million and $0.3 million,
respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
the
following is a summary of cash equivalents and marketable securities at january
30, 2005 and january 25, 2004:
january
30, 2005
amortized
cost
unrealized
gain
unrealized
(loss)
estimated
fair value
(in
thousands)
publicly
traded equity securities
$
$
--
$
asset-backed
securities
177,771
(1,786
)
175,986
commercial
paper
7,854
--
--
7,854
obligations
of the united states government & its agencies
104,768
--
(895
)
103,873
united
states corporate notes, bonds and obligations
182,688
(1,874
)
180,820
money
market
164,377
--
--
164,377
total
$
638,145
$
$
(4,555
)
$
633,817
classified
as:
cash
equivalents
$
172,284
marketable
securities
461,533
total
$
633,817
january
25, 2004
amortized
cost
unrealized
gain
unrealized
(loss) (1)
estimated
fair value
(in
thousands)
asset-backed
securities
$
65,147
$
$
(127
)
$
65,234
commercial
paper
15,592
--
--
15,592
obligations
of the united states government & its agencies
198,084
(111
)
198,547
united
states corporate notes, bonds and obligations
175,678
(90
)
176,545
money
market
143,661
--
--
143,661
total
$
598,162
$
1,745
$
(328
)
$
599,579
classified
as:
cash
equivalents
$
209,958
marketable
securities
389,621
total
$
599,579
(1)
the fair value of investments with loss positions is $96.9 million at january
25, 2004. we evaluated the nature of these investments, which are primarily
obligations of the united states government and its agencies and united states
corporate notes, the duration of the impairments, and the amount of the
impairments relative to the underlying portfolio and concluded that such amounts
were not other-than-temporary as defined by sfas no. 115, accounting
for certain investments in debt and equity securities.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
the
following table provides the breakdown of the investments with unrealized losses
at january 30, 2005:
less
than 12 months
months or greater
total
fair
value
gross
unrealized losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized losses
(in
thousands)
asset-backed
securities
$
167,468
$
(1,661
)
$
7,015
$
(125
)
$
174,483
$
(1,786
)
commercial
paper
--
--
--
--
--
--
obligations
of the united states government & its agencies
102,864
(895
)
--
--
102,864
(895
)
united
states corporate notes, bonds and obligations
165,884
(1,862
)
4,127
(12
)
170,011
(1,874
)
money
market
--
--
--
--
--
--
total
$
436,216
$
(4,418
)
$
11,142
$
(137
)
$
447,358
$
(4,555
)
the gross
unrealized losses related to fixed income securities were due to changes in
interest rates.we have determined that the gross unrealized losses on
investment securities at january 30, 2005 are temporary in nature. we review our
investments to identify and evaluate investments that have indications of
possible impairment. factors considered in determining whether a loss is
temporary include the length of time and extent to which fair value has been
less than the cost basis, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the
investee, and our intent and ability to hold the investment for a period of time
sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. our investment
policy requires the purchase of top-tier investment grade securities, the
diversification of asset type and certain limits on our portfolio duration.
the
amortized cost and estimated fair value of cash equivalents and marketable
securities classified as available-for-sale at january 30, 2005 and at january
25, 2004 by expected maturity are shown below.
all of
our marketable securities are debt instruments with the exception of $0.9
million of publicly traded equity securities in fiscal 2005.
january
30, 2005
january
25, 2004
amortized
cost
estimated
fair
value
amortized
cost
estimated
fair
value
(in
thousands)
less
than one year
$
198,242
$
197,844
$
282,762
$
283,123
due
in 1 - 5 years
416,085
412,141
315,400
316,456
due
in 6-7 years
23,132
22,925
--
--
total
$
637,459
$
632,910
$
598,162
$
599,579
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
note
7 - balance sheet components
certain
balance sheet components are as follows:
january
30,
january
25,
inventories:
(in
thousands)
raw
materials
$
23,225
$
22,131
work
in-process
130,211
44,523
finished
goods
162,082
167,584
total
inventories
$
315,518
$
234,238
january
30,
january
25,
property
and equipment:
(in
thousands)
software
$
125,310
$
116,150
test
equipment
86,883
73,287
computer
equipment
82,428
70,173
leasehold
improvements
79,160
58,649
construction
in process
3,264
1,620
office
furniture and equipment
18,777
17,996
395,822
337,875
accumulated
depreciation and amortization
(216,867
)
(147,846
)
property
and equipment, net
$
178,955
$
190,029
depreciation
expense for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 was $71.3 million, $59.3 million and
$42.6 million, respectively. assets recorded under capital leases included in
property and equipment were $19.3 million and $19.5 million as of january 30,
2005 and january 25, 2004, respectively. related accumulated amortization was
$17.8 million and $14.0 million as of january 30, 2005 and january 25, 2004,
respectively. amortization expense for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 related to
capital leases was $3.8 million, $5.4 million and $4.4 million,
respectively
january
30,
january
25,
accrued
liabilities:
(in
thousands)
accrued
customer programs
$
83,013
$
54,875
deferred
revenue
11,500
--
customer
advances
1,457
11,530
taxes
payable
28,826
29,609
accrued
payroll and related expenses
37,016
30,270
deferred
rent
10,844
8,151
other
9,421
10,320
total
accrued liabilities
$
182,077
$
144,755
january
30,
january
25,
long-term
liabilities:
(in
thousands)
asset
retirement obligation
$
4,483
$
--
technology
licenses
3,875
4,582
total
long-term liabilities
$
8,358
$
4,582
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
note
8 - guarantees
fasb
interpretation no. 45, or fin 45, guarantors
accounting and disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect
guarantees of indebtedness of others, requires
that upon issuance of a guarantee, the guarantor must recognize a liability for
the fair value of the obligation it assumes under that guarantee. in addition,
fin 45 requires disclosures about the guarantees that an entity has issued,
including a tabular reconciliation of the changes of the entitys product
warranty liabilities.
we record
a reduction to revenue for estimated product returns at the time revenue is
recognized primarily based on historical return rates. the reductions to revenue
for estimated product returns for fiscal 2005, fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003 are
as follows:
description
balance
at beginning of period
additions
(1)
deductions
(2)
balance
at end of period
(in
thousands)
year
ended january 30, 2005
allowance
for sales returns
$
9,421
$
22,463
$
(20,197
)
$
11,687
year
ended january 25, 2004
allowance
for sales returns
$
13,228
$
23,796
$
(27,603
)
$
9,421
year
ended january 26, 2003
allowance
for sales returns
$
15,586
$
20,147
$
(22,505
)
$
13,228
(1)
allowances for sales returns are charged as a reduction to revenue.
(2)
represents amounts written off against the allowance for sales
returns.
in
connection with certain agreements that we have executed in the past, we have at
times provided indemnities to cover the indemnified party for matters such as
tax, product and employee liabilities. we have also on occasion included
intellectual property indemnification provisions in our technology related
agreements with third parties. maximum potential future payments cannot be
estimated because many of these agreements do not have a maximum stated
liability. however, historically costs related to these indemnification
provisions have not been significant. as such, we have not recorded any
liability in our consolidated financial statements for such indemnifications.
note
9 - stockholders equity
stock
repurchase program
on august
9, 2004 we announced that our board of directors had authorized a stock
repurchase program to repurchase shares of our common stock, subject to certain
specifications, up to an aggregate maximum amount of $300.0 million. during
fiscal 2005, we repurchased 2.1 million shares for a total cost of approximately
$24.6 million.
convertible
preferred stock
as of
january 30, 2005, there were no shares of preferred stock outstanding.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
nonstatutory equity incentive plan
on august
1, 2000, our board of directors approved the 2000 nonstatutory equity incentive
plan, or the 2000 plan, to provide for the issuance of our common stock to
employees and affiliates who are not directors, officers or 10% stockholders.
the 2000 plan provides for the issuance of nonstatutory stock options, stock
bonuses and restricted stock purchase rights. option grants issued under the
2000 plan generally expire in six to 10 years. the compensation committee
appointed by the board of directors has the authority to amend the 2000 plan and
to determine the option term, exercise price and vesting period of each grant.
initial option grants generally vest ratably over a four-year period, with 25%
becoming vested approximately one year from the date of grant and the remaining
75% vesting on a quarterly basis over the next three years. subsequent option
grants generally vest quarterly over a four-year period. there were a total of
21,939,202 shares authorized for issuance and 10,505,378 shares available for
future issuance under the 2000 plan as of january 30, 2005.
equity incentive plan
the
equity incentive plan, or the 1998 plan, was adopted by our board of directors
on february17, 1998 and was approved by our stockholders on april 6, 1998
as an amendment and restatement of our then existing equity incentive plan which
had been adopted on may 21, 1993. the 1998 plan provides for the issuance of our
common stock to directors, employees and consultants. the 1998 plan provides for
the issuance of stock bonuses, restricted stock purchase rights, incentive stock
options or nonstatutory stock options. there were a total of 110,094,385 shares
authorized for issuance and 12,006,326 shares available for future issuance
under the 1998 plan as of january 30, 2005.
pursuant
to the 1998 plan, the exercise price for incentive stock options is at least
100% of the fair market value on the date of grant or for employees owning in
excess of 10% of the voting power of all classes of stock, 110% of the fair
market value on the date of grant. for nonstatutory stock options, the exercise
price is no less than 85% of the fair market value on the date of grant.
option
grants issued under the 1998 plan generally expire in six to 10 years. vesting
periods are determined by the board of directors, or the compensation committee
of the board of directors. initial option grants made after february 10, 2004
under the 1998 plan generally vest ratably each quarter over a three year
period. subsequent option grants are generally granted for performance and
generally vest quarterly over a four year period.
non-employee directors stock option plan
in
february 1998, our board of directors adopted the 1998 non-employee directors
stock option plan, or the directors plan, to provide for the automatic grant of
non-qualified options to purchase shares of our common stock to our directors
who are not employees or consultants of us or of an affiliate of us.
in july
2000, the board of directors amended the 1998 plan to incorporate the automatic
grant provisions of the directors plan into the 1998 plan. future automatic
grants to non-employee directors will be made according to the terms of the
directors plan, but will be made out of the 1998 plan until such time as shares
may become available for issuance under the amended directors plan. in may
2002, the directors plan was amended further to reduce the number of shares
granted to our non-employee directors. the altered automatic grant provisions of
the directors plan are also incorporated into the 1998 plan. the terms of the
amended directors plan are described below.
under the
amended directors plan, each non-employee director who is elected or appointed
to our board of directors for the first time is automatically granted an option
to purchase 75,000 shares, which vests quarterly over a three-year period, or
initial grant. previously, such a director was entitled to a grant of 200,000
shares, vesting monthly over a four-year period.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
under the
amended directors plan, on august 1, 2002, each non-employee director was
automatically granted an option to purchase 75,000 shares, which will vest 33%
on the first anniversary of the grant date, with the remaining 66% vesting
quarterly over the second and third years after the date of grant, provided that
the director has attended at least 75% of the meetings during the year following
the date of the grant, or 2002 grants. previously, such a director was entitled
to an annual grant of 80,000 shares, vesting 100% on the first anniversary of
the date of the grant.
on august
1, 2003 and on each august 1 thereafter, each non-employee director will be
automatically granted an option to purchase 25,000 shares, or annual grant.
these annual grants will begin vesting on the second anniversary of the date of
the grant and vest quarterly during the next year. the annual grants will be
fully vested on the third anniversary of the date of the grant, provided that
the director has attended at least 75% of the meetings during the year following
the date of the grant.
on august
1, 2002 and each august 1 of each year thereafter, each non-employee director
who is a member of a committee of the board of directors will automatically be
granted an option to purchase 5,000 shares, or committee grant. the committee
grants vest in full on the first anniversary of the date of the grant, provided
that the director has attended at least 75% of the meetings during the year
following the date of the grant. previously, such a director was entitled to a
grant of 20,000 shares, vesting in full on the first anniversary of the date of
the grant. directors who were members of two committees, messrs. cox, gaither
and jones, waived their grant of an additional 5,000 shares for being a member
of a second committee in fiscal 2003 and 2004.
if a
non-employee director fails to attend at least 75% of the regularly scheduled
meetings during the year following the grant of an option, rather than vesting
as described previously, the 2002 grants and committee grants will vest annually
over four years following the date of grant at the rate of 10% per year for the
first three years and 70% for the fourth year, and the annual grants will vest
30% upon the three-year anniversary of the grant date and 70% for the fourth
year, such that in each case the entire option will become fully vested on the
four-year anniversary of the date of the grant. for the 2002 grants, annual
grants and committee grants, if the person has not been serving on the board of
directors or committee since a prior years annual meeting, the number of shares
granted will be reduced pro rata for each full quarter prior to the date of
grant during which such person did not serve in such capacity.
the
compensation committee administers the amended directors plan. a total of
1,200,000 shares have been authorized and issued under the amended directors
plan of which none is available for future issuance as of january 30, 2005. as
described above, future grants to non-employee directors will be made out of the
1998 plan.
employee
stock purchase plan
in
february 1998, our board of directors approved the 1998 employee stock purchase
plan, or the purchase plan. in june 1999, the purchase plan was amended to
increase the number of shares reserved for issuance automatically each year at
the end of our fiscal year for the next 10 years (commencing at the end of
fiscal 2000 and ending 10 years later in 2009) by an amount equal to 2% of the
outstanding shareson each such date, including on an as-if-converted basis
preferred stock and convertible notes, and outstanding options and warrants,
calculated using the treasury stock method; provided that the maximum number of
shares of common stock available for issuance from the purchase plan could not
exceed 26,000,000 shares. there are a total of 22,751,516 shares authorized for
issuance. at january 30, 2005, 5,737,168 shares have been issued under the
purchase plan and17,014,348 shares are available for future issuance. at
january 25, 2004, 3,760,932 shares had been issued under the purchase plan and
15,438,882 shares were available for future issuance. at january 26, 2003,
2,104,670 shares had been issued under the purchase plan and 13,576,682 shares
were available for future issuance.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
the
purchase plan is intended to qualify as an employee stock purchase plan under
section 423 of the internal revenue code. under the purchase plan, the board has
authorized participation by eligible employees, including officers, in periodic
offerings following the adoption of the purchase plan. under the purchase plan,
separate offering periods shall be no longer than 27 months. under the current
offering adopted pursuant to the purchase plan, each offering period is 24
months, which is divided into four purchase periods of 6 months.
employees
are eligible to participate if they are employed by us or an affiliate of us
designated by the board. employees who participate in an offering may have up to
10% of their earnings withheld pursuant to the purchase plan and applied on
specified dates determined by the board to the purchase of shares of common
stock. the board may increase this percentage at its discretion, up to 15%. the
price of common stock purchased under the purchase plan will be equal to the
lower of the fair market value of the common stock on the commencement date of
each offering period and the purchase date of each offering period at 85% at the
fair market value of the common stock on the relevant purchase date. employees
may end their participation in the offering at any time during the offering
period, and participation ends automatically on termination of employment with
us and in each case their contributions are refunded.
the
following summarizes the transactions under the 1998 plan, 2000 plan and
directors plan:
options
available
for grant
options
outstanding
weighted
average price per
share
balances,
january 27, 2002
9,416,255
51,879,729
$
19.14
authorized
13,957,063
--
--
granted
(8,522,650
)
8,522,650
28.09
shares
of common stock issued in exchange for stock options
(3,815,069
)
--
--
exercised
--
(3,816,695
)
4.62
cancelled
- unvested (1)
18,067,604
(18,067,604
)
36.53
cancelled
- vested (2)
2,882,376
(2,882,376
)
32.51
balances,
january 26, 2003
31,985,579
35,635,704
$
12.93
authorized
8,796,156
--
--
granted
(12,680,144
)
12,675,144
14.77
exercised
--
(4,688,703
)
5.17
cancelled
855,440
(855,440
)
19.26
balances,
january 25, 2004
28,957,031
42,766,705
$
14.20
authorized
--
--
--
granted
(8,514,926
)
8,514,926
23.48
exercised
--
(3,051,875
)
8.29
cancelled
2,069,599
(2,069,599
)
18.82
balances,
january 30, 2005
22,511,704
46,160,157
$
16.10
(1)
includes
16,193,886 unvested stock options cancelled in exchange for shares of
common stock.
(2)
includes
2,649,607 vested stock options cancelled in exchange for shares of common
stock.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
the
following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding as of
january 30, 2005:
options
outstanding
options
exercisable
range
of exercise prices
number
outstanding
weighted
average remaining contractual
life
weighted
average exercise price
number
exercisable
weighted
average exercise price
$0.09
- $0.09
2,000
1.9
$
0.09
2,000
$
0.09
0.33
- 0.33
123,300
2.6
$
0.33
123,300
$
0.33
0.66
- 0.79
567,960
2.9
$
0.75
567,960
$
0.75
1.04
- 1.38
174,668
3.0
$
1.29
174,668
$
1.29
1.58
- 2.25
4,465,078
3.3
$
1.78
4,465,078
$
1.78
.09 - 5.88
3,609,167
4.5
$
4.80
3,585,022
$
4.80
7.65
- 11.07
4,387,246
6.0
$
9.45
3,274,188
$
9.49
11.51
- 17.18
14,133,223
5.0
$
14.49
6,857,542
$
14.81
17.53
- 26.25
13,953,002
5.4
$
22.38
6,210,995
$
19.79
26.38
- 39.54
4,120,013
5.9
$
31.90
3,182,306
$
31.44
42.98
- 53.61
624,000
6.6
$
43.35
617,750
$
43.26
65.47
- 65.47
7.0
$
65.47
$
65.47
$0.09
- $65.47
46,160,157
5.1
$
16.10
29,061,184
$
14.05
note
10 - retirement plan
we have a
401(k) retirement plan, or the plan, covering substantially all of our united
states employees. under the plan, participating employees may defer up to 100
percent of their pre-tax earnings, subject to the internal revenue service
annual contribution limits.
note
11 - stock option exchange
on
september 26, 2002, we commenced an offer, or the offer, to our employees to
exchange outstanding stock options with exercise prices equal to or greater than
$27.00 per share, or eligible options. the offer
was implemented in order to improve employee morale by realigning the cash and
equity components of our compensation programs, eliminate significant
out-of-the-money options and reduce the number of outstanding stock options
relative to the number of shares outstanding, or "options overhang", thereby
reducing future potential dilution to existing stockholders. stock
options to purchase an aggregate of approximately 20,615,000 shares were
eligible for tender at the commencement of the offer, representing approximately
39% of our outstanding stock options as of the commencement date. only employees
of nvidia or one of our subsidiaries as of september 26, 2002 who continued to
be employees through the offer termination date of october 24, 2002 were
eligible to participate in the offer. employees who were on medical, maternity,
workers compensation, military or other statutorily protected leaves of
absence, or a personal leave of absence, were also eligible to participate in
the offer. employees who were terminated on or before the offer termination date
of october 24, 2002, were not eligible to participate in the offer. in addition,
our chief executive officer and chief financial officer and members of our board
of directors were not eligible to participate in this offer.
eligible
employees who participated in the offer received, in exchange for the
cancellation of eligible options, a fixed amount of consideration, represented
by fully vested, non-forfeitable common stock less applicable withholding taxes,
equal to the number of shares underlying such eligible options, multiplied by
$3.20, less the amount of applicable tax withholdings, divided by $10.46, the
closing price of our common stock as reported on the nasdaq national market on
october 24, 2002. we concluded that the consideration paid for the eligible
options represented "substantial consideration" as required by issue 39(f) of
eitf issue no. 00-23 "issues relating to accounting for stock compensation under
apb opinion no. 25 and fasb interpretation no. 44," as the $3.20 per eligible
option was at least the fair value for each eligible option, as determined using
the black-scholes option-pricing model. in determining the fair value of the
eligible options using the black-scholes option-pricing model, we used the
following assumptions: (i) the expected remaining life was deemed to be the
remaining term of the options, which was approximately 7.8 years; (ii) a
volatility of 50.0% during the expected life; (iii) a risk-free interest rate of
3.71%; and (iv) no dividends. the amount of $3.20 per eligible option was
established at the commencement of the offer period and remained unchanged
throughout the offer period.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
variable
accounting is not required under issue 39(a) of eitf issue no. 00-23 for
eligible options subject to the offer that were not surrendered for
cancellation, because: (i) the shares of our common stock offered as
consideration for the surrendered options were fully vested and non-forfeitable;
and (ii) the number of shares to be received by an employee who accepted the
offer was based on the number of surrendered eligible options multiplied by
$3.20, divided by the fair value of the stock at the date of exchange. we
further concluded that the "look back" and "look forward" provisions of fasb
interpretation no. 44, paragraph 45 did apply to the stock options surrendered
for cancellation. based on the terms of the offer, variable accounting is not
required for any of our outstanding stock options existing at the time of the
offer. we did not grant stock options to any participants in the offer for at
least six months following october 24, 2002. if any stock options were granted
to participants in the offer within the six months following october 24, 2002,
those stock options would have received variable accounting.
on
october 24, 2002, the offer period ended and we were obligated to exchange
approximately 18,843,000 eligible options for total consideration of $61.8
million, consisting of $39.9 million in fully vested, non-forfeitable shares of
our common stock (approximately 3,815,000 shares) and $21.9 million in employer
and employee related taxes. the number of fully vested, non-forfeitable shares
of our common stock to be issued was determined by dividing the total
consideration due (less the amount of applicable tax withholdings) by the
closing price of our common stock on october 24, 2002 of $10.46 per share.
the
shares of our common stock issued in exchange for eligible options were fully
vested. however, a portion of the shares equal to 25% of the total
consideration, based on the closing price of our common stock on the offer
termination date, have a six month holding period, and a portion of the shares
equal to 25% of such total consideration have a one year holding period.
withholding taxes and other charges were deducted from the remaining 50% of the
total consideration, and the shares issued after such withholding did not have a
holding restriction.
note
12 - financial arrangements, commitments and contingencies
inventory
purchase obligations
at
january 30, 2005, we had outstanding inventory purchase obligations totaling
$457.3 million.
convertible
subordinated debentures
in
october 2000, we sold $300.0 million 4% convertible subordinated debentures due
2007, or the notes, due october 15, 2007 in a public offering. proceeds from the
offering were approximately $290.8 million after deducting underwriting
discounts, commissions and offering expenses. issuance costs related to the
offering totaled $9.2 million and were amortized to interest expense over the
term of the notes. interest on the notes accrued at the rate of 4% per annum
and was payable semiannually in arrears on april 15 and october 15 of each year,
commencing april 15, 2001. interest expense, excluding the amortization of
issuance costs, related to the notes for fiscal 2004 and 2003 was $10.4 million
and $14.2 million, respectively. the notes were redeemable at our option on or
after october 20, 2003 and were also convertible at the option of the holder at
any time prior to the close of business on the maturity date, unless previously
redeemed or repurchased, into shares of common stock at a conversion price of
$46.36 per share, subject to adjustment in certain circumstances.
on
october 24, 2003, we fully redeemed the notes. the aggregate principal amount of
the notes outstanding was $300.0 million, which included $18.6 million of notes
that we had purchased in the open market during the three months ended october
26, 2003. the redemption price was equal to approximately 102.7% of the
outstanding principal amount of the notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest up
to, but excluding, the redemption date. in connection with the redemption of the
notes, we recorded a charge in our consolidated income statement of
approximately $13.1 million, which included a $7.6 million redemption premium
and $5.5 million for the write-off of unamortized issuance costs.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
lease
obligations
our
headquarters complex is located on a leased site in santa clara, california and
is comprised of five buildings. the related leases expire in 2012 and each
includes two seven-year renewals at our option. future minimum lease payments
under these operating leases total approximately $172.9 million over the
remaining terms of the leases and are included in the future minimum lease
payment schedule below.
in
addition to the commitment of our headquarters, we have other office facilities
under operating leases expiring through fiscal 2013. future minimum lease
payments under our noncancelable capital and operating leases as of january 30,
2005, are as follows:
year
ending january:
operating
capital
(in
thousands)
$
27,534
$
27,425
--
27,422
--
26,615
--
26,327
--
and thereafter
55,794
--
total
$
191,117
$
less
amount representing interest at rates ranging from 5% -
10%
(13
)
present
value of minimum lease payments
less
current portion
long
term portion
$
rent
expense for the years ended january 30, 2005, january 25, 2004 and january 26,
2003 was approximately $28.0 million, $26.4 million and $25.6 million,
respectively.
the
following is an analysis of the property and equipment under capital leases by
major classes:
january
30,
january
25,
(in
thousands)
property
and equipment:
software
and other
$
$
test
equipment
9,125
9,309
computer
equipment
4,331
4,331
office
equipment and furniture
5,232
5,232
$
19,322
$
19,506
accumulated
amortization
(17,835
)
(14,016
)
property
and equipment, net
$
1,487
$
5,490
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
litigation
3dfx
on
december 15, 2000, nvidia corporation and one of our indirect subsidiaries
entered into an agreement to purchase certain graphics chip assets from 3dfx.
the 3dfx asset purchase closed on april 18, 2001. in may 2002, we were served
with a complaint filed by the landlord of 3dfxs san jose, california commercial
real estate lease. in october 2002, 3dfx filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection in the united states bankruptcy court for the northern district of
california. in december 2002, we were served with a complaint filed by the
landlord of 3dfxs austin, texas commercial real estate lease. the landlords
complaints both assert claims for, among other things, interference with
contract, successor liability and fraudulent transfer. the landlords are
seeking to recover, among other things, amounts owed on their leases in the
aggregate amount of approximately $10 million. in march 2003, we were served
with a complaint filed by the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to
represent the interests of the 3dfx bankruptcy estate. the trustees complaint
asserts claims for, among other things, successor liability and fraudulent
transfer. the trustees complaint seeks additional payments from us, the amount
of which has not been quantified. the landlords actions have been removed to
the bankruptcy court from the superior court of california and consolidated with
the trustees action for purposes of discovery. discovery is currently
proceeding and no trialdate has
been set. we believe the claims asserted against us are without merit and we
will continue to defend ourselves vigorously.
opti
incorporated
on
october 19, 2004, opti incorporated, or opti, filed a complaint for patent
infringement against nvidia in the united states district court for the eastern
district of texas. opti asserts that unspecified nvidia chipsets infringe five
united states patents held by opti. opti seeks unspecified damages for our
conduct, attorneys fees and triple damages for alleged willful infringement by
nvidia. nvidia filed a response to this complaint in december 2004. discovery
has not begun and no trial date has been set. we believe the claims asserted
against us are without merit and we will continue to defend ourselves
vigorously.
american
video graphics
in august
2004, a texas limited partnership named american video graphics, lp , or avg,
filed three separate complaints for patent infringement against various
corporate defendants (not including nvidia) in the united states district court
for the eastern district of texas. avg initially asserted that each of the
approximately thirty defendants sells products that infringe one or more of
seven separate patents that avg claims relate generally to graphics processing
functionality. each of the three lawsuits targeted a different group of
defendants; one case involves approximately twenty of the leading personal
computer manufacturers, the pc makers case, one case involves the three leading
video game console makers, the game console case, and one case involves
approximately ten of the leading video game publishers, the game publishers
case. in november 2004, nvidia sought and was granted permission to intervene in
two of the three pending avg lawsuits, the pc makers case and the game console
case. nvidias complaint in intervention alleges both that the patents in suit
are invalid and that, to the extent avgs claims target nvidia products, the
asserted patents are not infringed. two other leading suppliers of graphics
processing products, intel corporation, or intel, and ati technologies, inc., or
ati, have also intervened in the cases, ati in both the pc makers and game
console case, and intel in the pc makers case.
after
some consensual reconfigurations proposed by the various parties, in january
2005, the district court judge entered docket control and discovery orders in
the three lawsuits. the pc makers case now involves four separate patents and is
currently scheduled for trial beginning on september 11, 2006. the game console
case involves a single patent and is currently scheduled for trial beginning on
december 4, 2006. we believe that, to the extent avgs infringement allegations
target functionality that may be performed by nvidia products, those claims are
without merit, and we will continue to defend ourselves and our products
vigorously.
we are
subject to other legal proceedings, but we do not believe that the ultimate
outcome of any of these proceedings will have a material adverse effect on our
financial position or overall trends in results of operations. however, if an
unfavorable ruling were to occur in any specific period, there exists the
possibility of a material adverse impact on the results of operations of that
period.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
note
13 - income taxes
the
provision for income taxes applicable to income before income taxes consists of
the following:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands)
current:
federal
$
--
$
--
$
--
state
foreign
8,826
(51,590
)
20,555
total
current
9,181
(51,369
)
20,690
deferred:
federal
4,683
19,861
20,569
state
(620
)
35,274
9,319
foreign
--
--
--
total
deferred
4,063
55,135
29,888
charge
in lieu of taxes attributable to employer stock option
plans
11,845
8,488
9,180
provision
for income taxes
$
25,089
$
12,254
$
59,758
income
before income taxes consists of the following:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands)
domestic
$
9,556
$
(17,816
)
$
20,764
foreign
115,889
104,489
129,793
$
125,445
$
86,673
$
150,557
the
provision for income taxes differs from the amount computed by applying the
federal statutory income tax rate of 35% to income before income taxes as
follows:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands)
tax
expense computed at federal statutory rate
$
43,906
$
30,336
$
52,695
state
income taxes (benefit), net of federal tax effect
(4,241
)
foreign
tax rate differential
(8,462
)
(11,671
)
23,222
research
and experimental credit
(10,710
)
(5,230
)
(12,048
)
in-process
research and development
--
1,225
--
change
in estimates
--
(36,766
)
--
increase
in beginning of year valuation allowance
--
33,599
--
other
provision
for income taxes
$
25,089
$
12,254
$
59,758
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
the tax
effect of temporary differences that gives rise to significant portions of the
deferred tax assets and liabilities are presented below:
january
30,
january
25,
deferred
tax assets:
(in
thousands)
net
operating loss carryforwards
$
101,238
$
105,503
accruals
and reserves, not currently deductible for tax purposes
13,373
10,286
property,
equipment and intangible assets
17,182
19,194
research
and other tax credit carryforwards
113,856
99,806
gross
deferred tax assets
245,649
234,789
less
valuation allowance
(190,563
)
(182,669
)
net
deferred tax assets
55,086
52,120
deferred
tax liabilities:
unremitted
earnings of foreign subsidiaries
(72,575
)
(57,468
)
net
deferred tax liability
$
(17,489
)
$
(5,348
)
as of
january 30, 2005, we had a valuation allowance of $190.6 million. of the total
valuation allowance, $145.7 million is attributable to certain net operating
loss and tax credit carryforwards resulting from the exercise of employee stock
options. the tax benefit of these net operating loss and tax credit
carryforwards, if and when realization is sustained, would be accounted for as a
credit to stockholders' equity. of the remaining valuation allowance as of
january 30, 2005, $19.9 million relates to federal and state tax attributes
acquired in certain acquisitions for which realization of the related deferred
tax assets was determined not more likely than not to be realized due, in part,
to potential utilization limitations as a result of stock ownership changes, and
$25.0 million relates to certain state deferred tax assets that management
determined not more likely than not to be realized due, in part, to projections
of future taxable income. to the extent realization of the deferred tax assets
related to certain acquisitions becomes probable, recognition of these acquired
tax benefits would first reduce goodwill to zero, then reduce other non-current
intangible assets related to the acquisition to zero with any remaining benefit
reported as a reduction to income tax expense. to the extent realization of the
deferred tax assets related to certain state tax benefits becomes probable, we
would recognize an income tax benefit in the period such asset is more likely
than not to be realized.
as of
january 30, 2005, we had a federal net operating loss carryforward of
approximately $274.4 million and cumulative state net operating loss
carryforwards of approximately $144.4 million. the federal net operating loss
carryforward will expire beginning in fiscal 2012 and the state net operating
loss carryforwards will begin to expire in fiscal 2007 according to the rules of
each particular state. as of january 30, 2005, we had federal research and
experimentation tax credit carryforwards of approximately $72.6 million that
will begin to expire in fiscal 2008; and federal foreign tax credit
carryforwards of approximately $0.2 million that will begin to expire in fiscal
2011. the research and experimentation tax credit carryforward attributable to
states is approximately $57.8 million, of which approximately $55.6 million is
attributable to the state of california and may be carried over indefinitely,
and approximately $2.2 million is attributable to various other states and will
expire beginning in fiscal 2016 according to the rules of each particular state.
we have other california state tax credit carryforwards of approximately $4.9
million that will begin to expire in fiscal 2006. utilization of net operating
losses and tax credit carryforwards may be subject to limitations due to
ownership changes and other limitations provided by the internal revenue code
and similar state provisions. if such a limitation applies, the net operating
loss and tax credit carryforwards may expire before full utilization.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
the
american jobs creation act of 2004 was signed into law on october 22, 2004. this
act creates a temporary incentive for united states multinationals to repatriate
accumulated income earned outside the united states at a federal effective tax
rate of 5.25%. on december 21, 2004, the financial accounting standards board,
or fasb, issued fasb staff position no. fas 109-2, accounting
and disclosure guidance for the foreign earnings repatriation provision within
the american jobs creation act of 2004, which
allows an enterprise time beyond the financial reporting period of enactment to
evaluate the effect of the act on its plan for reinvestment or repatriation of
foreign earningswe have
started an evaluation of the effects of the repatriation provision; however, we
do not expect to be able to complete this evaluation until after congress or the
treasury department provide additional clarifying language on key elements of
the provision. we have not provided for united states income taxes on a
cumulative total of approximately $174.7 million of undistributed earnings as of
january 30, 2005 for certain non-united states subsidiaries as we intended to
reinvest these earnings indefinitely in operations outside of the united states.
we are currently in the process of evaluating whether or not, and to what
extent, if any, this provision may benefit us. we expect to complete such
evaluation before the end of our fiscal 2006. the range of possible amounts that
we are considering for repatriation under this provision is between zero and
$500 million. the potential range of related income tax expense is between zero
and $27 million.
note
14 - microsoft agreement
on march
5, 2000, we entered into an agreement with microsoft corporation, or the
microsoft agreement, in which we agreed, under certain terms and conditions, to
develop and sell processors for use in the xbox video game console. the terms of
the microsoft agreement also state that in the event that an individual or
corporation makes an offer to purchase shares equal to or greater than thirty
percent (30%) of the outstanding shares of our common stock, microsoft has first
and last rights of refusal to purchase the stock.
we were
engaged with microsoft corporation, or microsoft, in discussions related to
pricing and volumes of the xbox platform processors. the microsoft agreement
contemplated the use of a third party to resolve disputed matters, and on april
23, 2002 microsoft submitted the pricing dispute to binding arbitration. on
february 6, 2003, nvidia and microsoft announced that arbitration was over and
the companies had settled all issues related to pricing of the microsoft xbox
platform processors. in addition to resolving this pricing dispute, we have
agreed to collaborate with microsoft on future cost reductions for the xbox,
together the microsoft settlement. as a result of the microsoft settlement, we
recorded $40.4 million in additional revenue in the fourth quarter of fiscal
2003.
note
15 - segment information
during
the second quarter of fiscal 2005, our chief operating decision maker, the chief
executive officer, began reviewing financial information presented on an
operating segment basis for purposes of making operating decisions and assessing
financial performance. we now report three product-line operating segments: the
gpu business, which is composed of products that support desktop pcs, notebook
pcs and professional workstations; the mcp business, which is composed of nvidia
nforce and xbox products; and the wmp business, which supports handheld personal
digital assistants and cellular phones. in addition to these operating segments,
we have the all other category that includes human resources, legal, finance,
general administration and corporate marketing expenses, which total $101.4
million for fiscal 2005, that we do not allocate to our other operating
segments. all other also includes the results of operations of other
miscellaneous operating segments that are neither individually reportable, nor
aggregated with another operating segment. revenue in the all other category
is primarily derived from sales of memory.
we do not
identify or allocate assets by operating segment. operating segments do not
record intersegment revenue, and, accordingly, there is none to be reported. the
accounting policies for segment reporting are the same as for our company as a
whole.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
for
periods prior to the first quarter of fiscal 2005, product-line operating
segment information other than revenue is impracticable to obtain primarily due
to changes in our enterprise resource system structure that we implemented
during the first quarter of fiscal 2005.
gpu
mcp
wmp
all
other
consolidated
(in
thousands)
twelve
months ended january 30, 2005:
revenue
$
1,360,351
$
424,052
$
45,921
$
179,709
$
2,010,033
operating
income (loss)
$
182,045
$
66,454
$
(37,532
)
$
(97,374
)
$
113,593
twelve
months ended january 25, 2004:
revenue
$
1,259,803
$
442,500
$
9,009
$
111,633
$
1,822,945
twelve
months ended january
26, 2003:
revenue
$
1,303,719
$
498,270
$
--
$
107,458
$
1,909,447
revenue
by geographic region is allocated to individual countries based on the location
to which the products are initially billed even if our customers revenue is
attributable to end customers that are located in a different location. the
following tables summarize information pertaining to our revenue from customers
based on invoicing address in different geographic regions:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
(in
thousands)
revenue:
united
states
$
473,721
$
444,510
$
601,952
other
americas
11,045
6,359
1,798
china
269,306
280,975
242,908
taiwan
883,346
834,511
862,238
other
asia pacific
169,888
149,843
127,796
europe
202,727
106,747
72,755
total
revenue
$
2,010,033
$
1,822,945
$
1,909,447
as
of
as
of
january
30,
january
25,
(in
thousands)
long-lived
assets
united
states
$
169,872
$
186,280
other
americas
--
asia
pacific
5,104
1,653
europe
3,979
2,081
total
long-lived assets
$
178,955
$
190,029
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements - (continued)
revenue
from significant customers, those representing approximately 10% or more of
total revenue for the respective periods, is summarized as follows:
year
ended
year
ended
year
ended
january
30,
january
25,
january
26,
revenue:
customer
a
9%
12%
15%
customer
b
13%
15%
23%
customer
c
8%
12%
9%
customer
d
18%
21%
17%
accounts
receivable from significant customers, those representing approximately 10% or
more of total accounts receivable for the respective periods, is summarized as
follows:
as
of
as
of
january
30,
january
25,
accounts
receivable:
customer
a
13%
15%
customer
b
5%
--
customer
c
9%
18%
customer
d
14%
21%
note
16 - quarterly summary (unaudited)
fiscal
quarters
ended
jan.
30, 2005
oct.
24, 2004
july
25, 2004
april
25, 2004
(in
thousands, except per share data)
statement
of operations data:
revenue
$
566,476
$
515,591
$
456,061
$
471,905
cost
of revenue
$
372,661
$
348,849
$
315,968
$
323,069
gross
profit
$
193,815
$
166,742
$
140,093
$
148,836
net
income
$
48,009
$
25,879
$
5,119
$
21,349
basic
net income per share
$
0.29
$
0.16
$
0.03
$
0.13
diluted
net income per share
$
0.27
$
0.15
$
0.03
$
0.12
fiscal
quarters
ended
jan.
25, 2004
oct.
26, 2003
july
27, 2003
april
27, 2003
(in
thousands, except per share data)
statement
of operations data:
revenue
$
472,119
$
486,069
$
459,774
$
404,983
cost
of revenue
$
333,914
$
351,938
$
329,800
$
278,415
gross
profit
$
138,205
$
134,131
$
129,974
$
126,568
net
income
$
24,166
$
6,356
$
24,150
$
19,747
basic
net income per share
$
0.15
$
0.04
$
0.15
$
0.12
diluted
net income per share
$
0.14
$
0.04
$
0.14
$
0.12
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
schedule
ii - valuation and qualifying accounts
description
balance
at beginning of period
additions
(3)
deductions
balance
at end of
period
(in
thousands)
year
ended january 30, 2005
allowance
for sales returns and allowances
$
9,421
$
22,463
$
(20,197)
(1
)
$
11,687
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
2,310
$
(844
)
$
--
$
1,466
year
ended january 25, 2004
allowance
for sales returns and allowances
$
13,228
$
23,796
$
(27,603)
(1
)
$
9,421
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
4,240
$
$
(2,661)
(2
)
$
2,310
year
ended january 26, 2003
allowance
for sales returns and allowances
$
15,586
$
20,147
$
(22,505)
(1
)
$
13,228
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
2,493
$
2,413
$
(666)
(2
)
$
4,240
______________________________
(1)
represents amounts written off against the allowance for sales
returns.
(2)
represents uncollectible accounts written off against the allowance for doubtful
accounts.
(3)
allowances for sales returns are charged as a reduction to revenue. allowances
for doubtful accounts are charged to expenses.
exhibit
index
exhibit
number
description
of document
2.1
asset
purchase agreement, dated as of december 15, 2000, by and among nvidia
corporation, nvidia us investment company and 3dfx interactive, inc.
(filed as exhibit 2.1 to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the
year ended january 28, 2001 and incorporated herein by reference).
3.1
amended
and restated certificate of incorporation (filed as exhibit 4.1 to the
companys registration statement on form s-8 (file no. 333-74905) and
incorporated herein by reference).
3.2
certificate
of amendment of amended and restated certificate of incorporation (filed
as exhibit 3.4 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the
quarterly period ended july 28, 2002 and incorporated herein by
reference).
3.3
bylaws,
as amended (filed as exhibit 3.1 to the companys quarterly report on form
10-q for the quarterly period ended july 29, 2001 and incorporated herein
by reference).
4.1
reference
is made to exhibits 3.1 and 3.2.
4.2
specimen
stock certificate (filed as exhibit 4.2 to amendment no. 1 to the
companys registration statement on form s-1 (file no. 333-47495) and
incorporated herein by reference).
4.3
second
amended and restated investors rights agreement, dated august 19, 1997
between the company and the parties indicated thereto and first amendment
to second amended and restated investors rights agreement, dated july 22,
1998 (filed as exhibit 4.3 to amendment no. 4 to the companys
registration statement on form s-1 (file no. 333-47495) and incorporated
herein by reference).
4.4
second
amendment to second amended and restated investors rights agreement,
dated april 12, 1999 (filed as exhibit 4.4 to the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended may 2, 1999 and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.1
form
of indemnity agreement between nvidia corporation and each of its
directors and officers (filed as exhibit 10.1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-1 file no. 333-47495) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.2*+
equity incentive plan, as amended.
10.3
+
equity incentive plan iso, as amended (filed as exhibit 10.5 to the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended
october 23, 2004 and incorporated herein by reference).
10.4+
equity incentive plan nso, as amended (filed as exhibit 10.6 to the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended
october 23, 2004 and incorporated herein by reference).
10.5
+
certificate
of stock option grant (filed as exhibit 10.7 to the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.6+
employee stock purchase plan, as amended (filed as exhibit 99.4 to the
companys registration statement on form s-8 (file no. 333-51520) and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.7+
form
of employee stock purchase plan offering, as amended (filed as exhibit
99.5 to the companys registration statement on form s-8 (file no.
333-100010) and incorporated herein by reference).
10.8+
non-employee directors stock option plan, as amended (filed as exhibit
10.7 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q/a for the quarterly
period ended april 28, 2002 and incorporated herein by
reference).
10.9
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (annual grant - board service),
as amended (filed as exhibit 10.1 to the companys quarterly report on
form 10-q for the quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and incorporated
herein by reference).
exhibit
number
description
of document
10.10+
non-employee directors stock option plan (committee grant - committee
service), as amended (filed as exhibit 10.2 to the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.11+
non-employee directors stock option plan (initial grant) (filed as
exhibit 10.3 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the
quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and incorporated herein by
reference).
10.12+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan, as amended (filed as exhibit 10.11 to
the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended january 26,
2003 and incorporated herein by reference).
10.13
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building a (filed as exhibit 10.1 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.14
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building b (filed as exhibit 10.2 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.15
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c (filed as exhibit 10.3 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.16
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c (filed as exhibit 10.4 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
21.1*
list
of registrants subsidiaries.
23.1*
consent
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp.
23.2*
consent
of kpmg llp.
24.1*
power
of attorney (included in signature page).
31.1*
certification
of the chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
31.2*
certification
of the chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
32.1*#
certification
of the chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
32.2*#
certification
of the chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
_______________________________
* filed
herewith.
+
management contract, compensatory plan or arrangement.
# the
certifications attached as exhibit 32.1 and exhibit 32.2 accompany this annual
report on form 10-k, are not deemed filed with the securities and exchange
commission and are not to be incorporated by reference into any filing of nvidia
corporation under the securities act of 1933 or the securities exchange act of
1934 whether made before or after the date of this form 10-k, irrespective of
any general incorporation language contained in such filing.
signatures
pursuant
to the requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on march 22,
2005.
nvidia
corporation
by /s/
jen-hsun huang_______
jen-hsun
huang
president
and chief executive officer
power
of attorney
know
all persons by these presents, that each person whose signature appears below
constitutes and appoints jen-hsun huang and marvin d. burkett, and each or any
one of them, his true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of
substitution and resubstitution, for him and in his name, place and stead, in
any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments (including posting
effective amendments) to this report, and to file the same, with all exhibits
thereto, and other documents in connection therewith, with the securities and
exchange commission, granting unto said attorneys-in-facts and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing
requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully to all
intents and purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or their
or his substitutes or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue
hereof.
pursuant
to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
president,
chief executive officer
/s/
jen-hsun huang
and
director (principal executive
jen-hsun
huang
officer)
march
22, 2005
/s/
marvin d. burkett
chief
financial officer (principal
marvin
d. burkett
financial
and accounting officer)
march
22, 2005
/s/
tench coxe
tench
coxe
director
march
22, 2005
/s/
steven chu
steven
chu
director
march
17, 2005
/s/
james c. gaither
james
c. gaither
director
march
22, 2005
/s/
harvey c. jones
march
21, 2005
harvey
c. jones
director
signature
title
date
/s/
william j. miller
william
j. miller
director
march
21, 2005
/s/
a. brooke seawell
a.
brooke seawell
director
march22,
/s/
mark a. stevens
mark
a. stevens
director
march
22, 2005
exhibit
index
exhibit
number
description
of document
2.1
asset
purchase agreement, dated as of december 15, 2000, by and among nvidia
corporation, nvidia us investment company and 3dfx interactive, inc.
(filed as exhibit 2.1 to the companys annual report on form 10-k for the
year ended january 28, 2001 and incorporated herein by reference).
3.1
amended
and restated certificate of incorporation (filed as exhibit 4.1 to the
companys registration statement on form s-8 (file no. 333-74905) and
incorporated herein by reference).
3.2
certificate
of amendment of amended and restated certificate of incorporation (filed
as exhibit 3.4 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the
quarterly period ended july 28, 2002 and incorporated herein by
reference).
3.3
bylaws,
as amended (filed as exhibit 3.1 to the companys quarterly report on form
10-q for the quarterly period ended july 29, 2001 and incorporated herein
by reference).
4.1
reference
is made to exhibits 3.1 and 3.2.
4.2
specimen
stock certificate (filed as exhibit 4.2 to amendment no. 1 to the
companys registration statement on form s-1 (file no. 333-47495) and
incorporated herein by reference).
4.3
second
amended and restated investors rights agreement, dated august 19, 1997
between the company and the parties indicated thereto and first amendment
to second amended and restated investors rights agreement, dated july 22,
1998 (filed as exhibit 4.3 to amendment no. 4 to the companys
registration statement on form s-1 (file no. 333-47495) and incorporated
herein by reference).
4.4
second
amendment to second amended and restated investors rights agreement,
dated april 12, 1999 (filed as exhibit 4.4 to the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended may 2, 1999 and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.1
form
of indemnity agreement between nvidia corporation and each of its
directors and officers (filed as exhibit 10.1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-1 file no. 333-47495) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.2*+
equity incentive plan, as amended.
10.3
+
equity incentive plan iso, as amended (filed as exhibit 10.5 to the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended
october 23, 2004 and incorporated herein by reference).
10.4+
equity incentive plan nso, as amended (filed as exhibit 10.6 to the
companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended
october 23, 2004 and incorporated herein by reference).
10.5
+
certificate
of stock option grant (filed as exhibit 10.7 to the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.6+
employee stock purchase plan, as amended (filed as exhibit 99.4 to the
companys registration statement on form s-8 (file no. 333-51520) and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.7+
form
of employee stock purchase plan offering, as amended (filed as exhibit
99.5 to the companys registration statement on form s-8 (file no.
333-100010) and incorporated herein by reference).
10.8+
non-employee directors stock option plan, as amended (filed as exhibit
10.7 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q/a for the quarterly
period ended april 28, 2002 and incorporated herein by
reference).
10.9
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (annual grant - board service),
as amended (filed as exhibit 10.1 to the companys quarterly report on
form 10-q for the quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and incorporated
herein by reference).
exhibit
number
description
of document
10.10+
non-employee directors stock option plan (committee grant - committee
service), as amended (filed as exhibit 10.2 to the companys quarterly
report on form 10-q for the quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and
incorporated herein by reference).
10.11+
non-employee directors stock option plan (initial grant) (filed as
exhibit 10.3 to the companys quarterly report on form 10-q for the
quarterly period ended october 23, 2004 and incorporated herein by
reference).
10.12+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan, as amended (filed as exhibit 10.11 to
the companys annual report on form 10-k for the year ended january 26,
2003 and incorporated herein by reference).
10.13
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building a (filed as exhibit 10.1 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.14
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building b (filed as exhibit 10.2 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.15
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c (filed as exhibit 10.3 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
10.16
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c (filed as exhibit 10.4 to amendment no. 1 to the companys
registration statement on form s-3 (file no. 333-33560) and incorporated
herein by reference).
21.1*
list
of registrants subsidiaries.
23.1*
consent
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp.
23.2*
consent
of kpmg llp.
24.1*
power
of attorney (included in signature page).
31.1*
certification
of the chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
31.2*
certification
of the chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
32.1*#
certification
of the chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
32.2*#
certification
of the chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the
securities exchange act of 1934.
_______________________________
* filed
herewith.
+
management contract, compensatory plan or arrangement.
# the
certifications attached as exhibit 32.1 and exhibit 32.2 accompany this annual
report on form 10-k, are not deemed filed with the securities and exchange
commission and are not to be incorporated by reference into any filing of nvidia
corporation under the securities act of 1933 or the securities exchange act of
1934 whether made before or after the date of this form 10-k, irrespective of
any general incorporation language contained in such
filing.
