10-k
fy2009form10k.htm
fiscal year 2009 form 10-k
fy2009form10k.htm
united
states
securities
and exchange commission
washington,
d.c.20549
________________
form
10-k
[x]
annual
report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
for the fiscal year ended
january 25, 2009
or
[_]
transition
report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
commission
file number: 0-23985
nvidia
corporation
(exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
94-3177549
(state
or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s.
employer
incorporation
or organization)
identification
no.)
san tomas expressway
santa
clara, california95050
(408)
486-2000
(address,
including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of principal
executive offices)
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title
of each class
name
of each exchange on which registered
common
stock, $0.001 par value per share
the
nasdaq global select market
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act:
none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in
rule 405 of the securities act.
yes x no
o
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to
section 13 or section 15(d) of the act.
yes o no
x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be
filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required
to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days.
yes x no
o
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulation s-k ( 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not
be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in
definitiveproxy or information statements incorporated by reference
in part iii of this form 10-k or any amendment to this form 10-k.
x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see
definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller
reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):
large
accelerated filer xaccelerated
filer o
non-accelerated
filer o (do not
check if a smaller reporting company)smaller reporting
company o
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule
12b-2 of the act).
yes o no x
the
aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the
registrant as of july 27, 2008 was approximately $6.1 billion (based on the
closing sales price of the registrants common stock as reported by the nasdaq
global select market, on july 25, 2008). this calculation excludes approximately
26,237,509shares held by directors and executive officers of the
registrant. this calculation does not exclude shares held by such organizations
whose ownership exceeds 5% of the registrants outstanding common stock that
have represented to the registrant that they are registered investment advisers
or investment companies registered under section8 of the investment
company act of 1940.
the
number of shares of common stock outstanding as of march 6, 2009 was
542,453,547.
documents
incorporated by reference
portions
of the registrants proxy statement for its 2009 annual meeting of stockholders
to be filed with the securities and exchange commission by april 6, 2009 are
incorporated by reference.
nvidia
corporation
table
of contents
page
part i
item
1.
business
item
1a.
risk
factors
item
1b.
unresolved staff
comments
item
2.
properties
item
3.
legal
proceedings
item
4.
submission of matters to a vote
of security holders
part
ii
item
5.
market for registrants common
equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item
6.
selected financial
data
item
7.
managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item
7a.
quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk
item
8.
financial statements and
supplementary data
item
9.
changes in and disagreements with
accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item
9a.
controls and
procedures
item
9b.
other
information
part
iii
item
10.
directors, executive officers
and corporate governance
item
11.
executive compensation
item
12.
security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item
13.
certain relationships and
related transactions, and director independence
item
14.
principal accounting fees and
services
part
iv
item
15.
exhibits, financial statement
schedules
signatures
part i
item 1. business
forward-looking
statements
this annual report on
form10-k contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of
section27a of the securities act of 1933, as amended, and section21e
of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, which are subject to the
safe harbor created by those sections. forward-looking statements are based on
our managements beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available
to our management. in some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by
terms such as may, will, should, could, goal, would, expect,
plan, anticipate, believe, estimate, project, predict, potential
and similar expressions intended to identify forward-looking statements. these
statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors,
which may cause our actual results, performance, time frames or achievements to
be materially different from any future results, performance, time frames or
achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. we discuss
many of these risks, uncertainties and other factors in this annual report on
form10-k in greater detail under the heading risk factors. given these
risks, uncertainties and other factors, you should not place undue reliance on
these forward-looking statements. also, these forward-looking statements
represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this filing. you
should read this annual report on form10-k completely and with the
understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from
what we expect. we hereby qualify our forward-looking statements by these
cautionary statements. except as required by law, we assume no obligation to
update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons
actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these
forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the
future.
all references to
nvidia, we, us, our or the company mean nvidia corporation and its
subsidiaries, except where it is made clear that the term means only the parent
company.
nvidia, geforce, sli,
hybrid sli, goforce, quadro,nvidia quadro, nvidia nforce,tesla,
tegra, cuda, nvidia apx, physx, ageia, mental images, and the nvidia logo are
our trademarks and/or registered trademarks in the united states and other
countries that are used in this document. we may also refer to trademarks of
other corporations and organizations in this document.
our
company
nvidia corporation is the
worldwide leader in visual computing technologies and the inventor of the
graphic processing unit, or the gpu, a high-performance processor which
generates realistic, interactive graphics on workstations, personal computers,
game consoles, and mobile devices. our products are designed to generate
realistic, interactive graphics on consumer and professional computing devices.
we serve the entertainment and consumer market with our geforce graphics
products, the professional design and visualization market with our quadro
graphics products, the high-performance computing market with our tesla
computing solutions products, and the handheld computing market with our tegra
computer-on-a-chip products. we have four major product-line operating segments:
the gpu business, the professional solutions business, or psb, the media and
communications processor, or mcp, business, and the consumer products business,
or cpb.
our gpu business is
comprised primarily of our geforce products that support desktop and notebook
personal computers, or pcs, plus memory products. our psb is comprised of our
quadro professional workstation products and other professional graphics
products, including our nvidia tesla high-performance computing products. our
mcp business is comprised of nforce core logic and motherboard gpu, or mgpu
products. our cpb is comprised of our tegra and goforce mobile brands and
products that support netbooks, personal navigation devices, or pnds, handheld
personal media players, or pmps, personal digital assistants, or pdas, cellular
phones and other handheld devices. cpb also includes license, royalty, other
revenue and associated costs related to video game consoles and other digital
consumer electronics devices.original equipment manufacturers, or
oems, original design manufacturers, or odms, add-in-card manufacturers, system
builders and consumer electronics companies worldwide utilize our processors as
a core component of their entertainment, business and professional
solutions.
we were incorporated in
california in april 1993 and reincorporated in delaware in april 1998. our
headquarter facilities are in santa clara, california. our internet address is
www.nvidia.com.the
contents of our website are not a part of this form 10-k.
gpu business
our gpu business is
comprised primarily of our geforce products that support desktop and notebook
pcs, plus memory products. our gpu business is focused on microsoft windows and
apple pc platforms.geforce gpus power pcs made by or distributed by
most pc oems in the world for desktop pcs, notebook pcs, pcs loaded with
windowsmediacenter and media extenders such as the apple
tv.gpus enhance the user experience for playing video games, editing
photos, viewing and editing videos and high-definition, or hd, movies. gpus also
enable the rich visual user interfaces of the windows vista and apple os x
operating systems. the combination of the programmable unified shader gpu with
microsoft corporations, or microsofts, directx 10 high-level shading language
is known as directx 10 gpus. combined with the ability to directly access the
gpu via the new windows vista applications from microsoft office to web 2.0,
applications can now incorporate improved quality through 3d
effects.
we believe we are in an
era where visual computing is becoming increasingly important to consumers and
other end users of our products.our strategy is to promote our geforce
brand as one of the most important processors through technology leadership,
increasing programmability, and great content experience.in fiscal
year 2009, our strategy was to extend our architectural and technology advantage
with our geforce gpus.
the geforce gtx 280 and
260 gpu products that we launched during fiscal year 2009 represent the
second-generation of our unified architecture. based on a comparison between the
geforce gtx 280 and the geforce 8800 ultra in a variety of benchmarks and
resolutions, the geforce gtx 280 and 260 gpusdeliver 50 percent more
gaming performance over the geforce 8800 ultra gpu. other significant product
launches during fiscal year 2009 included the geforce 9600 gt, which provides
more than double the performance of our geforce 8600 gts product; the geforce
9800 gx2, which provides a new dual gpu board featuring quad scalable link
interface, or sli, technology; and the geforce 9800 gtx,which is a
flexible gpu that supports both two-way and three-way sli
technology.
we also launched the
geforce gtx 295 and geforce gtx 285 which were designed based on compute unified
device architecture, or cuda, technology.the geforce gtx 295 is
among the worlds fastest dual gpu solutions featuring the power of two geforce
gtx 200 gpus on a single card. the geforce gtx 285 is among the worlds most
powerful single gpu solution and works efficiently in complex directx 10
environments with extreme hd resolutions. we also shipped notebook products from
the geforce 100m series, which includes the geforce g105m and the geforce g110m
to meet the performance demands of todays visual computing
applications.the geforce g105m is over 55 percentfaster than
our previous product in the mainstream segment, while the geforce g110m is 35
percentfaster than our previous mainstream gpu.
in fiscal
year 2009, we completed our acquisition of ageia technologies, inc., or ageia,
an industry leader in gaming physics technology. ageia's physx software is
widely adopted in several physx-based games that are shipping or in development
on sony playstation 3, microsoft xbox 360, nintendo wii, and gaming pcs. we
believe that the combination of the gpu and physics engine brands result
in an enhanced visual experience for the gaming world.subsequent to our
acquisition of ageia, we launched the geforce 9800 gtx+, geforce 9800 gt, and
geforce 9500 gt gpus, which provide support for our physx physics engine and
cuda parallel processing across a wide range of price segments. electronic arts,
thq and 2k games, a publishing label of take-two interactive software,have
licensed physx technology as a development platform which will be available for
use by each of the companies studios worldwide.
our share of
the standalone desktop gpu category decreased from 64% to 63% in fiscal year
2009, according to the december 2007and december 2008 pc graphics report
from mercury research, respectively. our share of the standalone notebook
category decreased from 75% to 63%, according to the december 2007and
december 2008 pc graphics report from mercury research,
respectively.
professional
solutions business
our psb is
comprised of our quadro professional workstation products and other professional
graphics products, including our tesla high-performance computing products. our
quadro brand products are designed to deliver the highest possible level of
performance and compatibility for the professional industry.the
quadro family consists of the quadro plex visual computing system, or vcs,
quadro fx, quadro cx and the quadro night vision systems, or nvs, professional
workstation processors. quadro products are recognized by many as the standard
for professional graphics solutions needed to solve many of the worlds most
complex visual computing challenges in the manufacturing, entertainment,
medical, science, and aerospace industries. nvidia quadro products are fully
certified by several software developers for professional workstation
applications and are designed to deliver the graphics performance and precision
required by professional applications.
we believe that recent years have experienced an increasing level of global
adoption for the computer-aided design approach of product
creation.we have achieved a leading position in the professional
graphics category by providing innovative gpu technology, software, and tools
that integrate the capabilities of our gpu with a broad array of visualization
products.
during fiscal
year 2009, we launched several new quadro solutions. these included the quadro
fx 3600m professional, which is among the highest performing notebook gpus, and
the quadro plex d series, a dedicated desk side vcs system that, alternatively,
can be configured using two quadro plex d systems for a 3u configuration that
fits a standard 19 rack environment.at the siggraph 2008
conference, the quadro plex d2 system set a new milestone in computer graphics
by demonstrating the worlds first real-time fully-interactive ray tracer. we
also launched five new quadro fx notebook gpus that spanned from ultra-high
performance to ultra mobility, as well as the quadro cx, the industrys first
accelerator for adobes creative suite 4, or adobe cs4, content creation
software. adobe cs4 software has added optimization to take advantage of gpu
technology.the quadro cx is specifically designed to enhance the
performance of the adobe cs4 product line and to give creative professionals the
ultimate performance and productivity.
during fiscal
year 2009, we also we launched the tesla c1060 computing processor and the tesla
s1070 computing system, which is among the first teraflop processors and has a
1u system demonstrating up to four teraflops of performance.tesla is
a new family of gpu computing products that delivers processing capabilities for
high-performance computing applications, and marks our entry into the
high-performance computing industry. the tesla family also consists of the c870
gpu computing processor, the d870 deskside supercomputer and the s870 1u
computing server. we believe we are in an era of gpu computing, where our cuda
parallel processing architecture can accelerate compute-intensive applications
by significant multiples over that of a central processing unit, or cpu, alone.
nvidia cuda is a general purpose parallel computing architecture that leverages
the parallel compute engine inour graphics processing units to solve many
complex computational problems in a fraction of the time required on a cpu.
there are currently over 25,000 developers around the world using cuda. in order
to program using the cuda architecture, developers can, today, use c, one of the
most widely used high-level programming languages, which can then be run at
great performance on a cuda enabled processor. we expect other languages to be
supported in the future, including fortran and c++.
with cuda, we
are able to speed up general purpose compute-intensive applications like we do
for 3d graphics processing.developers are able to speed-up
algorithms in areas ranging from nano molecular dynamics to image processing,
medical image reconstruction and derivatives modeling for financial risk
analysis.over 100 universities around the world now teach parallel
programming with cuda and many pc oems now offer high performance computing
solutions with tesla for use by customers around the world, including motorola,
chevron, ge health care and even general mills, the consumer products company.
researchers use cuda to accelerate their time-to-discovery, and popular
off-the-shelf software packages are now cuda accelerated.
mcp
business
our mcp
business is comprised of nforce core logic and geforce mgpu
products. our nforce and geforce mgpu families of products address
the core logic market.core logic is the computers central nervous
system, controlling and directing high speed data between the central
processing unit, or cpu, the gpu, storage, and networks.high
quality, long-term reliability, and top performance are key customer demands of
core logic suppliers.
during fiscal
year 2008, we announced a new technology named hybrid sli. this technology
combines the multi-gpu technology with a powerful and energy-efficient engine.
when geforce add-in graphics cards are connected to geforce mgpus, hybrid sli
kicks in, combining their processing power to deliver an improved experience.
the technology is application aware so, depending on the processing demands of
each application running on the host pc, the discrete gpu may be completely shut
down in order to save power.
during fiscal year
2009, we shipped hybrid sli dx10 mgpus  the geforce 8000 gpu
series.the geforce 8000 gpu series includes geforce boost hybrid sli
technology, which is designed to double performance when paired with a geforce 8
series desktop gpu.we also extended the reach of sli technology into
the performance category with the launch of our nvidia nforce 790i ultra sli
mcp, a highly rated overclockable platform for intel corporation, or intel,
processors.during fiscal year 2009, we launched
the geforce 9m series of notebook gpus that enables improved performance in
notebooks with hybrid sli technology and physx technology. we also launched sli
for intel broomfield cpu platforms.when paired with the nforce 200
sli mcp, intels bloomfield cpu and tylersburg core logic chipset will deliver
nvidia three-way sli technology with up to a 2.8 times performance boost over
single graphics card platforms.
in fiscal
year 2009, we launched the geforce 9400m mgpu along with apple inc., or apple,
for their new lineup of mac notebooks. the geforce 9400m integrates three
complex chips  the northbridge, the input-output network processor, and the
geforce gpu into a single chip and, as a result, significantly improves
performance over intel integrated graphics.apples macbook and
macbook air notebook computers come standard with the geforce 9400m. apples
macbook pro notebook computer comes standard with the hybrid combination of two
geforce gpus - ageforce 9400m for maximum battery life and a geforce 9600m
gt for high performance mode.wealso launched the geforce 9400
and 9300 mgpus for intel desktop pcs.these new mgpus set a new
price/performance standard for integrated graphics by combining the power of
three different chips into one highly compact and efficient gpu.
additionally,
in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009, we announced the nvidia ion platform,
which combines the geforce 9400 gpu with the intel atom cpu. the combination
enables netbooks, small form factor and all-in-one pcs to play rich media and
popular games in high definition.
our mcp
strategy is to bring the benefits of geforce gpus to the most price sensitive
categories while creating exciting platform architectures like sli,
hybridsli, and enthusiast system architecture, or esa.esa is a
standard for system information protocol that links a pc systems various
critical components  such as fan, power supply, smart chassis, gpus, and
motherboards.it enables a unified architecture for applications and
users to control and optimize the performance of their system.sli,
hybrid sli, and esa are examples of how we create architectures that advance the
capabilities of the pc.
consumer
products business
our cpb is
comprised of our tegra and goforce mobile brands and products that support
netbooks, pmps,pdas, cellular phones and other handheld devices.
this business also includes license, royalty, other revenue and associated costs
related to video game consoles and other digital consumer electronics
devices.
we believe
thatmobile devices like phones, music players, and portable navigation
devices will increasingly become multi-function, multi-tasking,
pcs.as such, we anticipate the architecture of these devices will
increasingly become more consumer pc-like and be capable of delivering all the
entertainment and web experiences that end users currently enjoy on a pc, but in
a form-factor that fits nicely in their hands.our mobile strategy is
to create a computer-on-a-chip that enables this experience.nvidia tegra
and goforce mobile products implement design techniques, both inside the chips
and at the system level, which result in high performance and long battery life.
these technologies enhance visual display capabilities, improve connectivity,
and minimize chip and system-level power consumption. nvidia tegra and goforce
products can be found primarily in multimedia cellular phones and other handheld
devices.
during fiscal
year 2009, we launched the nvidia tegra apx 2500
computer-on-a-chip.the nvidia tegra apx 2500 is a computer-on-a-chip
designed to meet the growing multimedia demands of today's mobile phone and
entertainment userin february 2009, we announced the nvidia
tegra apx 2600 computer-on-a-chip and that we have worked closely with google,
inc., or google, and the open handset alliance to unleash android, an open
mobile phone software stack, with the nvidia tegraseries of
computer-on-a-chip processors. the nvidia tegra apx 2600 and 2500 enable a
compelling user interface and high-definition video playback for a low-power,
visually rich experience, and we expect that these products will be key to
building next-generation microsoft windows mobile, windows ce, and android-based
devices, including smartphones, pnds, and pmps.
additionally,
we also launched the nvidia tegra 600 and 650 products, which are small,
advanced, highly-integrated visual computer-on-a-chip products. these products,
whichrepresent a single-chip heterogeneous computer architecture designed
for low-power mobile computing devices, featureenhanced multimedia
functionalityincluding high definition, or hd, 1080p video and advanced 3d
technologyand deliver many times the power efficiency of competing products on
a broad range of connected devices.
additionally,
in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009, we also introduced geforce 3d vision,
a high-definition 3d stereo solution for the home. 3d vision is a combination of
high-tech wireless glasses, a high-power infraredemitter and advanced
software that transforms hundreds of pc games into full stereoscopic
3d.
our
strategy
we design our
products to enable our pc oems, odms, system builders, motherboard and add-in
board manufacturers, and cellular phone and consumer electronics oems, to build
products that deliver state-of-the-art features, performance, compatibility and
power efficiency while maintaining competitive pricing and profitability. we
believe that by developing 3d graphics, hd, video and media communications
solutions that provide superior performance and address the key requirements of
each of the product categories we serve, we will accelerate the adoption of hd
digital media platforms and devices throughout these segments. we combine
scalable architectural technology with mass market economies-of-scale to deliver
a complete family of products that span from professional workstations, to
consumer pcs, to multimedia-rich cellular phones.
our objective
is to be the leading supplier of performance gpus, mcps and computer-on-a-chip
products that supportnetbooks, pnds, pdas, pmps, cellular phones and other
handheld devices. our current focus is on the desktop pc, professional
workstation, notebook pc, high-performance computing, application processor,
multimedia-rich cellular phone and video game console product lines, and we plan
to expand into other product lines. our strategy to achieve this objective
includes the following key elements:
build award-winning,
architecturally-compatible 3d graphics, hd video, media communications and
ultra-low power product families for the pc, handheld and digital entertainment
platforms.our strategy is to achieve market
segment leadership in these platforms by providing award-winning performance at
every price point. by developing 3d graphics, hd video and media communications
solutions that provide superior performance and address the key requirements of
these platforms, we believe that we will accelerate the adoption of 3d graphics
and rich digital media.
target leading oems,
odms and system builders.our strategy is to
enable our leading pc, handheld and consumer electronics oems, odms and major
system builder customers to differentiate their products in a highly competitive
marketplace by using our products. we believe that design wins with these
industry leaders provide market validation of our products, increase brand
awareness and enhance our ability to penetrate additional leading customer
accounts. in addition, we believe that close relationships with oems, odms and
major system builders will allow us to better anticipate and address customer
needs with future generations of our products.
sustain technology
and product leadership in 3d graphics and hd video, and media communications and
ultra-low power.we are focused on using our
advanced engineering capabilities to accelerate the quality and performance of
3d graphics, hd video, media communications and ultra-low power processing in
pcs and handheld devices. a fundamental aspect of our strategy is to actively
recruit the best 3d graphics and hd video, networking and communications
engineers in the industry, and we believe that we have assembled an
exceptionally experienced and talented engineering team. our research and
development strategy is to focus on concurrently developing multiple generations
of gpus, including gpus for high-performance computing, mcps and mobile and
consumer products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas, cellular phones and
other handheld devices using independent design teams. as we have in the past,
we intend to use this strategy to achieve new levels of graphics, networking and
communications features and performance and ultra-low power designs, enabling
our customers to achieve superior performance in their products.
increase market
share.we believe that substantial market share
will be important to achieving success. we intend to achieve a leading share of
the market in areas in which we don't have a leading market share, and maintain
a leading share of the market in areas in which we do have the lead, by devoting
substantial resources to building families of products for a wide range of
applications that offer significant improvement in performance over existing
products.
use our expertise in
digital multimedia.we believe the synergy created
by the combination of 3d graphics, hd video and the internet will fundamentally
change the way people work, learn, communicate and play. we believe that our
expertise in hd graphics and system architecture positions us to help drive this
transformation. we are using our expertise in the processing and transmission of
high-bandwidth digital media to develop products designed to address the
requirements of high-bandwidth concurrent multimedia.
use our intellectual
property and resources to enter into license and development contracts.
from time to time, we expect to enter into license arrangements that will
require significant customization of our intellectual property components.
for license arrangements that require significant customization of our
intellectual property components, we generally recognize this license revenue
using the percentage-of-completion method of accounting over the period that
services are performed. for example, in fiscal year 2006, we entered into an
agreement with sony computer entertainment, inc., or sce, to jointly develop a
custom gpu for sces playstation3. our collaboration with sce includes
license fees and royalties for the playstation3 and all derivatives, including
next-generation digital consumer electronics devices. in addition, we are
licensing software development tools for creating shaders and advanced graphics
capabilities to sce.
revolutionize
computing with cuda and tesla.tesla is a family of gpu
computing products that delivers processing capabilities for high-performance
computing applications, and marks our entry into the high-performance computing
industry. nvidia cuda is a general purpose parallel computing architecture that
leverages the parallel compute engine in nvidia gpus to solve many complex
computational problems in a fraction of the time required on a cpu. we believe
we are in an era of gpu computing, where our cuda parallel processing
architecture can accelerate compute-intensive applications by significant
multiples over that of a cpu alone. we are working with developers around the
world to adopt and write application programs for the cuda architecture using c,
one of the most widely used high-level programming languages, which can then be
run at great execution speeds on a cuda enabled processor. we expect other
languages to be supported in the future, including fortran and
c++.with cuda, we are able to speed up general purpose
compute-intensive applications like we do for 3d graphics
processing.developers are able to speed-up algorithms in areas
ranging from nano molecular dynamics to image processing, medical image
reconstruction and derivatives modeling for financial risk
analysis.we are also working with universities around the world who
now teach parallel programming with cuda and we are also working with many pc
oems who now offer high performance computing solutions with tesla for use by
their customers around the world. researchers also use cuda to accelerate their
time-to-discovery, and popular off-the-shelf software packages are now cuda
accelerated.
sales
and marketing
our worldwide
sales and marketing strategy is a key part of our objective to become the
leading supplier of performance gpus, mcps, and applications processors that
support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas, cellular phones and other handheld devices.
our sales and marketing teams work closely with each industrys respective oems,
odms, system builders, motherboard manufacturers, add-in board manufacturers and
industry trendsetters, collectively referred to as our channel, to define
product features, performance, price and timing of new products. members of our
sales team have a high level of technical expertise and product and industry
knowledge to support the competitive and complex design win process. we also
employ a highly skilled team of application engineers to assist our channel in
designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate our products.
we believe that the depth and quality of our design support are keys to
improving our channels time-to-market, maintaining a high level of customer
satisfaction within our channel and fostering relationships that encourage
customers to use the next generation of our products.
in the gpu
and mcp segments we serve, the sales process involves achieving key design wins
with leading oems and major system builders and supporting the product design
into high volume production with key odms, motherboard manufacturers and add-in
board manufacturers. these design wins in turn influence the retail and system
builder channel that is serviced by add-in board and motherboard manufacturers.
our distribution strategy is to work with a number of leading independent
contract equipment manufacturers, or cems, odms, motherboard manufacturers,
add-in board manufacturers and distributors each of which have relationships
with a broad range of major oems and/or strong brand name recognition in the
retail channel. in the cpb segment we serve, the sales process primarily
involves achieving key design wins directly with the leading handheld oems and
supporting the product design into high-volume production. currently, we sell a
significant portion of our processors directly to distributors, cems, odms,
motherboard manufacturers and add-in board manufacturers, which then sell boards
and systems with our products to leading oems, retail outlets and to a large
number of system builders.
although a
small number of our customers represent the majority of our revenue, their end
customers include a large number of oems and system builders throughout the
world.as a result of our channel strategy, our sales are focused on
a small number of customers. sales to our largest customer, hewlett-packard
company, accounted for 11% of our total revenue for fiscal year
2009.
to encourage
software title developers and publishers to develop games optimized for
platforms utilizing our products, we seek to establish and maintain strong
relationships in the software development community. engineering and marketing
personnel interact with and visit key software developers to promote and discuss
our products, as well as to ascertain product requirements and solve technical
problems. our developer program makes certain that our products are available to
developers prior to volume availability in order to encourage the development of
software titles that are optimized for our products.
backlog
our sales are
primarily made pursuant to standard purchase orders. the quantity of products
purchased by our customers as well as our shipment schedules are subject to
revisions that reflect changes in both the customers requirements and in
manufacturing availability. the semiconductor industry is characterized by short
lead time orders and quick delivery schedules. in light of industry practice and
experience, we believe that only a small portion of our backlog is
non-cancelable and that the dollar amount associated with the non-cancelable
portion is not significant. consequently, we do not believe that a backlog as of
any particular date is indicative of future results.
dependence
on pc market
we derive and
expect to continue to derive the majority of our revenuefrom the sale or
license of products for use in the desktop pc and notebook pc markets, including
professional workstations. a reduction in sales of pcs, or a reduction in the
growth rate of pc sales, may reduce demand for our products.changes
in demand for our products could be large and sudden.during fiscal
year 2009, sales of our desktop gpu products decreased approximately 29%
compared to fiscal year 2008. these decreases were primarily due to the
standalone desktop and standalone notebook gpu market segment decline as
reported in the pc graphics december 2008 report from mercury research.
since pc manufacturers often build inventories during periods of anticipated
growth, they may be left with excess inventories if growth slows or if they
incorrectly forecast product transitions. in these cases, pc manufacturers may
abruptly suspend substantially all purchases of additional inventory from
suppliers like us until their excess inventory has been absorbed, which would
have a negative impact on our financial results.
seasonality
our industry
is largely focused on the consumer products market. historically, we have seen
stronger revenue in the second half of ourfiscal year than in the first
half of ourfiscal year, primarily due to back-to-school and holiday
demand. this seasonal trend did not occur in fiscal year
2009.revenue in the second half of fiscal year 2009 declined by 33%
when compared to revenue from the first half of fiscal year 2009. the current
recessionary economic environment has created substantial uncertainty in our
business.there can be no assurance that the historical seasonal trend will
resume in the future.
manufacturing
fabless
manufacturing strategy
we do not
directly manufacture semiconductor wafers used for our products. instead, we
utilize what is known as a fabless manufacturing strategy for all of our
product-line operating segments whereby we employ world-class suppliers for all
phases of the manufacturing process, including wafer fabrication, assembly,
testing and packaging. this strategy uses the expertise of industry-leading
suppliers that are certified by the international organization for
standardization, or iso, in such areas as fabrication, assembly, quality control
and assurance, reliability and testing. in addition, this strategy allows us to
avoid many of the significant costs and risks associated with owning and
operating manufacturing operations. our suppliers are also responsible for
procurement of most of the raw materials used in the production of our products.
as a result, we can focus our resources on product design, additional quality
assurance, marketing and customer support.
we utilize
industry-leading suppliers, such as taiwan semiconductor manufacturing
corporation, or tsmc, united microelectronics corporation, or umc, chartered
semiconductor manufacturing, or chartered, semiconductor manufacturing
international corporation, or smic, and austria micro systems, or ams to produce
our semiconductor wafers. we then utilize independent subcontractors, such as
advanced semiconductor engineering, or ase, amkor technology, or amkor, jsi
logistics ltd., or jsi, king yuan electronics co., ltd, or kyec, siliconware
precision industries company ltd., or spil, and stats chippac incorporated, or
chippac, to perform assembly, testing and packaging of most of our
products.
we typically
receive semiconductor products from our subcontractors, perform incoming quality
assurance and then ship the semiconductors to cems, distributors, motherboard
and add-in board manufacturer customers from our third-party warehouse in hong
kong. generally, these manufacturers assemble and test the boards based on our
design kit and test specifications, and then ship the products to retailers,
system builders or oems as motherboard and add-in board solutions.
product
defect
our products
are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to any number of
issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use within a system.
if any of our products or technologies contains a defect, compatibility issue or
other error, we may have to invest additional research and development efforts
to find and correct the issue.such efforts could divert our
managements and engineers attention from the development of new products and
technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce our gross margin.
in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or related software
drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result in failure to
achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be required to
reimburse customers, including for customers costs to repair or replace the
products in the field. a product recall or a significant number of product
returns could be expensive, damage our reputation and could result in the
shifting of business to our competitors. costs associated with correcting
defects, errors, bugs or other issues could be significant and could materially
harm our financial results.
for example,
in july 2008, we recorded a $196.0 million charge against cost of revenue to
cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and other
associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in certain
versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in notebook
systems. all of our newly manufactured products and all of our products that are
currently shipping in volume have a different material set that we believe is
more robust. the previous generation mcp and gpu products that are impacted were
included in a number of notebook products that were shipped and sold in
significant quantities. certain notebook configurations of these mcp and gpu
products are failing in the field at higher than normal rates. while we have not
been able to determine a root cause for these failures, testing suggests a weak
material set of die/package combination, system thermal management designs, and
customer use patterns are contributing factors. we have worked with our
customers to develop and have made available for download a software driver to
cause the system fan to begin operation at the powering up of the system and
reduce the thermal stress on these chips. we have also recommended to our
customers that they consider changing the thermal management of the mcp and gpu
products in their notebook system designs. we intend to fully support our
customers in their repair and replacement of these impacted mcp and gpu products
that fail, and their other efforts to mitigate the consequences of these
failures.
we continue
to engage in discussions with our supply chain regarding reimbursement to us for
some or all of the costs we have incurred and may incur in the future relating
to the weak material set. we also continue to seek to access our insurance
coverage, which provided us with $8.0 million in related reimbursement during
fiscal year 2009. however, there can be no assurance that we will recover any
additional reimbursement. we continue to not see any abnormal failure rates in
any systems using nvidia products other than certain notebook configurations.
however, we are continuing to test and otherwise investigate other products.
there can be no assurance that we will not discover defects in other mcp or gpu
products.
inventory
and working capital
our
management focuses considerable attention on managing our inventories and other
working-capital-related items. we manage inventories by communicating with our
customers and then using our industry experience to forecast demand on a
product-by-product basis. we then place manufacturing orders for our products
that are based on forecasted demand. the quantity of products actually purchased
by our customers as well as shipment schedules are subject to revisions that
reflect changes in both the customers requirements and in manufacturing
availability. we generally maintain substantial inventories of our products
because the semiconductor industry is characterized by short lead time orders
and quick delivery schedules.
we believe
that our existing cash balances and anticipated cash flows from operations will
be sufficient to meet our operating, acquisition and capital requirements for at
least the next twelve months. however, there is no assurance that we will not
need to raise additional equity or debt financing within this time frame.
additional financing may not be available on favorable terms or at all and may
be dilutive to our then-current stockholders. we also may require additional
capital for other purposes not presently contemplated. if we are unable to
obtain sufficient capital, we could be required to curtail capital equipment
purchases or research and development expenditures, which could harm our
business.
research
and development
we believe
that the continued introduction of new and enhanced products designed to deliver
leading 3d graphics, hd video, audio, ultra-low power communications, storage,
and secure networking performance and features is essential to our future
success. our research and development strategy is to focus on concurrently
developing multiple generations of gpus, mcps and our consumer products that
support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas, cellular phones or other handheld devices
using independent design teams. our research and development efforts are
performed within specialized groups consisting of software engineering, hardware
engineering, very large scale integration design engineering, process
engineering, architecture and algorithms. these groups act as a pipeline
designed to allow the efficient simultaneous development of multiple generations
of products.
a critical
component of our product development effort is our partnerships with leaders in
the computer aided design, or cad, industry. we invest significant resources in
the development of relationships with industry leaders, including cadence design
systems, inc., and synopsys, inc., often assisting these companies in the
product definition of their new products. we believe that forming these
relationships and utilizing next-generation development tools to design,
simulate and verify our products will help us remain at the forefront of the 3d
graphics market and develop products that utilize leading-edge technology on a
rapid basis. we believe this approach assists us in meeting the new design
schedules of pc oem and other manufacturers.
we
substantially increased our engineering and technical resources in fiscal year
2009, and had 3,772 full-time employees engaged in research and development as
of january 25, 2009, compared to 3,255 employees as of january 27, 2008 and
2,668 employees as of january 28, 2007. during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
we incurred research and development expenditures of $855.9 million, $691.6
million and $553.5 million, respectively.
competition
the market for gpus, mcps,
and computer-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas,
cellular phones or other handheld devices is intensely competitive and is
characterized by rapid technological change, evolving industry standards and
declining average selling prices. we believe that the principal competitive
factors in this market are performance, breadth of product offerings, access to
customers and distribution channels, software support, conformity to industry
standard application programming interfaces, or apis, manufacturing
capabilities, processor pricing, and total system costs. we believe that our
ability to remain competitive will depend on how well we are able to anticipate
the features and functions that customers will demand and whether we are able to
deliver consistent volumes of our products at acceptable levels of quality and
at competitive prices. we expect competition to increase from both existing
competitors and new market entrants with products that may be less costly than
ours, or may provide better performance or additional features not provided by
our products. in addition, it is possible that new competitors or alliances
among competitors could emerge and acquire significant market
share.
a significant
source of competition is from companies that provide or intend to provide gpu,
mcp, and computer-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas,
cellular phones or other handheld devices. some of our competitors may have
greater marketing, financial, distribution and manufacturing resources than we
do and may be more able to adapt to customer or technological changes.
currently, intel, which has greater resources than we do, is working on a
multi-core architecture code-named larrabee, which may compete with our products
in various markets.intel may also release an enthusiast level
discrete gpu based on the larrabee architecture. additionally, in fiscal year
2009, intel also introduced the intel atom processor which is designed for lower
cost pcs. intel may also release a second generation of atom chips by 2010 which
is expected to have an improved battery life. the intel atom processor may
compete with our products that support netbooks, pdas, cellular phones and other
handheld devices.
our current
competitors include the following:
suppliers
of discrete mcps that incorporate a combination of networking, audio,
communications and input/output, or i/o, functionality as part of their
existing solutions, such as amd, broadcom corporation, or broadcom,
silicon integrated systems, inc.,or sis,via technologies,
inc.,or via,and intel;
suppliers
of gpus, including mcps that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as part
of their existing solutions, such as amd, intel, matrox electronics
systems ltd.,sis, and via;
suppliers
of computer-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas,
cellular phones or other handheld devices such as amd, broadcom, fujitsu
limited, imagination technologies ltd., arm holdings plc, marvell
technology group ltd, or marvell, nec corporation, qualcomm incorporated,
renesas technology, samsung, seiko-epson, texas instruments incorporated,
and toshiba america, inc.; and
suppliers
of computer-on-a-chip products for handheld and embedded devices that
incorporate multimedia processing as part of their existing solutions such
as broadcom, texas instruments inc., qualcomm incorporated, marvell,
freescale semiconductor inc., renesas technology, samsung, and st
microelectronics.
we expect
substantial competition from both intels and amds strategy of selling platform
solutions, such as the success intel achieved with its centrino platform
solution. amd has also announced a platform solution. additionally, we
expect that intel and amd will extend this strategy to other segments, including
the possibility of successfully integrating a central processing unit, or cpu,
and a gpu on the same chip, as evidenced by amds announcement of its fusion
processor project. if amd and intel continue to pursue platform solutions, we
may not be able to successfully compete and our business would be negatively
impacted.
if and to the
extent we offer products in new markets, we may face competition from some of
our existing competitors as well as from companies with which we currently do
not compete. for example, in the case of our cpb, our tegra and goforce products
primarily compete in architecture used in multimedia cellular phones and
handheld devices.we believe thatmobile devices like phones,
music players, and portable navigation devices will increasingly become more
consumer pc-like and be capable of delivering all the entertainment and web
experiences in a handheld device.we cannot accurately predict if we will
compete successfully in any of the new markets we may enter. if we are unable to
compete in our current or new markets, demand for our products could decrease
which could cause our revenue to decline and our financial results to
suffer.
our gpu and
mcp products are currently used with both intel and amd
processors.in february 2009, intel filed suit against us,
related to a patent license agreement that we signed with intel in 2004. intel
seeks an order from the court declaring that the license does not extend to a
new intel processor architecture and enjoining us from stating that we have
licensing rights for this architecture.if intel successfully obtains
such a court order, we could be unable to sell our mcp products for use with
these intel processors and our competitive position would be
harmed.in addition, in order to continue to sell mcp products for
use with these intel processors we could be required to negotiate a new license
agreement with intel and we may not be able to do so on reasonable terms, if at
all.
patents
and proprietary rights
we rely
primarily on a combination of patents, trademarks, trade secrets, employee and
third-party nondisclosure agreements and licensing arrangements to protect our
intellectual property in the united states and internationally. our issued
patents have expiration dates from april 10, 2009 to october 1,
2028.we have numerous patents issued, allowed and pending in the
united states and in foreign jurisdictions. our patents and pending patent
applications primarily relate to our products and the technology used in
connection with our products. we also rely on international treaties,
organizations and foreign laws to protect our intellectual property. the laws of
certain foreign countries in which our products are or may be manufactured or
sold, including various countries in asia, may not protect our products or
intellectual property rights to the same extent as the laws of the united
states. this makes the possibility of piracy of our technology and products more
likely. we continuously assess whether and where to seek formal protection for
particular innovations and technologies based on such factors as:
the
location in which our products are
manufactured;
our
strategic technology or product directions in different countries;
and
the
degree to which intellectual property laws exist and are meaningfully
enforced in different
jurisdictions.
the
commercial significance of our operations and our competitors operations
in particular countries and
regions;
our pending
patent applications and any future applications may not be approved. in
addition, any issued patents may not provide us with competitive advantages or
may be challenged by third parties. the enforcement of patents by others may
harm our ability to conduct our business. others may independently develop
substantially equivalent intellectual property or otherwise gain access to our
trade secrets or intellectual property. our failure to effectively protect our
intellectual property could harm our business. we have licensed technology from
third parties for incorporation in some of our products and for defensive
reasons, and expect to continue to enter into such license agreements. these
licenses may result in royalty payments to third parties, the cross licensing of
technology by us or payment of other consideration. if these arrangements are
not concluded on commercially reasonable terms, our business could
suffer.
employees
as of january 25, 2009 we
had 5,420 employees, 3,772 of whom were engaged in research and development and
1,648 of whom were engaged in sales, marketing, operations and administrative
positions. none of our employees are covered by collective bargaining
agreements, and we believe our relationships with our employees are
good.
financial
information by business segment and geographic data
our chief executive
officer, who is considered to be our chief operating decision maker, or codm,
reviews financial information presented on an operating segment basis for
purposes of making operating decisions and assessing financial
performance.during the first quarter of fiscal year 2008, we
reorganized our operating segments. we now report financial information for four
operating segments to our codm: the gpu business, which is comprised primarily
of our geforce products that support desktop and notebook pcs, plus memory
products; the psb which is comprised of our nvidia quadro professional
workstation products and other professional graphics products, including our
nvidia teslahigh-performance computing products; the mcp business which is
comprised of nvidia nforce core logic and motherboard gpu products; and our cpb,
which is comprised of our tegra and goforce mobile brands and products that
support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas, cellular phones and other handheld
devices.cpb also includes license, royalty, other revenue and
associated costs related to video game consoles and other digital consumer
electronics devices. in addition to these operating segments, we have the all
other category that includes human resources, legal, finance, general
administration and corporate marketing expenses, which total $346.1 million,
$266.2 million and $239.6 million for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively, that we do not allocate to our other operating segments as these
expenses are not included in the segment operating performance measures
evaluated by our codm. all other also includes the results of operations of
other miscellaneous reporting segments that are neither individually reportable,
nor aggregated with another operating segment. revenue in the all other
category is primarily derived from sales of components. certain prior
period amounts have been revised to conform to the presentation of our current
fiscal year.
our codm does
not review any information regarding total assets on an operating segment basis.
operating segments do not record intersegment revenue, and, accordingly, there
is none to be reported. the accounting policies for segment reporting are
the same as for nvidia as a whole. the information included in note 16 of
the notes to the consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15
of this form10-k, including financial information by business segment and
revenue and long-lived assets by geographic region, is hereby incorporated by
reference.
executive
officers of the registrant
the
following sets forth certain information regarding our executive officers, their
ages and their positions as of february 27,2009:
name
age
position
jen-hsun
huang
president,
chief executive officer and director
david
l. white*
executive
vice president and chief financial officer
ajay
k. puri
executive
vice president, worldwide sales
david
m. shannon
executive
vice president, general counsel and secretary
debora
shoquist
executive
vice president,
operations
*
on february 27, 2009, we announced that david l. white was appointed as our
executive vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding marvin burkett,
whose decision to retire was disclosed in march 2008.
jen-hsun huang
co-founded nvidia in april 1993 and has served as its president, chief
executive officer and a member of the board of directors since its inception.
from 1985 to 1993, mr. huang was employed at lsi logic corporation, a computer
chip manufacturer, where he held a variety of positions, most recently as
director of coreware, the business unit responsible for lsis system-on-a-chip
strategy. from 1983 to 1985, mr. huang was a microprocessor designer for
advanced micro devices, inc., a semiconductor company. mr. huang holds a
b.s.e.e. degree from oregonstateuniversity and an m.s.e.e. degree
from stanforduniversity.
david white
joined nvidia in february 2009 as executive vice president and chief
financial officer. from august 2004 to february 2009, mr. white served as the
executive vice president of finance and chief financial officer of sanmina-sci
corporation, a global provider of customized, integrated electronics
manufacturing services to original equipment manufacturers in the
communications, enterprise computing and medical industries and various other
end markets. from 2003 to 2004, mr. white was senior vice president and chief
financial officer of asyst technologies, inc., a provider of integrated hardware
and software automation solutions that enhance semiconductor and flat-panel
display manufacturing productivity. mr. white served as president and chief
executive officer of candescent technologies corporation, a developer of field
emission display technology for next-generation thin flat-panel displays, and
held various other positions, from 1995 to 2002. mr. white holds a b.s. degree
from brighamyounguniversity and an m.b.a. from the university of
washington.
ajay k. puri
joined nvidia in december 2005 as senior vice president, worldwide sales and
becameexecutive vice president, worldwide sales in january 2009. prior to
nvidia, he held positions in sales, marketing, and general management over a
22-year career at sun microsystems, inc. mr. puri previously held marketing,
management consulting, and product development positions at hewlett-packard
company, booz allen hamilton inc., and texas instruments incorporated. mr. puri
holds an m.b.a. degree from harvarduniversity, an m.s.e.e. degree from the
california institute of technology and a b.s.e.e. degree from the university of
minnesota.
david m.
shannonjoined nvidia in august 2002 as vice president and general
counsel. mr. shannon became secretary of nvidia in april 2005,a senior
vice president in december 2005 and an executive vice president in january 2009.
from 1993 to 2002, mr.shannon held various counsel positions at intel,
including the most recent position of vice president and assistant general
counsel. mr.shannon also practiced for eight years in the law firm of
gibson dunn and crutcher, focusing on complex commercial and high-technology
related litigation. mr.shannon holds b.a. and j.d. degrees from
pepperdineuniversity.
debora
shoquist joined nvidia in september 2007 as senior vice president of
operations and became executive vice president of operations in january
2009.from 2004 to 2007, ms.shoquist served as senior vice
president of operations at jds uniphase corporation, a provider of
communications test and measurement solutions and optical products for the
telecommunications industry. from 2002 to 2004, she served as senior vice
president and general manager of the electro-optics business at coherent, inc.,
a manufacturer of commercial and scientific laser equipment. her experience
includes her role at quantum corporation as the president of the personal
computer hard disk drive division. her experience also includes senior roles at
hewlett-packard corporation. she holds a b.s degree in electrical engineering
from kansasstateuniversity and a b.s. degree in biology from santa
clarauniversity.
available
information
our annual
report on form 10-k, quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k
and, if applicable, amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
section 13(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, or the exchange act, are
available free of charge on or through our internet web site,
http://www.nvidia.com, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically
file such material with, or furnish it to, the securities and exchange
commission, or the sec. our web site and the information on it or connected to
it is not a part of this form 10-k.
item 1a. risk factors
in evaluating
nvidia and our business, the following factors should be considered in addition
to the other information in this annual report on form 10-k.before
you buy our common stock, you should know that making such an investment
involves some risks including, but not limited to, the risks described below.
additionally, any one of the following risks could seriously harm our business,
financial condition and results of operations, which could cause our stock price
to decline. additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that
we currently deem immaterial may also impair our business
operations.
risks
related to our business and industry
global
economic conditions have reduced demand for our products, adversely impacted our
customers and suppliers and harmed our business.
our
operations and performance depend significantly on worldwide economic
conditions. uncertainty about current global economic conditions poses a
continuing risk to our business as consumers and businesses have postponed
spending in response to tighter credit, negative financial news and/or declines
in income or asset values, which have reduced the demand for our products. other
factors that could depress demand for our products in the future include
conditions in the residential real estate and mortgage markets, labor and
healthcare costs, access to credit, consumer confidence, and other macroeconomic
factors affecting consumer spending behavior. these and other economic factors
have reduced demand for our products and could further harm our business,
financial condition and operating results.
the current
financial turmoil affecting the banking system and financial markets and the
possibility that financial institutions may consolidate or go out of business
have resulted in a tightening in the credit markets, a low level of liquidity in
many financial markets, and extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency
and equity markets. there could be a number of follow-on effects from the credit
crisis on our business, including insolvency of key suppliers resulting in
product delays; inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain
credit to finance purchases of our products and/or customer, including channel
partner, insolvencies; and failure of financial institutions, which may
negatively impact our treasury operations. other income and expense could also
vary materially from expectations depending on gains or losses realized on the
sale or exchange of financial instruments; impairment charges related to debt
securities as well as equity and other investments; interest rates; and cash,
cash equivalent and marketable securities balances. for example, during fiscal
year 2009, we recorded impairment charges of $5.6 million related to our money
market investment in the reserve international liquidity fund, ltd., or the
international reserve fund. the current volatility in the financial markets and
overall economic uncertainty increases the risk that the actual amounts realized
in the future on our financial instruments could differ significantly from the
fair values currently assigned to them.
our business
is cyclical in nature and is currently experiencing a severe downturn, which has
harmed and may continue to harm our financial results.
our business
is directly affected by market conditions in the highly cyclical semiconductor
industry, which is currently experiencing a severe downturn. the semiconductor
industry has been adversely affected by many factors, including the current
global downturn, ongoing efforts by our customers to reduce their spending,
diminished product demand, increased inventory levels, lower average selling
prices, uncertainty regarding long-term growth rates and underlying financial
health and increased competition. these factors, could, among other things,
limit our ability to maintain or increase our sales or recognize revenue and in
turn adversely affect our business, operating results and financial
condition.if our actions to reduce our operating expenses to
sufficiently offset these factors during this downturn are unsuccessful, our
operating results will suffer.
our revenue
may fluctuate while our operating expenses are relatively fixed, which makes our
results difficult to predict and could cause our results to fall short of
expectations.
demand for
many of our revenue components fluctuate and are difficult to predict, and our
operating expenses are relatively fixed and largely independent of revenue.
therefore, it is difficult for us to accurately forecast revenue and profits or
losses in any particular period.our operating expenses, which are
comprised of research and development expenses, sales, general and
administrative expenses and restructuring and other charges, represented 36%,
25% and 28% of our total revenue for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively. since we often recognize a substantial portion of our
revenue in the last month of each quarter, we may not be able to adjust our
operating expenses in a timely manner in response to any unanticipated revenue
shortfalls in any quarter as was the case in the fourth quarter of fiscal year
2009. our operating expenses, which are comprised of research and development
expenses and sales, general and administrative expenses and restructuring and
other charges, represented 66% of our total revenue for the fourth quarter of
fiscal year 2009.further, some of our operating expenses, like stock-based
compensation expense can only be adjusted over a longer period of time and
cannot be reduced during a quarter. if we are unable to reduce operating
expenses quickly in response to any revenue shortfalls, our financial results
will be negatively impacted.
in september 2008, we announced a workforce reduction to allow for continued
investment in strategic growth areas, which was completed in the third quarter
of fiscal year 2009. as a result, we eliminated approximately 360 positions
worldwide, or about 6.5% of our global workforce.during fiscal year
2009, expenses associated with the workforce reduction, which were comprised
primarily of severance and benefits payments to these employees, totaled $8.0
million. we anticipate that the expected decrease in operating expenses from
this action will be offset by continued investment in strategic growth areas. in
addition, in response to the current economic environment, we have commenced
several cost reduction measures which are designed to reduce our operating
expenses and will continue to focus on reducing our operating expenses during
fiscal year 2010. please refer to the discussion in note 19 to the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for the potential impact of the tender offer on operating
expenses during the first quarter of fiscal year 2010.
any one or
more of the risks discussed in this annual report on form 10-k or other factors
could prevent us from achieving our expected future revenue or net income.
accordingly, we believe that period-to-period comparisons of our results of
operations should not be relied upon as an indication of future performance.
similarly, the results of any quarterly or full fiscal year period are not
necessarily indicative of results to be expected for a subsequent quarter or a
full fiscal year. as a result, it is possible that in some quarters our
operating results could be below the expectations of securities analysts or
investors, which could cause the trading price of our common stock to decline.
we believe that our quarterly and annual results of operations may continue to
be affected by a variety of factors that could harm our revenue, gross profit
and results of operations.
our failure
to estimate customer demand properly could adversely affect our financial
results.
we
manufacture our products based on forecasts of customer demand in order to have
shorter shipment lead times and quicker delivery schedules for our
customers.as a result, we may build inventories for anticipated
periods of growth which do not occur or may build inventory anticipating demand
for a product that does not materialize. the current negative worldwide economic
conditions and market instability makes it increasingly difficult for us, our
customers and our suppliers to accurately forecast future product demand trends.
in forecasting demand, we make multiple assumptions any of which may prove to be
incorrect. situations that may result in excess or obsolete inventory
include:
if
there were a sudden and significant decrease in demand for our
products;
if
there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly
changing technology and customer
requirements;
if
we fail to estimate customer demand properly for our older products as our
newer products are introduced; or
if
our competition were to take unexpected competitive pricing
actions.
any inability
to sell products to which we have devoted resources could harm our business. in
addition, cancellation or deferral of customer purchase orders could result in
our holding excess inventory, which could adversely affect our gross margin and
restrict our ability to fund operations. additionally, because we often sell a
substantial portion of our products in the last month of each quarter, we may
not be able to reduce our inventory purchase commitments in a timely manner in
response to customer cancellations or deferrals. we could be subject to excess
or obsolete inventories and be required to take corresponding inventory
write-downs and/or a reduction in average selling prices if growth slows or does
not materialize, or if we incorrectly forecast product demand, which could
negatively impact our financial results.
conversely,
if we underestimate our customers demand for our products, our third party
manufacturing partners may not have adequate lead-time or capacity to increase
production for us meaning that we may not be able to obtain sufficient inventory
to fill our customers orders on a timely basis. even if we are able to increase
production levels to meet customer demand, we may not be able to do so in a cost
effective or timely manner. inability to fulfill our customers orders on a
timely basis, or at all, could damage our customer relationships, result in lost
revenue, cause a loss in market share, impact our customer relationships or
damage our reputation, any of which could adversely impact our
business.
because our
gross margin for any period depends on a number of factors, our failure to
forecast changes in any of these factors could adversely affect our gross
margin.
we are
focused on improving our gross margin. our gross margin for any period depends
on a number of factors, including:
the
mix of our products sold;
average
selling prices;
introduction
of new products;
product
transitions;
sales
discounts;
unexpected
pricing actions by our competitors;
the
cost of product components; and
the
yield of wafers produced by the foundries that manufacture our
products.
during the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009, our gross margin declined to 29.4% as
compared to 45.7% during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008 and decreased
from 41.0% from the third quarter of fiscal year 2009. if we do not correctly
forecast the impact of any of the relevant factors on our business, there may
not be any actions we can take or we may not be able to take any possible
actions in time to counteract any negative impact on our gross margin.
additionally, during fiscal year 2009, the revenue and gross margins from our
sale of desktop products decreased primarily due to a decline in the standalone
desktop market segment as reported in the december 2008 pc graphics report from
mercury research. this decline was driven by a combination of market migration
from desktop pcs towards notebook pcs and an overall market shift in the mix of
products towards lower priced products. if the overall shift in the demand from
the consumer continues to shift towards lower priced products, it will have an
adverse impact on our gross margin. in addition, if we are unable to meet our
gross margin target for any period or the target set by analysts, the trading
price of our common stock may decline.
we are
dependent on the personal computer market and its rate of growth in the future
may have a negative impact on our business.
we derive and
expect to continue to derive the majority of our revenuefrom the sale or
license of products for use in the desktop personal computer, or pc, and
notebook pc markets, including professional workstations. a reduction in sales
of pcs, or a reduction in the growth rate of pc sales, may reduce demand for our
products. these changes in demand could be large and sudden. during fiscal year
2009, sales of our desktop gpu products decreased by approximately 29% compared
to fiscal year 2008. these decreases were primarily due to the standalone
desktop gpu market segment decline as reported in the pc graphics december 2008
report from mercury research.since pc manufacturers often
build inventories during periods of anticipated growth, they may be left with
excess inventories if growth slows or if they incorrectly forecast product
transitions. in these cases, pc manufacturers may abruptly suspend substantially
all purchases of additional inventory from suppliers like us until their excess
inventory has been absorbed, which would have a negative impact on our financial
results.
if we are
unable to compete in the markets for our products, our financial results could
be adversely impacted.
the market
for gpus, mcps, and computer-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds,
pmps, pdas, cellular phones or other handheld devices is intensely competitive
and is characterized by rapid technological change, new product introductions,
evolving industry standards and declining average selling prices.we
believe that the principal competitive factors in this market are performance,
breadth of product offerings, access to customers and distribution channels,
software support, conformity to industry standard application programming
interface, or apis, manufacturing capabilities, price of processors, and total
system costs. we believe that our ability to remain competitive will depend on
how well we are able to anticipate the features and functions that customers
will demand and whether we are able to deliver consistent volumes of our
products at acceptable levels of quality. we expect competition to increase from
both existing competitors and new market entrants with products that may be less
costly than ours, or may provide better performance or additional features not
provided by our products. in addition, it is possible that new competitors or
alliances among competitors could emerge and acquire significant market share.
we believe other factors impacting our ability to compete
are:
product
performance;
product
bundling by competitors with multiple product
lines;
breadth
and frequency of product offerings;
access
to customers and distribution
channels;
backward-forward
software support;
conformity
to industry standard application programming interfaces;
and
manufacturing
capabilities.
a significant
source of competition is from companies that provide or intend to provide gpu,
mcp, and computer-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas,
cellular phones or other handheld devices. some of our competitors may have
greater marketing, financial, distribution and manufacturing resources than we
do and may be more able to adapt to customer or technological changes.
currently, intel corporation, or intel, which has greater resources than we do,
is working on a multi-core architecture code-named larrabee, which may compete
with our products in various markets.intel may also release an
enthusiast level discrete gpu based on the larrabee architecture. additionally,
in fiscal year 2009, intel also introduced the intel atom processor which is
designed for lower cost pcs. intel may also release a second generation of atom
chips by 2010 which is expected to have an improved battery life. the intel atom
processor may compete with our products that support netbooks, pdas, cellular
phones and other handheld devices.
our current
competitors include the following:
suppliers
of discrete mcps that incorporate a combination of networking, audio,
communications and input/output, or i/o, functionality as part of their
existing solutions, such as amd, broadcom corporation, or broadcom,
silicon integrated systems, inc.,or sis,via technologies,
inc.,or via,and intel;
suppliers
of gpus, including mcps that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as part
of their existing solutions, such as amd, intel, matrox electronics
systems ltd.,sis, and via;
suppliers
of computer-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas,
cellular phones or other handheld devices such as amd, broadcom, fujitsu
limited, imagination technologies ltd., arm holdings plc, marvell
technology group ltd, or marvell, nec corporation, qualcomm incorporated,
renesas technology, samsung, seiko-epson, texas instruments incorporated,
and toshiba america, inc.; and
suppliers
of computer-on-a-chip products for handheld and embedded devices that
incorporate multimedia processing as part of their existing solutions such
as broadcom, texas instruments inc., qualcomm incorporated, marvell,
freescale semiconductor inc., renesas technology, samsung, and st
microelectronics.
if and to the
extent we offer products in new markets, we may face competition from some of
our existing competitors as well as from companies with which we currently do
not compete. for example, in the case of our cpb, our tegra and goforce products
primarily compete in architecture used in multimedia cellular phones and
handheld devices.we believe thatmobile devices like phones,
music players, and portable navigation devices will increasingly become more
consumer pc-like and be capable of delivering all the entertainment and web
experiences in a handheld device.we cannot accurately predict if we will
compete successfully in any of the new markets we may enter. if we are unable to
compete in our current or new markets, demand for our products could decrease
which could cause our revenue to decline and our financial results to
suffer.
our gpu and
mcp products are currently used with both intel and amd
processors.in february 2009, intel filed suit against us,
related to a patent license agreement that we signed with intel in 2004. intel
seeks an order from the court declaring that the license does not extend to a
new intel processor architecture and enjoining us from stating that we have
licensing rights for this architecture.if intel successfully obtains
such a court order, we could be unable to sell our mcp products for use with
these intel processors and our competitive position would be
harmed.in addition, in order to continue to sell mcp products for
use with these intel processors we could be required to negotiate a new license
agreement with intel and we may not be able to do so on reasonable terms, if at
all.
as intel and
amd continue to pursue platform solutions, we may not be able to successfully
compete and our business would be negatively impacted.
we expect
substantial competition from both intels and amds strategy of selling platform
solutions, such as the success intel achieved with its centrino platform
solution. amd has also announced a platform solution. additionally, we
expect that intel and amd will extend this strategy to other segments, including
the possibility of successfully integrating a central processing unit, or cpu,
and a gpu on the same chip, as evidenced by amds announcement of its fusion
processor project. if amd and intel continue to pursue platform solutions, we
may not be able to successfully compete and our business would be negatively
impacted.
if our
products contain significant defects our financial results could be negatively
impacted, our reputation could be damaged and we could lose market
share.
our products
are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to any number of
issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use within a system.
if any of our products or technologies contains a defect, compatibility issue or
other error, we may have to invest additional research and development efforts
to find and correct the issue.such efforts could divert our
engineers attention from the development of new products and technologies and
could increase our operating costs and reduce our gross margin. in addition, an
error or defect in new products or releases or related software drivers after
commencement of commercial shipments could result in failure to achieve market
acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be required to reimburse
customers, including our customers costs to repair or replace products in the
field. a product recall or a significant number of product returns could be
expensive, damage our reputation, could result in the shifting of business to
our competitors and could result in litigation against us. costs associated with
correcting defects, errors, bugs or other issues could be significant and could
materially harm our financial results. for example, in july 2008, we recorded a
$196.0 million charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer
warranty, repair, return, replacement and other associated costs arising from a
weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation
media and communications processor, or mcp, and gpu products used in notebook
systems. in september, october and november 2008, several putative class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted
mcp and gpu products.please refer to the risk entitled we are subject to litigation arising
from alleged defects in our previous generation mcp and gpu products, which if
determined adversely to us, could harm our business for the risk
associated with this litigation.
we
are subject to risks associated with international operations which may harm our
business.
we conduct
our business worldwide.our semiconductor wafers are manufactured,
assembled, tested and packaged by third-parties located outside of the united
states. we generated 87%, 89% and 86% of our revenue for fiscal years
2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, from sales to customers outside the united
states and other americas. as of january 25, 2009, we had offices in fifteen
countries outside of the united states.the manufacture, assembly,
test and packaging of our products outside of the united states, operation of
offices outside of the united states, and sales to customers internationally
subjects us to a number of risks, including:
international
economic and political conditions, such as political tensions between
countries in which we do business;
unexpected
changes in, or impositions of, legislative or regulatory requirements;
complying
with a variety of foreign laws;
differing
legal standards with respect to protection of intellectual property and
employment practices;
cultural
differences in the conduct of
business;
inadequate
local infrastructure that could result in business
disruptions;
exporting
or importing issues related to export or import restrictions, tariffs,
quotas and other trade barriers and
restrictions;
financial
risks such as longer payment cycles, difficulty in collecting accounts
receivable and fluctuations in currency exchange
rates;
imposition
of additional taxes and
penalties;and
other
factors beyond our control such as terrorism, civil unrest, war and
diseases such as severe acute respiratory syndrome and the avian flu.
if sales to
any of our customers outside of the united states and other americas are delayed
or cancelled because of any of the above factors, our revenue may be negatively
impacted.
our
international operations in australia, china, finland, france, germany, hong
kong, india, japan, korea, russia, singapore, sweden, switzerland, taiwan, and
the united kingdom are subject to many of the above listed risks. difficulties
with our international operations, including finding appropriate staffing and
office space, may divert managements attention and other resources any of which
could negatively impact our operating results.
the economic
conditions in our primary overseas markets, particularly in asia, may negatively
impact the demand for our products abroad. all of our international sales to
date have been denominated in united statesdollars. accordingly, an
increase in the value of the united statesdollar relative to foreign
currencies could make our products less competitive in international markets or
require us to assume the risk of denominating certain sales in foreign
currencies. we anticipate that these factors will impact our business to a
greater degree as we further expand our international business
activities.
if our
products do not continue to be adopted by the desktop pc, notebook pc,
workstation, high-performance computing, netbook, personal media player, or pmp,
personal digital assistant, or pda, cellular handheld device, and video game
console markets or if the demand for new and innovative products in these
markets decreases, our business and operating results would suffer.
our success
depends in part upon continued broad adoption of our processors for 3d graphics
and multimedia in desktop pc, notebook pc, workstation, high-performance
computing, netbooks, pmps, pdas, cellular handheld devices, and video game
console applications. the market for processors has been characterized by
unpredictable and sometimes rapid shifts in the popularity of products, often
caused by the publication of competitive industry benchmark results, changes in
pricing of dynamic random-access memory devices and other changes in the total
system cost of add-in boards, as well as by severe price competition and by
frequent new technology and product introductions. broad market acceptance is
difficult to achieve and such market acceptance, if achieved, is difficult to
sustain due to intense competition and frequent new technology and product
introductions. our gpu and mcp businesses together comprised approximately 75%,
79% and 77% of our revenue during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively.as such, our financial results would suffer if for any
reason our current or future gpus or mcps do not continue to achieve widespread
adoption by the pc market. if we are unable to complete the timely development
of new products or if we were unable to successfully and cost-effectively
manufacture and deliver products that meet the requirements of the desktop pc,
notebook pc, workstation, high-performance computing, netbook, pmp, pda,
cellular phone, and video game console markets, we may experience a decrease in
revenue which could negatively impact our operating results.
additionally,
there can be no assurance that the industry will continue to demand new products
with improved standards, features or performance. if our customers, oems, odms,
add-in-card and motherboard manufacturers, system builders and consumer
electronics companies, do not continue to design products that require more
advanced or efficient processors and/or the market does not continue to demand
new products with increased performance, features, functionality or standards,
sales of our products could decline and the markets for our products could
shrink. decreased sales of our products for these markets could negatively
impact our revenue and our financial results.
our business
results could be adversely affected if the identification and development of new
products or entry into or development of a new market is delayed or
unsuccessful.
in order to
maintain or improve our financial results, we will need to continue to identify
and develop new products as well as identify and enter new
markets.as our gpus and other processors develop and competition
increases, we anticipate that product life cycles at the high end will remain
short and average selling prices will decline. in particular, average selling
prices and gross margins for our gpus and other processors could decline as each
product matures and as unit volume increases. as a result, we will need to
introduce new products and enhancements to existing products to maintain or
improve overall average selling prices, our gross margin and our financial
results.we believe the success of our new product introductions will
depend on many factors outlined elsewhere in these risk factors as well as the
following:
market
demand for new products and enhancements to existing
products;
timely
completion and introduction of new product designs and new opportunities
for existing products;
seamless
transitions from an older product to a new
product;
differentiation
of our new products from those of our
competitors;
delays
in volume shipments of our
products;
market
acceptance of our products instead of our customers' products;
and
availability
of adequate quantity and configurations of various types of memory
products.
in the past,
we have experienced delays in the development and adoption of new products and
have been unable to successfully manage product transitions from older to newer
products resulting in obsolete inventory.
to be
successful, we must also enter new markets or develop new uses for our future or
existing products. we cannot accurately predict if our current or existing
products or technologies will be successful in the new opportunities or markets
that we identify for them or that we will compete successfully in any new
markets we may enter. for example, we have developed products and other
technology in order for certain general-purpose computing operationsto be
performed on a gpu rather than a cpu.this general purpose computing,
which is often referred to as gp computing, was a new use for the gpu which had
been entirely used for graphics rendering.during fiscal year 2008,
we introduced our nvidia tesla family of products, which was our entry into the
high-performance computing industry, a new market for us.we also
offer our cuda software development solution, which is a c language programming
environment for gpus, that allows parallel computing on the gpu by using
standard c language to create programs that process large quantities of data in
parallel. some of our competitors, including intel, are now developing
their own solutions for the discrete graphics and computing markets. our failure
to successfully develop, introduce or achieve market acceptance for new gpus,
other products or other technologies or to enter into new markets or identify
new uses for existing or future products, could result in rapidly declining
average selling prices, reduced demand for our products or loss of market share
any of which could cause our revenue, gross margin and overall financial results
to suffer.
if we are
unable to achieve design wins, our products may not be adopted by our target
markets or customers either of which could negatively impact our financial
results.
the success
of our business depends to a significant extent on our ability to develop new
competitive products for our target markets and customers. we believe achieving
design wins, which entails having our existing and future products chosen for
hardware components or subassemblies designed by oems, odms, add-in board and
motherboard manufacturers, is an integral part of our future success. our oem,
odm, and add-in board and motherboard manufacturers customers typically
introduce new system configurations as often as twice per year, typically based
on spring and fall design cycles or in connection with trade shows. accordingly,
when our customers are making their design decisions, our existing products must
have competitive performance levels or we must timely introduce new products in
order to be included in our customers new system configurations. this requires
that we:
anticipate
the features and functionality that customers and consumers will demand;
incorporate
those features and functionalities into products that meet the exacting
design requirements of our
customers;
price
our products competitively; and
introduce
products to the market within our customers limited design cycles.
if oems,
odms, and add-in board and motherboard manufacturers do not include our products
in their systems, they will typically not use our products in their systems
until at least the next design configuration. therefore, we endeavor to develop
close relationships with our oems and odms, in an attempt to better anticipate
and address customer needs in new products so that we will achieve design
wins.
our ability
to achieve design wins also depends in part on our ability to identify and be
compliant with evolving industry standards. unanticipated changes in industry
standards could render our products incompatible with products developed by
major hardware manufacturers and software developers like amd, inteland
microsoft corporation, or microsoft.if our products are not in
compliance with prevailing industry standards, we may not be designed into our
customers product designs.however, to be compliant with changes to
industry standards, we may have to invest significant time and resources to
redesign our products which could negatively impact our gross margin or
operating results. if we are unable to achieve new design wins for existing or
new customers, we may lose market share and our operating results would be
negatively impacted.
we may have
to invest more resources in research and development than anticipated, which
could increase our operating expenses and negatively impact our operating
results.
if new
competitors, technological advances by existing competitors, our entry into new
markets, or other competitive factors require us to invest significantly greater
resources than anticipated in our research and development efforts, our
operating expenses would increase. we had 3,772 full-time employees engaged in
research and development as of january 25, 2009, compared to 3,255 employees as
of january 27, 2008 and 2,668 employees as of january 28, 2007,
respectively.research and development expenditures were $855.9
million, $691.6 million and $553.5 million, for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and
2007, respectively. research and development expenses included stock-based
compensation expense of $98.0 million, $76.6 million and $70.1 million for
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. if we are required to invest
significantly greater resources than anticipated in research and development
efforts without a corresponding increase in revenue, our operating results could
further decline. research and development expenses are likely to fluctuate from
time to time to the extent we make periodic incremental investments in research
and development and these investments may be independent of our level of revenue
which could negatively impact our financial results. in order to remain
competitive, we anticipate that we will continue to devote substantial resources
to research and development.
we are
dependent on key employees and the loss of any of these employees could
negatively impact our business.
our future
success and ability to compete is substantially dependent on our ability to
identify, hire, train and retain highly qualified key personnel.the
market for key employees in the semiconductor industry can be
competitive.none of our key employees is bound by an employment
agreement, meaning our relationships with all of our key employees are at will.
the loss of the services of any of our other key employees without an
adequate replacement or our inability to hire new employees as needed could
delay our product development efforts, harm our ability to sell our products or
otherwise negatively impact our business.
in september
2008, we reduced our global workforce by approximately 6.5% as part of our
efforts to allow continued investment in strategic growth areas.this
reduction in our workforce may impair our ability to recruit and retain
qualified employees of our workforce as a result of a perceived risk of future
workforce reductions.employees, whether or not directly affected by
the reduction, may also seek future employment with our business partners,
customers or competitors.in addition, we rely on stock-based
awards as one means for recruiting, motivating and retaining highly skilled
talent.if the value of such stock awards does not appreciate as
measured by the performance of the price of our common stock or if our
share-based compensation otherwise ceases to be viewed as a valuable benefit,
our ability to attract, retain, and motivate employees could be weakened, which
could harm our results of operations.the significant decline in the
trading price of our common stock has resulted in the exercise price of a
significant portion of our outstanding options to significantly exceed the
current trading price of our common stock, thus lessening the effectiveness of
these stock-based awards.we may not continue to successfully attract
and retain key personnel which would harm our business.
we may not be
able to realize the potential financial or strategic benefits of business
acquisitions or strategic investments, which could hurt our ability to grow our
business, develop new products or sell our products.
we have
acquired and invested in other businesses that offered products, services and
technologies that we believe will help expand or enhance our existing products
and business. we may enter into future acquisitions of, or investments in,
businesses, in order to complement or expand our current businesses or enter
into a new business market. negotiations associated with an acquisition or
strategic investment could divert managements attention and other company
resources. any of the following risks associated with past or future
acquisitions or investments could impair our ability to grow our business,
develop new products, our ability to sell our products, and ultimately could
have a negative impact on our growth or our financial results:
difficulty
in combining the technology, products, operations or workforce of the
acquired business with our
business;
difficulty
in operating in a new or multiple new
locations;
disruption
of our ongoing businesses or the ongoing business of the company we invest
in or acquire;
difficulty
in realizing the potential financial or strategic benefits of the
transaction;
difficulty
in maintaining uniform standards, controls, procedures and
policies;
disruption
of or delays in ongoing research and development
efforts;
diversion
of capital and other resources;
assumption
of liabilities;
diversion
of resources and unanticipated expenses resulting fromlitigation
arising frompotential or actual business acquisitions or
investments;
difficulties
in entering into new markets in which we have limited or no experience and
where competitors in such markets have stronger positions;
and
impairment
of relationships with employees and customers, or the loss of any of our
key employees or customers our targets key employees or customers, as a
result of our acquisition or
investment.
in addition,
the consideration for any future acquisition could be paid in cash, shares of
our common stock, the issuance of convertible debt securities or a combination
of cash, convertible debt and common stock. if we make an investment in cash or
use cash to pay for all or a portion of an acquisition, our cash reserves would
be reduced which could negatively impact the growth of our business or our
ability to develop new products. however, if we pay the consideration with
shares of common stock, or convertible debentures, the holdings of our existing
stockholders would be diluted. the significant decline in the trading price of
our common stock would make the dilution to our stockholders more extreme and
could negatively impact our ability to pay the consideration with shares of
common stock or convertible debentures. we cannot forecast the number, timing or
size of future strategic investments or acquisitions, or the effect that any
such investments or acquisitions might have on our operations or financial
results.
we are
exposed to credit risk, fluctuations in the market values of our portfolio
investments and in interest rates.
we account
for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no. 115, accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities. all of the cash equivalents and marketable
securities are treated as available-for-sale under sfas no. 115. investments
in both fixed rate and floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree
of interest rate risk. fixed rate securities may have their market value
adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates, while floating rate
securities may produce less income than expected if interest rates fall. due in
part to these factors, our future investment income may fall short of
expectations due to changes in interest rates or if the decline in fair value of
our publicly traded debt or equity investments is judged to be
other-than-temporary. we may suffer losses in principal if we are forced to sell
securities that decline in securities market value due to changes in interest
rates. future declines in the market values of our cash, cash equivalents and
marketable securities could have a material adverse effect on our financial
condition and operating results.however, because any debt securities
we hold are classified as available-for-sale, no gains or losses are realized
in our consolidated statements of operationsdue to changes in interest
rates unless such securities are sold prior to maturity or unless declines in
value are determined to be other-than-temporary.
at january
25, 2009 and january 27, 2008, we had $1.26 billion and $1.81 billion,
respectively, in cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities.given the global nature of our business, we have invested
both domestically and internationally.all of our investments are
denominated in united states dollars. we invest in a variety of financial
instruments, consisting principally of cash and cash equivalents, asset-backed
securities, commercial paper, mortgage-backed securities issued by
government-sponsored enterprises, equity securities, money market funds and debt
securities of corporations, municipalities and the united statesgovernment
and its agencies. as of january 25, 2009, we did not have any investments in
auction-rate preferred securities.as of january 25, 2009, our
investments in government agencies and government sponsored enterprises
represented approximately 71% of our total investment portfolio, while the
financial sector accounted for approximately 17% of our total investment
portfolio.
the current
volatility in the financial markets and overall economic uncertainty increases
the risk that the actual amounts realized in the future on our financial
instruments could differ significantly from the fair values currently assigned
to them. other income and expense could also vary materially from expectations
depending on gains or losses realized on the sale or exchange of financial
instruments; impairment charges related to debt securities as well as equity and
other investments; interest rates; and cash, cash equivalent and marketable
securities balances. for instance, werecorded other than temporary
impairment charges of $9.9 million during fiscal year 2009. these charges
include $5.6 million related to what we believe is an other than temporary
impairment of our investment in the money market funds held by the reserve
international liquidity fund, ltd., or international reserve fund; $2.5 million
related to a decline in the value of publicly traded equity securities and $1.8
million related to debt securities held by us that were issued by companies that
have filed for bankruptcy as of january 25, 2009.please refer to
note 17 of these notes to the consolidated financial statements in partiv,
item15 of this form10-k for further details. subsequent to year-end,
on january 30, 2009, we received $84.4 million from the international reserve
fund. this was our portion of a payout of approximately 65% of the total assets
of the fund. each shareholders percentage of this distribution was determined
by dividing the shareholders total unfunded redeemed shares by the aggregate
unfunded redeemed shares of the fund, which was then used to calculate the
shareholders pro rata portion of this distribution. we expect to receive the
proceeds of our remaining investment in the international reserve fund,
excluding the $5.6 million that we have recorded as an other than temporary
impairment, by no later than october 2009, when all of the underlying securities
held by the international reserve fund are scheduled to have matured. however,
redemptions from the international reserve fund are currently subject to pending
litigation, which could cause further delay in receipt of our funds. in
addition, we may determine that further impairment of our investment in the
international reserve fund may be necessary.
risks
related to our partners and customers
we depend on
foundries to manufacture our products and these third parties may not be able to
satisfy our manufacturing requirements, which would harm our
business.
wedo
not manufacture the silicon wafers used for our products and do not own or
operate a wafer fabrication facility. instead, we are dependent on
industry-leading foundries, such as taiwan semiconductor manufacturing
corporation, or tsmc,to manufacture our semiconductor wafers using their
state-of-the-art fabrication equipment and techniques. the foundries, which have
limited capacity, also manufacture products for other semiconductor companies,
including some of our competitors.since we do not have long-term
commitment contracts with any of these foundries, they do not have an obligation
to provide us with any minimum quantity of product at any time or at any set
price, except as may be provided in a specific purchase
order.most of our products are only manufactured by one
foundry at a time.in times of high demand, the foundries could
choose to prioritize their capacity for other companies, reduce or eliminate
deliveries to us, or increase the prices that they charge us.if we
are unable to meet customer demand due to reduced or eliminated deliveries or
have to increase the prices of our products, we could lose sales to customers,
which would negatively impact our revenue and our reputation.
because the
lead-time needed to establish a strategic relationship with a new manufacturing
partner could be several quarters, we do not have an alternative source of
supply for our products. in addition, the time and effort to qualify a new
foundry could result in additional expense, diversion of resources, or lost
sales, any of which would negatively impact our financial results. we believe
that long-term market acceptance for our products will depend on reliable
relationships with the third-party manufacturers we use to ensure adequate
product supply and competitive pricing to respond to customer
demand.
failure to
achieve expected manufacturing yields for our products could negatively impact
our financial results and damage our reputation.
manufacturing
yields for our products are a function of product design, which is developed
largely by us, and process technology, which typically is proprietary to the
manufacturer. low yields may result from either product design or process
technology failure.we do not know a yield problem exists until our
design is manufactured.when a yield issue is identified, the product
is analyzed and tested to determine the cause. as a result, yield problems may
not be identified until well into the production process. resolution of yield
problems requires cooperation by, and communication between, us and the
manufacturer. because of our potentially limited access to wafer foundry
capacity, decreases in manufacturing yields could result in an increase in our
costs and force us to allocate our available product supply among our customers.
lower than expected yields could potentially harm customer relationships, our
reputation and our financial results.
we are
dependent on third parties for assembly, testing and packaging of our products,
which reduces our control over the delivery schedule, product quantity or
product quality.
our products
are assembled, tested and packaged by independent subcontractors, such as
advanced semiconductor engineering, inc., amkor technology, jsi logistics, ltd.,
king yuan electronics co., siliconware precision industries co. ltd., and
chippac. as a result, we do not directly control our product delivery schedules,
product quantity, or product quality.all of these subcontractors
assemble, test and package products for other companies, including some of our
competitors.since we do not have long-term agreements with our
subcontractors, when demand for subcontractors to assemble, test or package
products is high, our subcontractors may decide to prioritize the orders of
other customers over our orders.since the time required to qualify a
different subcontractor to assemble, test or package our products can be
lengthy, if we have to find a replacement subcontractor we could experience
significant delays in shipments of our products, product shortages, a decrease
in the quality of our products, or an increase in product cost. any product
shortages or quality assurance problems could increase the costs of manufacture,
assembly or testing of our products, which could cause our gross margin and
revenue to decline.
failure to
transition to new manufacturing process technologies could adversely affect our
operating results and gross margin.
we use the
most advanced manufacturing process technology appropriate for our products that
is available from our third-party foundries. as a result, we continuously
evaluate the benefits of migrating our products to smaller geometry process
technologies in order to improve performance and reduce costs. we believe this
strategy will help us remain competitive.our current product
families are manufactured using 0.15 micron, 0.14 micron, 0.13 micron, 0.11
micron, 90 nanometer, 65 nanometer and 55 nanometer process
technologies.manufacturing process technologies are subject to
rapid change and require significant expenditures for research and development,
which could negatively impact our operating expenses and gross
margin.
we have
experienced difficulty in migrating to new manufacturing processes in the past
and, consequently, have suffered reduced yields, delays in product deliveries
and increased expense levels. we may face similar difficulties, delays and
expenses as we continue to transition our new products to smaller geometry
processes. moreover, we are dependent on our third-party manufacturers to invest
sufficient funds in new manufacturing techniques in order to have ample capacity
for all of their customers and to develop the techniques in a timely manner. our
product cycles may also depend on our third-party manufacturers migrating to
smaller geometry processes successfully and in time for us to meet our customer
demands.some of our competitors own their manufacturing facilities
and may be able to move to a new state of the art manufacturing process more
quickly or more successfully than our manufacturing partners.for
example, intel has released a 45nanometer chip for desktop computers which
it is manufacturing in its foundries.in addition, in october 2008,
amd and the advanced technology investment company, a technology investment
company backed by the government of abu dhabi, announced the establishment of a
u.s. headquartered semiconductor manufacturing company that will manufacture
amds advance processors. if our suppliers fall behind our competitors in
manufacturing processes, the development and customer demand for our products
and the use of our products could be negatively impacted.if we are
forced to use larger geometric processes in manufacturing a product than our
competition, our gross margin may be reduced.the inability by us or
our third-party manufacturers to effectively and efficiently transition to new
manufacturing process technologies may adversely affect our operating results
and our gross margin.
we rely on
third-party vendors to supply software development tools to us for the
development of our new products and we may be unable to obtain the tools
necessary to develop or enhance new or existing products.
we rely on
third-party software development tools to assist us in the design, simulation
and verification of new products or product enhancements. to bring new products
or product enhancements to market in a timely manner, or at all, we need
software development tools that are sophisticated enough or technologically
advanced enough to complete our design, simulations and
verifications.in the past, we have experienced delays in the
introduction of products as a result of the inability of then available software
development tools to fully simulate the complex features and functionalities of
our products. in the future, the design requirements necessary to meet consumer
demands for more features and greater functionality from our products may exceed
the capabilities of available software development
tools.unavailability of software development tools may result in our
missing design cycles or losing design wins, either of which could result in a
loss of market share or negatively impact our operating results.
because of
the importance of software development tools to the development and enhancement
of our products, a critical component of our product development efforts is our
partnerships with leaders in the computer-aided design industry, including
cadence design systems, inc. and synopsys, inc. we have invested significant
resources to develop relationships with these industry leaders and have often
assisted them in the definition of their new products. we believe that forming
these relationships and utilizing next-generation development tools to design,
simulate and verify our products will help us remain at the forefront of the 3d
graphics, communications and networking segments and develop products that
utilize leading-edge technology on a rapid basis. if these relationships are not
successful, we may be unable to develop new products or product enhancements in
a timely manner, which could result in a loss of market share, a decrease in
revenue or negatively impact our operating results.
we sell our
products to a small number of customers and our business could suffer if we
loseany of these customers.
we have a limited number of customers and our sales are highly
concentrated.for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, aggregate
sales to customers in excess of 10% of our total revenue accounted for
approximately 11% of total revenue from one customer and approximately 10% and
12% of our total revenue from another customer,
respectively.although a small number of our other customers
represent the majority of our revenue, their end customers include a large
number of original equipment manufacturers, or oems, and system integrators
throughout the world who, in many cases, specify the graphics supplier. our
sales process involves achieving key design wins with leading pc, oems and major
system builders and supporting the product design into high volume production
with key contract equipment manufacturers, or cems, original design
manufacturers, or odms, add-in board and motherboard manufacturers. these design
wins in turn influence the retail and system builder channel that is serviced by
cems, odms, add-in board and motherboard manufacturers. our distribution
strategy is to work with a small number of leading independent cems, odms,
add-in board and motherboard manufacturers, and distributors, each of which has
relationships with a broad range of system builders and leading pc oems. if we
were to lose sales to our pc oems, cems, odms, add-in board manufacturers and
motherboard manufacturers and were unable to replace the lost sales with sales
to different customers, if they were to significantly reduce the number of
products they order from us, or if we were unable to collect accounts receivable
from them, our revenue may not reach or exceed the expected level in any period,
which could harm our financial condition and our results of
operations.
anydifficulties
in collecting accounts receivable, including from foreign customers, could harm
our operating results and financial condition.
our
accounts receivable are highly concentrated and make us vulnerable to adverse
changes in our customers' businesses, and to downturns in the industry and the
worldwide economy.accounts receivable from significant customers,
those representing 10% or more of total accounts receivable aggregated
approximately 38% of our accounts receivable balance from three customers at
january 25, 2009 and approximately 12% of our accounts receivable balance from
one customer at january27, 2008.
difficulties in collecting accounts receivable could materially and adversely
affect our financial condition and results of operations. these difficulties are
heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen. we continue to work
directly with more foreign customers and it may be difficult to collect accounts
receivable from them. we maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for
estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required
payments. this allowance consists of an amount identified for specific customers
and an amount based on overall estimated exposure. if the financial condition of
our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment in their ability
to make payments, additional allowances may be required, we may be required to
defer revenue recognition on sales to affected customers, and we may be required
to pay higher credit insurance premiums, any of which could adversely affect our
operating results. in the future, we may have to record additional reserves or
write-offs and/or defer revenue on certain sales transactions which could
negatively impact our financial results.
risks
related to regulatory, legal, our common stock and other matters
we are
subject to litigation arising from alleged defects in our previous generation
mcp and gpu products, which if determined adversely to us, could harm our
business.
during the
second fiscal quarter of 2009, we recorded a $196.0 million charge against cost
of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return, replacement
and other associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in
certain versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in
notebook systems.the previous generation mcp and gpu products that
are impacted were included in a number of notebook products that were shipped
and sold in significant quantities. certain notebook configurations of these mcp
and gpu products are failing in the field at higher than normal
rates.while we have not been able to determine a root cause for
these failures, testing suggests a weak material set of die/package combination,
system thermal management designs, and customer use patterns are contributing
factors. we continue to engage indiscussions with our supply chain
regarding reimbursement to us for some or all of the costs we have incurred and
may incur in the future relating to the weak material set. wealso continue
to seek to access our insurance coverage, which provided us with $8 million in
related reimbursement during fiscal year 2009. however, there can be no
assurance that we will recover any additional reimbursement. we continue to not
see any abnormal failure rates in any systems using nvidia products other than
certain notebook configurations. however, we are continuing to test and
otherwise investigate other products. there can be no assurance that we will not
discover defects in other mcp or gpu products.
inseptember,
october and november2008, several putative class action lawsuits were
filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted mcp and gpu
products.such lawsuits could result in the diversion of managements
time and attention away from business operations, which could harm our business.
in addition, the costs of defense and any damages resulting from this
litigation, a ruling against us, or a settlement of the litigation could
adversely affect our cash flow and financial results.
the ongoing
civil actions or any new actions relating to the market for gpus could adversely
affect our business.
in november
2006, we received a subpoena from the san francisco office of the antitrust
division of the united states department of justice, or doj, in connection with
the doj's investigation into potential antitrust violations related to gpus and
cards.in october 2008, the doj formally notified us that the doj
investigation had been closed. no specific allegations were made against nvidia
during the investigation.
several
putative civil complaints were filed against us by direct and indirect
purchasers of gpus, asserting federal antitrust claims based on alleged price
fixing, market allocation, and other alleged anti-competitive agreements between
us and ati technologies, ulc., or ati, and advanced micro devices, inc., or amd,
as a result of its acquisition of ati.the indirect purchasers
consolidated amended complaint also asserts a variety of state law antitrust,
unfair competition and consumer protection claims on the same allegations, as
well as a common law claim for unjust enrichment.
in
september2008, we executed a settlement agreement, or the agreement, in
connection with the claims of the certified class of direct purchaser
plaintiffs.the agreement is subject to court approval and, if
approved, would dispose of all claims and appeals raised by the certified class
in the complaints against nvidia. in addition, in september2008, we
reached a settlement agreement with the remaining individual indirect purchaser
plaintiffs that provides for a dismissal of all claims and appeals related to
the complaints raised by the individual indirect purchaser plaintiffs. this
settlement is not subject to the approval of the court. while we expect the
courts to approve the settlement agreement with the direct purchasers, there can
be no assurance that it will approved.if the settlement agreement is
not approved we may be required to pay damages or penalties or have other
remedies imposed on us that could harm our business. in addition, additional
parties may bring claims against us relating to the potential antitrust
violations related to gpus and cards. if additional claims are brought against
us, such lawsuits could result in the diversion of managements time and
attention away from business operations, which could harm our business. in
addition, the costs of defense and any damages resulting from this litigation, a
ruling against us, or a settlement of the litigation could adversely affect our
cash flow and financial results.
the matters
relating to the board of directorsreview of our historical stock option
granting practices and the restatement of our consolidated financial statements
have resulted in litigation, which could harm our financial
results.
in august
2006, we announced that the audit committee of our board, with the assistance of
outside legal counsel, was conducting a review of our stock option practices
covering the time from our initial public offering in 1999, our fiscal year
2000, through june 2006. the audit committee reached the conclusion that
incorrect measurement dates were used for financial accounting purposes for
stock option grants in certain prior periods. as a result, we recorded
additional non-cash stock-based compensation expense, and related tax effects,
related to stock option grants.ten derivative complaints were filed
in state and federal court pertaining to allegations relating to stock option
grants. in september 2008, we entered into memoranda of understanding regarding
the settlement of the stockholder derivative lawsuits.in november
2008, the definitive settlement agreements were concurrently filed in the
chancery court of delaware and the united states district court northern
district of california and are subject to approval by both such
courts.the settlement agreements do not contain any admission of
wrongdoing or fault on the part of nvidia, our board of directors or executive
officers.while we expect the courts to approve the settlement
agreements, there can be no assurance that they will approved.if the
settlement agreements are not approved we may be required to pay damages or
penalties or have other remedies imposed on us that could harm our
business.
we are a
party to other litigation, including patent litigation, which, if determined
adversely to us, could adversely affect our cash flow and financial
results.
we are a
party to other litigation as both a defendant and as a plaintiff.for
example, we are engaged in litigation with intel corporation, rambus corporation
and with various parties related to our acquisition of 3dfx in 2001. please
refer to note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k for further detail on these
lawsuits. there can be no assurance that any litigation to which we are a party
will be resolved in our favor. any claim that is successfully decided against us
may cause us to pay substantial damages, including punitive damages, and other
related fees. regardless of whether lawsuits are resolved in our favor or if we
are the plaintiff or the defendant in the litigation, any lawsuits to which we
are a party will likely be expensive and time consuming to defend or resolve.
such lawsuits could also harm our relationships with existing customers and
result in the diversion of managements time and attention away from business
operations, which could harm our business. costs of defense and any damages
resulting from litigation, a ruling against us, or a settlement of the
litigation could adversely affect our cash flow and financial
results.
litigation to
defend against alleged infringement of intellectual property rights or to
enforce our intellectual property rights and the outcome of such litigation
could result in substantial costs to us.
we expect
that as the number of issued hardware and software patents increases and as
competition intensifies, the volume of intellectual property infringement claims
and lawsuits may increase. we may in the future become involved in lawsuits or
other legal proceedings alleging patent infringement or other intellectual
property rights violations by us or by our customers that we have agreed to
indemnify them for certain claims of infringement.
an
unfavorable ruling in any such intellectual property related litigation could
include significant damages, invalidation of a patent or family of patents,
indemnification of customers, payment of lost profits, or, when it has been
sought, injunctive relief.
in addition,
in the future, we may need to commence litigation or other legal proceedings in
order to:
assert
claims of infringement of our intellectual
property;
enforce
our patents;
protect
our trade secrets or know-how; or
determine
the enforceability, scope and validity of the propriety rights of
others.
if we have to
initiate litigation in order to protect our intellectual property, our operating
expenses may increase which could negatively impact our operating results. our
failure to effectively protect our intellectual property could harm our
business.
if
infringement claims are made against us or ourproducts are found to
infringe a third parties patent or intellectual property, we or one of our
indemnified customers may have to seek a license to the third parties patent or
other intellectual property rights. however, we may not be able to obtain
licenses at all or on terms acceptable to us particularly from our competitors.
if we or one of our indemnified customers is unable to obtain a license from a
third party for technology that we use or that is used in one of our products,
we could be subject to substantial liabilities or have to suspend or discontinue
the manufacture and sale of one or more of our products.we may also
have to make royalty or other payments, or cross license our technology. if
these arrangements are not concluded on commercially reasonable terms, our
business could be negatively impacted. furthermore, the indemnification of a
customer may increase our operating expenses which could negatively impact our
operating results.
our ability
to compete will be harmed if we are unable to adequately protect our
intellectual property.
we rely
primarily on a combination of patents, trademarks, trade secrets, employee and
third-party nondisclosure agreements, and licensing arrangements to protect our
intellectual property in the united states and internationally. we have numerous
patents issued, allowed and pending in the united states and in foreign
jurisdictions. our patents and pending patent applications primarily relate to
our products and the technology used in connection with our products. we also
rely on international treaties, organizations and foreign laws to protect our
intellectual property. the laws of certain foreign countries in which our
products are or may be manufactured or sold, including various countries in
asia, may not protect our products or intellectual property rights to the same
extent as the laws of the united states. this makes the possibility of piracy of
our technology and products more likely. we continuously assess whether and
where to seek formal protection for particular innovations and technologies
based on such factors as:
the
commercial significance of our operations and our competitors operations
in particular countries and
regions;
the
location in which our products are
manufactured;
our
strategic technology or product directions in different countries; and
the
degree to which intellectual property laws exist and are meaningfully
enforced in different
jurisdictions.
our pending
patent applications and any future applications may not be approved. in
addition, any issued patents may not provide us with competitive advantages or
may be challenged by third parties. the enforcement of patents by others may
harm our ability to conduct our business. others may independently develop
substantially equivalent intellectual property or otherwise gain access to our
trade secrets or intellectual property. our failure to effectively protect our
intellectual property could harm our business.
government
investigations and inquiries from regulatory agencies could lead to enforcement
actions, fines or other penalties and could result in litigation against
us.
in the past,
we have been subject to government investigations and inquiries from regulatory
agencies such as the doj and the sec.we may be subject to government
investigations and receive additional inquiries from regulatory agencies in the
future, which may lead to enforcement actions, fines or other
penalties.
in addition,
litigation has often been brought against a company in connection with the
announcement of a government investigation or inquiry from a regulatory
agency.for example, following the announcement of the doj
investigation, several putative civil complaints were filed against us. in
addition, following our audit committees investigation and the secs
investigation concerning our historical stock option granting practices, ten
derivative complaints were filed in state and federal court pertaining to
allegations relating to stock option grants.please refer to note 12
of the notes to consolidated financial statements in part iv, item 15 of this
form 10-k for further information regarding these lawsuits. such lawsuits could
result in the diversion of managements time and attention away from business
operations, which could harm our business. in addition, the costs of defense and
any damages resulting from litigation, a ruling against us, or a settlement of
the litigation could adversely affect our cash flow and financial
results.
we are
subject to the risks of owning real property.
in fiscal
year 2009, we used approximately $183.8 million of our cash to purchase real
property in santa clara, california that includes approximately 25 acres of land
and ten commercial buildings.we also own real property in china and
india.we have limited experience in the ownership and management of
real property and are subject to the risks of owning real property,
including:
the
possibility of environmental contamination and the costs associated with
fixing any environmental
problems;
adverse
changes in the value of these properties, due to interest rate changes,
changes in the neighborhood in which the property is located, or other
factors;
the
risk of loss if we decide to sell and are not able to recover all
capitalized costs;
increased
cash commitments for the possible construction of a campus;
the
possible need for structural improvements in order to comply with zoning,
seismic and other legal or regulatory
requirements;
increased
operating expenses for the buildings or the property or
both;
possible
disputes with third parties, such as neighboring owners or others, related
to the buildings or the property or both;
and
the
risk of financial loss in excess of amounts covered by insurance, or
uninsured risks, such as the loss caused by damage to the buildings as a
result of earthquakes, floods and or other natural
disasters.
expensing
employee equity compensation adversely affects our operating results and could
also adversely affect our competitive position.
since
inception, we have used equity through our stock option plans and our employee
stock purchase program as a fundamental component of our compensation packages.
we believe that these programs directly motivate our employees and, through the
use of vesting, encourage our employees to remain with us.
in december
2004, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting standards no. 123(r), or
sfas no. 123(r),share-based
payment,which requires the measurement and recognition of
compensation expense for all stock-based compensation payments. sfas no.
123(r) requires that we record compensation expense for stock options and our
employee stock purchase plan using the fair value of those awards.
stock-based compensation expense resulting from our compliance with sfas
no. 123(r), was $162.7 million, $133.4 million and $116.7 million for fiscal
years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, which negatively impacted our operating
results.additionally, on february 11, 2009, we announced that our
board of directors approved a cash tender offer for certain employee stock
options. the tender offer commenced on february 11, 2009 and expired at 12:00
midnight (pacific time) on march 11, 2009. as of january 25, 2009, there were
approximately 33.1 million options eligible to participate in the tender offer.
if all these options were tendered and accepted in the offer, the aggregate cash
purchase price for these options would be approximately $92.0 million. as a
result of the tender offer, we may incur a non-recurring charge of up to
approximately $150.0 million if all of the unvested eligible options are
tendered. this charge would be reflected in our financial results for the first
fiscal quarter of fiscal year 2010 and represents stock-based compensation
expense, consisting of the remaining unamortized stock-based compensation
expense associated with the unvested portion of the eligible options tendered in
the offer, stock-based compensation expense resulting from amounts paid in
excess of the fair value of the underlying options, if any, plus associated
payroll taxes and professional fees. we are currently tallying information on
the number of options tendered under the offer to determine the actual aggregate
cash to be paid in exchange for the cancellation of the eligible options and the
non-recurring charge to be incurred pertaining to the unvested eligible options
that have been tendered. we believe that sfas no. 123(r) will continue to
negatively impact our operating results.
to the extent
that sfas no. 123(r) makes it more expensive to grant stock options or to
continue to have an employee stock purchase program, we may decide to incur
increased cash compensation costs. in addition, actions that we may take to
reduce stock-based compensation expense that may be more severe than any actions
our competitors may implement and may make it difficult to attract retain and
motivate employees, which could adversely affect our competitive position as
well as our business and operating results.
we may be
required to record a charge to earnings if our goodwill or amortizable
intangible assets become impaired, which could negatively impact our operating
results.
under
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states, we review our
amortizable intangible assets and goodwill for impairment when events or changes
in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. goodwill is
tested for impairment at least annually. the carrying value of our goodwill or
amortizable assets may not be recoverable due to factors such as a decline in
stock price and market capitalization, reduced estimates of future cash flows
and slower growth rates in our industry or in any of our business units. for
example, during the twelve months ended january 25, 2009, our market
capitalization declined from approximately $14 billion to approximately $4
billion. estimates of future cash flows are based on an updated long-term
financial outlook of our operations. however, actual performance in the
near-term or long-term could be materially different from these forecasts, which
could impact future estimates. for example, if one of our business units does
not meet its near-term and longer-term forecasts, the goodwill assigned to the
business unit could be impaired. we may be required to record a charge to
earnings in our financial statements during a period in which an impairment of
our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets is determined to exist, which may
negatively impact our results of operations.
our stock
price continues to be volatile and investors may suffer losses.
our stock has
at times experienced substantial price volatility as a result of variations
between our actual and anticipated financial results, announcements by us and
our competitors, or uncertainty about current global economic conditions. the
stock market as a whole also has experienced extreme price and volume
fluctuations that have affected the market price of many technology companies in
ways that may have been unrelated to these companies operating
performance.
in the past,
securities class action litigation has often been brought against a company
following periods of volatility in the market price of its securities. for
example, following our announcement in july 2008 that we would take a charge
against cost of revenue to cover anticipated costs and expenses arising from a
weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation
mcp and gpu products and that we were revising financial guidance for our second
fiscal quarter of 2009, the trading price of our common stock
declined.in september, october and november 2008, several putative
class action lawsuits were filed against us relating to this
announcement.please refer to note 12 of the notes to consolidated
financial statements in part iv, item 15 of this form 10-k for further
information regarding these lawsuits.due to changes in the potential
volatility of our stock price, we may be the target of securities litigation in
the future. such lawsuits could result in the diversion of managements time and
attention away from business operations, which could harm our business. in
addition, the costs of defense and any damages resulting from litigation, a
ruling against us, or a settlement of the litigation could adversely affect our
cash flow and financial results.
our operating
results may be adversely affected if we are subject to unexpected tax
liabilities.
we are
subject to taxation by a number of taxing authorities both in the united states
and throughout the world. tax rates vary among the jurisdictions in which we
operate. significant judgment is required in determining our provision for our
income taxes as there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate
tax determination is uncertain. although we believe our tax estimates are
reasonable, any of the below could cause our effective tax rate to be materially
different than that which is reflected in historical income tax provisions and
accruals:
the
jurisdictions in which profits are determined to be earned and
taxed;
adjustments
to estimated taxes upon finalization of various tax
returns;
changes
in available tax credits;
changes
in share-based compensation
expense;
changes
in tax laws, the interpretation of tax laws either in the united states or
abroad or the issuance of newinterpretative accounting guidance
related to uncertain transactions and calculations where the tax treatment
was previously uncertain; and
the
resolution of issues arising from tax audits with various tax
authorities.
should
additional taxes be assessed as a result of any of the above, our operating
results could be adversely affected. in addition, our future effective tax rate
could be adversely affected by changes in the mix of earnings in countries with
differing statutory tax rates, changes in tax laws or changes in the
interpretation of tax laws.
our failure
to comply with any applicable environmental regulations could result in a range
of consequences, including fines, suspension of production, excess inventory,
sales limitations, and criminal and civil liabilities.
we are
subject to various state, federal and international laws and regulations
governing the environment, including restricting the presence of certain
substances in electronic products and making producers of those products
financially responsible for the collection, treatment, recycling and disposal of
those products. for example, we are subject to the european union directive on
restriction of hazardous substances directive, or rohs directive, that restricts
the use of a number of substances, including lead, and other hazardous
substances in electrical and electronic equipment in the market in the european
union. we could face significant costs and liabilities in
connection with the european union directive on waste electrical and electronic
equipment, or weee. the weee directs members of the european union to enact
laws, regulations, and administrative provisions to ensure that producers of
electric and electronic equipment are financially responsible for the
collection, recycling, treatment and environmentally responsible disposal of
certain products sold into the market after august 15, 2005.
it is
possible that unanticipated supply shortages, delays or excess non-compliant
inventory may occur as a result ofthe rohs directive, weee, and other
domestic or international environmental regulations. failure to comply with any
applicable environmental regulations could result in a range of consequences
including costs, fines, suspension of production, excess inventory, sales
limitations, criminal and civil liabilities and could impact our ability to
conduct business in the countries or states that have adopted these types of
regulations.
while we believe that
we have adequate internal control over financial reporting, if we or our
independent registered public accounting firm determines that we do not, our
reputation may be adversely affected and our stock price may
decline.
section404 of
the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 requires our management to report on, and our
independent registered public accounting firm to audit, the effectiveness of our
internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting. we have an
ongoing program to perform the system and process evaluation and testing
necessary to comply with these requirements. however, the manner in which
companies and their independent public accounting firms apply these requirements
and test companies internal controls remains subject to some judgment. to date,
we have incurred, and we expect to continue to incur, increased expense and to
devote additional management resources to section404 compliance. despite
our efforts, if we identify a material weakness in our internal controls, there
can be no assurance that we will be able to remediate that material weakness in
a timely manner, or that we will be able to maintain all of the controls
necessary to determine that our internal control over financial reporting is
effective. in the event that our chief executive officer, chief financial
officer or our independent registered public accounting firm determine that our
internal control over financial reporting is not effective as defined under
section404, investor perceptions of us may be adversely affected and could
cause a decline in the market price of our stock.
changes in financial
accounting standards or interpretations of existing standards could affect our
reported results of operations.
we prepare
our consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles in the united states.these principles are
constantly subject to review and interpretation by the sec and various bodies
formed to interpret and create appropriate accounting principles. a change in
these principles can have a significant effect on our reported results and may
even retroactively affect previously reported transactions.
provisions in our
certificate of incorporation, our bylaws and our agreement with microsoft could
delay or prevent a change in control.
our
certificate of incorporation and bylaws contain provisions that could make it
more difficult for a third party to acquire a majority of our outstanding voting
stock. these provisions include the following:
the
ability of our board to create and issue preferred stock without prior
stockholder approval;
the
prohibition of stockholder action by written
consent;
a
classified board; and
advance
notice requirements for director nominations and stockholder
proposals.
on march 5,
2000, we entered into an agreement with microsoft in which we agreed to develop
and sell graphics chips and to license certain technology to microsoft and its
licensees for use in the xbox. under the agreement, if an individual or
corporation makes an offer to purchase shares equal to or greater than 30% of
the outstanding shares of our common stock, microsoft may have first and last
rights of refusal to purchase the stock. the microsoft provision and the other
factors listed above could also delay or prevent a change in control of
nvidia.
item 1b. unresolved
staff comments
none.
item 2. properties
our
headquarters complex is located in santa clara, california. during fiscal year
2009, we purchased property that includes approximately 25 acres of land and ten
commercial buildings in santa clara, california for approximately $194.8 million
of which we occupy four buildings, sublease two buildings, and four are
unoccupied.our original plans for the purchased property included
constructing a new campus on the site. we are currently re-evaluating those
plans. additionally, our corporate campus is comprised of seven other leased
buildings with four used primarily as office buildings, one used as warehouse
space, and the other two used primarily as lab space. we also entered into a
lease for data center space in santa clara in fiscal year 2009.
outside of
santa clara, we lease space in marina del rey, san jose and san francisco,
california; austin and houston, texas; beaverton and portland, oregon; bedford,
massachusetts; bellevue and bothell, washington; madison, alabama; durham, north
carolina; greenville, south carolina; salt lake city, utah; st. louis, missouri;
and fort collins and boulder, colorado. these facilities are used as design
centers and/or sales and administrative offices.
outside of
the united states, we lease space in hsin chu city, taiwan; tokyo, japan; seoul,
korea; beijing and shanghai, china; wanchai, and shatin, new territories, hong
kong; mumbai, india; paris, france; moscow, russia; berlin and munich, germany;
helsinki, finland; theale and london, united kingdom; melbourne, australia;
singapore; uppsala, sweden; and zurich, switzerland. these facilities are used
primarily to support our customers and operations and as sales and
administrative offices.we also lease spaces in wurselen, germany;
shenzhen, china; neihu, taiwan; and bangalore and pune, india, which are used
primarily as design centers.additionally, we own buildings in
hyderabad, india and shanghai, china which are being used primarily as research
and development centers.
we believe
that we currently have sufficient facilities to conduct our operations for the
next twelve months, although we expect to lease additional facilities throughout
the world as our business requires. for additional information regarding
obligations under leases, see note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial
statements in partiv, item15 of this form10-k under the
subheading lease obligations, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
item 3. legal proceedings
3dfx
on december
15, 2000, nvidia and one of our indirect subsidiaries entered into an asset
purchase agreement, or apa, to purchase certain graphics chip assets from
3dfx.the transaction closed on april 18, 2001.that
acquisition, and 3dfx's october 2002 bankruptcy filing, led to four lawsuits
against nvidia: two brought by 3dfx's former landlords, one by 3dfx's bankruptcy
trustee and the fourth by a committee of 3dfx's equity security holders in the
bankruptcy estate.
landlord
lawsuits
in may 2002,
we were served with a california state court complaint filed by the landlord of
3dfxs san jose, california commercial real estate lease, carlyle fortran trust,
or carlyle. in december 2002, we were served with a california state court
complaint filed by the landlord of 3dfxs austin, texas commercial real estate
lease, carramerica realty corporation, or carramerica. the landlords both
asserted claims for, among other things, interference with contract, successor
liability and fraudulent transfer. the landlords sought to recover damages in
the aggregate amount of approximately $15 million, representing amounts then
owed on the 3dfx leases.the cases were later removed to the united
states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california when 3dfx filed
its bankruptcy petition and consolidated for pretrial purposes with an action
brought by the bankruptcy trustee.
in 2005, the
u.s. district court for the northern district of california withdrew the
reference to the bankruptcy court for the landlords actions, and on november
10, 2005, granted our motion to dismiss both landlords
complaints.the landlords filed amended complaints in early february
2006, and nvidia again filed motions to dismiss those claims. on september 29,
2006, the district court dismissed the carramerica action in its entirety and
without leave to amend.on december 15, 2006, the district court also
dismissed the carlyle action in its entirety.both landlords filed
timely notices of appeal from those orders.
on july
17, 2008, the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit held oral
argument on the landlords' appeals. on november 25, 2008, the court of
appeals issued its opinion affirming the dismissal of carlyles complaint in its
entirety.the court of appeals also affirmed the dismissal of most of
carramericas complaint, but reversed the district courts dismissal of
carramericas claims for interference with contractual relations and
fraud.on december 8, 2008, carlyle filed a request for rehearing
en banc, which
carramerica joined. that same day, carlyle also filed a motion for clarification
of the courts opinion.on january 22, 2009, the court of appeals
denied the request for rehearing en banc, but clarified its
opinion affirming dismissal of the claims by stating that carramerica had
standing to pursue claims for interference with contractual relations, fraud,
conspiracy and tort of another, and remanding carlyles case with instructions
that the district court evaluate whether the trustee had abandoned any claims,
which carlyle might have standing to pursue.
the
district court held a status conference in the carramerica and carlyle cases on
march 9, 2009.that same day, 3dfxs bankruptcy trustee filed in the
bankruptcy court a notice of trustees intention to compromise controversy with
carlyle fortran trust.according to that notice, the trustee would
abandon any claims it has against us for intentional interference with contract,
negligent interference with prospective economic advantage, aiding and abetting
breach of fiduciary duty, declaratory relief, unfair business practices and tort
of another, in exchange for which carlyle will withdraw irrevocably its proof of
claim against the 3dfx bankruptcy estate and waive any further right of
distribution from the estate.in light of the trustees notice, the
district court ordered the parties to seek a hearing on the notice on or before
april 24, 2009, ordered carlyle and carramerica to file amended complaints by
may 10, 2009, and set a further case management conference for may 18, 2009. we
continue to believe that there is no merit to carlyle or carramericas remaining
claims.
trustee
lawsuit
in march
2003, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to represent 3dfxs
bankruptcy estate served his complaint on nvidia.the trustees
complaint asserts claims for, among other things, successor liability and
fraudulent transfer and seeks additional payments from us.the
trustee's fraudulent transfer theory alleged that nvidia had failed to pay
reasonably equivalent value for 3dfx's assets, and sought recovery of the
difference between the $70 million paid and the alleged fair value, which the
trustee estimated to exceed $50 million.the trustee's successor
liability theory alleged nvidia was effectively 3dfx's legal successor and was
therefore responsible for all of 3dfx's unpaid liabilities.this
action was consolidated for pretrial purposes with the landlord cases, as noted
above.
on october
13, 2005, the bankruptcy court heard the trustees motion for summary
adjudication, and on december 23, 2005, denied that motion in all material
respects and held that nvidia may not dispute that the value of the 3dfx
transaction was less than $108 million. the bankruptcy court denied the
trustees request to find that the value of the 3dfx assets conveyed to nvidia
was at least $108 million.
in early
november 2005, after several months of mediation, nvidia and the official
committee of unsecured creditors, or the creditors committee, agreed to a plan
of liquidation of 3dfx, which included a conditional settlement of the trustees
claims against us. this conditional settlement was subject to a confirmation
process through a vote of creditors and the review and approval of the
bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement called for a payment by nvidia of
approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx estate. under the settlement, $5.6
million related to various administrative expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0
million related to the satisfaction of debts and liabilities owed to the general
unsecured creditors of 3dfx. accordingly, during the three month period ended
october 30, 2005, we recorded $5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and
$25.0 million as additional purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee
advised that he intended to object to the settlement. the conditional settlement
never progressed substantially through the confirmation process.
on december
21, 2006, the bankruptcy court scheduled a trial for one portion of the
trustees case against nvidia. on january 2, 2007, nvidia terminated the
settlement agreement on grounds that the bankruptcy court had failed to proceed
toward confirmation of the creditors committees plan. a non-jury trial began
on march 21, 2007 on valuation issues in the trustee's constructive fraudulent
transfer claims against nvidia. specifically, the bankruptcy court tried four
questions: (1) what did 3dfx transfer to nvidia in the apa?; (2) of what was
transferred, what qualifies as "property" subject to the bankruptcy court's
avoidance powers under the uniform fraudulent transfer act and relevant
bankruptcy code provisions?; (3) what is the fair market value of the "property"
identified in answer to question (2)?; and (4) was the $70 million that nvidia
paid "reasonably equivalent" to the fair market value of that property? the
parties completed post-trial briefing on may 25, 2007.
on april 30,
2008, the bankruptcy court issued its memorandum decision after trial, in which
it provided a detailed summary of the trial proceedings and the parties'
contentions and evidence and concluded that "the creditors of 3dfx were not
injured by the transaction."this decision did not entirely dispose
of the trustee's action, however, as the trustee's claims for successor
liability and intentional fraudulent conveyance were still
pending.on june 19, 2008, nvidia filed a motion for summary judgment
to convert the memorandum decision after trial to a final
judgment.that motion was granted in its entirety and judgment was
entered in nvidias favor on september 11, 2008. the trustee filed a notice of
appeal from that judgment on september 22, 2008, and on september 25, 2008,
nvidia exercised its election to have the appeal heard by the united states
district court, where the appeal is pending.
while the
conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed through the
confirmation process, the trustees case still remains pending
appeal.as such, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6 million -
$5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx  that we recorded during the three months ended october
30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees case. we do not
believe the resolution of this matter will have a material impact on our results
of operations or financial position.
the equity
committee lawsuit
on december
8, 2005, the trustee filed a form 8-k on behalf of 3dfx, disclosing the terms of
the conditional settlement agreement between nvidia and the creditors
committee. thereafter, certain 3dfx shareholders filed a petition with the
bankruptcy court to appoint an official committee to represent the claimed
interests of 3dfx shareholders. the court granted that petition and appointed an
equity securities holders committee, or the equity committee. the equity
committee thereafter sought and obtained an order granting it standing to bring
suit against nvidia, for the benefit of the bankruptcy estate, to compel nvidia
to pay the stock consideration then unpaid from the apa, and filed its own
competing plan of reorganization/liquidation. the equity committees plan
assumes that 3dfx can raise additional equity capital that would be used to
retire all of 3dfxs debts, and thus to trigger nvidia's obligation to pay six
million shares of stock consideration specified in the apa. nvidia contends,
among other things, that such a commitment is not sufficient and that its
obligation to pay the stock consideration had long before been extinguished. on
may 1, 2006, the equity committee filed its lawsuit for declaratory relief to
compel nvidia to pay the stock consideration. in addition, the equity committee
filed a motion seeking bankruptcy court approval of investor protections for
harbinger capital partners master fund i, ltd., an equity investment fund that
conditionally agreed to pay no more than $51.5 million for preferred stock in
3dfx. the hearing on that motion was held on january 18, 2007, and the
bankruptcy court approved the proposed protections.
after the
bankruptcy court denied our motion to dismiss on september 6, 2006, the equity
committee again amended its complaint, and nvidia moved to dismiss that amended
complaint as well. on december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court granted the motion
as to one of the equity committees claims, and denied it as to the others.
however, the bankruptcy court also ruled that nvidia would only be required to
answer the first three causes of action by which the equity committee seeks
determinations that (1) the apa was not terminated before 3dfx filed for
bankruptcy protection, (2) the 3dfx bankruptcy estate still holds some rights in
the apa, and (3) the apa is capable of being assumed by the bankruptcy
estate.
because of
the trial of the trustee's fraudulent transfer claims against nvidia, the equity
committee's lawsuit did not progress substantially in 2007.on july
31, 2008, the equity committee filed a motion for summary judgment on its first
three causes of action.on september 15, 2008, nvidia filed a
cross-motion for summary judgment.on october 24, 2008, the court
held a hearing on the parties cross-motions for summary judgment.on
january 6, 2009, the bankruptcy court issued a memorandum decision granting
nvidias motion and denying the equity committees motion, and entered an order
to that effect on january 30, 2009. on february 27, 2009, the bankruptcy court
entered judgment in favor of nvidia. the equity committee has waived its right
to appeal by stipulation entered on february 18, 2009, and the judgment is now
final.
proceedings,
sec inquiry and lawsuits related to our historical stock option granting
practices
in june 2006,
the audit committee of the board of nvidia ("audit committee"), began a review
of our stock option practices based on the results of an internal review
voluntarily undertaken by management. the audit committee, with the assistance
of outside legal counsel, completed its review on november 13, 2006 when the
audit committee reported its findings to our full board. the review covered
option grants to all employees, directors and consultants for all grant dates
during the period from our initial public offering in january 1999 through june
2006. based on the findings of the audit committee and our internal review, we
identified a number of occasions on which we used an incorrect measurement date
for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
we
voluntarily contacted the sec regarding the audit committees
review.in late august 2006, the sec initiated an inquiry related to
our historical stock option grant practices. in october 2006, we met with the
sec and provided it with a review of the status of the audit committees review.
in november 2006, we voluntarily provided the sec with additional documents. we
continued to cooperate with the sec throughout its inquiry.on
october 26, 2007, the sec formally notified us that the sec's investigation
concerning our historical stock option granting practices had been terminated
and that no enforcement action was recommended.
concurrently
with our internal review and the secs inquiry, since september 29, 2006, ten
derivative cases have been filed in state and federal courts asserting claims
concerning errors related to our historical stock option granting practices and
associated accounting for stock-based compensation expense. these complaints
have been filed in various courts, including the california superior court,
santa clara county, the united states district court for the northern district
of california, and the court of chancery of the state of delaware in and for new
castle county. the california superior court cases were subsequently
consolidated as were the cases pending in the northern district of california.
all of the cases purport to be brought derivatively on behalf of nvidia against
members of our board and several of our current and former officers and
directors. plaintiffs in these actions allege claims for, among other things,
breach of fiduciary duty, unjust enrichment, insider selling, abuse of control,
gross mismanagement, waste, and constructive fraud. the northern district of
california action also alleges violations of federal provisions, including
sections 10(b) and 14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934. the plaintiffs
seek to recover for nvidia, among other things, damages in an unspecified
amount, rescission, punitive damages, treble damages for insider selling, and
fees and costs. plaintiffs also seek an accounting, a constructive trust and
other equitable relief.
on august 5,
2007, our board authorized the formation of a special litigation committee to
investigate, evaluate, and make a determination as to how nvidia should proceed
with respect to the claims and allegations asserted in the underlying derivative
cases brought on behalf of nvidia. the special litigation committee has made
substantial progress in completing its work, but has not yet issued a
report.
between june
2007 and september 2008 the parties to the actions engaged in settlement
discussions, including four mediation sessions before the honorable edward
infante (ret.).on september 22, 2008, we disclosed that we had
entered into memoranda of understanding regarding the settlement of all
derivative actions concerning our historical stock option granting
practices.on november 10, 2008, the definitive settlement agreements
were concurrently filed in the chancery court of delaware and the united states
district court for the northern district of california and are subject to
approval by both such courts.the settlement agreements do not
contain any admission of wrongdoing or fault on the part of nvidia, our board of
directors or executive officers.the terms of the settlement
agreements include, among other things, the agreement by the board of directors
to continue and to implement certain corporate governance changes;
acknowledgement of the prior amendment of certain options through re-pricings
and limitations of the relevant exercise periods; an agreement by jen-hsun
huang, our president and chief executive officer, to amend additional options to
increase the aggregate exercise price of such options by $3.5 million or to
cancel options with an intrinsic value of $3.5 million; an $8.0 million cash
payment by our insurance carrier to nvidia; and an agreement to not object to
attorneys fees to be paid by nvidia to plaintiffs counsel of no more than
$7.25 million, if approved by the courts.on january 24, 2009, a
notice of pendency and settlement of shareholder derivative actions was mailed
to shareholders of record and posted on www.nvidia.com.on
march 11, 2009, a final settlement hearing was held in the delaware chancery
courtand, on the same date, the court entereda final order and
judgment, which approved the requested attorneys' fees and dismissed the
delaware action with prejudice. the final approval hearing in the northern
district of california is scheduled for march 17,
2009.
department of
justice subpoena and investigation, and civil cases
on november
29, 2006, we received a subpoena from the san francisco office of the antitrust
division of the united states department of justice, or doj, in connection with
the doj's investigation into potential antitrust violations related to gpus and
cards.on october 10, 2008, the doj formally notified us that
the doj investigation has been closed. no specific allegations were made against
nvidia during the investigation.
as of january
25, 2009, over 50 civil complaints have been filed against us. the majority of
the complaints were filed in the northern district of california, several were
filed in the central district of california, and other cases were filed in
several other federal district courts.on april 18, 2007, the
judicial panel on multidistrict litigation transferred the actions currently
pending outside of the northern district of california to the northern district
of california for coordination of pretrial proceedings before the honorable
william h. alsup.by agreement of the parties, judge alsup will
retain jurisdiction over the consolidated cases through trial or other
resolution.
in the
consolidated proceedings, two groups of plaintiffs (one putatively representing
all direct purchasers of gpus and the other putatively representing all indirect
purchasers) filed consolidated, amended class-action complaints. these
complaints purport to assert federal antitrust claims based on alleged price
fixing, market allocation, and other alleged anti-competitive agreements between
us and ati technologies, ulc., or ati, and advanced micro devices, inc., or amd,
as a result of its acquisition of ati.the indirect purchasers
consolidated amended complaint also asserts a variety of state law antitrust,
unfair competition and consumer protection claims on the same allegations, as
well as a common law claim for unjust enrichment.
plaintiffs
filed their first consolidated complaints on june 14, 2007.on july
16, 2007, we moved to dismiss those complaints.the motions to
dismiss were heard by judge alsup on september 20, 2007.the court
subsequently granted and denied the motions in part, and gave the plaintiffs
leave to move to amend the complaints.on november 7, 2007, the court
granted plaintiffs motion to file amended complaints, ordered defendants to
answer the complaints, lifted a previously entered stay on discovery, and set a
trial date for january 12, 2009.plaintiffs filed motions for class
certification on april 24, 2008.we filed oppositions to the motions
on may 20, 2008.on july 18, 2008, the court ruled on plaintiffs
class certification motions.the court denied class certification for
the proposed class of indirect purchasers.the court granted in part
class certification for the direct purchasers but limited the direct purchaser
class to individual purchasers that acquired graphics processing cards products
directly from nvidia or ati from their websites between december 4, 2002 and
november 7, 2007.
on
september16, 2008, we executed a settlement agreement, or the agreement,
in connection with the claims of the certified class of direct purchaser
plaintiffs approved by the court.pursuant to the agreement, nvidia
has paid $850,000 into a $1.7 million fund to be made available for payments to
the certified class. we are not obligated under the agreement to pay plaintiffs
attorneys fees, costs, or make any other payments in connection with the
settlement other than the payment of $850,000. the agreement is subject to court
approval and, if approved, would dispose of all claims and appeals raised by the
certified class in the complaints against nvidia.a final settlement
approval hearing is scheduled for march 26, 2009. because the court
certified a class consisting only of a narrow group of direct purchasers, the
agreement does not resolve any claims that other direct purchasers may
assert. in addition, on september9, 2008, we reached a settlement
agreement with the remaining individual indirect purchaser plaintiffs pursuant
to which nvidia paid $112,500 in exchange for a dismissal of all claims and
appeals related to the complaints raised by the individual indirect purchaser
plaintiffs. this settlement is not subject to the approval of the court.
pursuant to the settlement, the individual indirect purchaser plaintiffs in the
complaints have dismissed their claims and withdrawn their appeal of the class
certification ruling.because the court did not certify a class of
indirect purchasers, this settlement agreement resolves only the claims of those
indirect purchasers that were named inthe various
actions.
rambus
corporation
on july 10,
2008, rambus corporation, or rambus, filed suit against nvidia corporation,
asserting patent infringement of 17 patents claimed to be owned by rambus.
rambus seeks damages, enhanced damages and injunctive relief.the
lawsuit was filed in the northern district of california in san jose,
california.on july 11, 2008, nvidia filed suit against rambus in the
middle district of north carolina asserting numerous claims, including antitrust
and other claims.nvidia seeks damages, enhanced damages and
injunctive relief.rambus has since dropped two patents from its
lawsuit in the northern district of california.the two cases have
recently been consolidated into a single action in the northern district of
california.a case management conference in the case pending in the
northern district of california is scheduled for march 30, 2009.on
november 6, 2008, rambus filed a complaint alleging a violation of 19 u.s.c.
section 1337 based on a claim of patent infringement against nvidia and 14 other
respondents with the u.s. international trade commission, or itc.the
complaint seeks an exclusion order barring the importation of products that
allegedly infringe nine rambus patents.the itc has instituted the
investigation.nvidia intends to pursue its offensive and defensive
cases vigorously.
product
defect litigation and securities cases
in
september,october and november2008, several putative consumer class
action lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims arising from a
weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation
mcp and gpu products used in notebook systems.most of the lawsuits
were filed in federal court in the northern district of california, but three
were filed in state court in california, in federal court in new york, and in
federal court in texas.those three actions have since been removed
or transferred to the united states district court for the northern district of
california, san jose division, where all of the actions now are currently
pending.the various lawsuits are titled nakash v. nvidia corp., feinstein v. nvidia corp.,
inicom networks, inc. v.
nvidia corp. and dell, inc. and hewlett packard, olivos v. nvidia corp., dell, inc. and hewlett
packard, sielicki v.
nvidia corp. and dell, inc., cormier v. nvidia corp.,
national business officers
association, inc. v. nvidia corp., and west v. nvidia
corp.the first amended complaint was filed on october 27,
2008, which no longer asserted claims against dell, inc.the various
complaints assert claims for, among other things, breach of warranty, violations
of the consumer legal remedies act, business & professions code sections
17200 and 17500 and other consumer protection statutes under the laws of various
jurisdictions, unjust enrichment, and strict liability.
the
district court has entered orders deeming all of the above casesrelated
under the relevant local rules.on december 11, 2008, nvidia filed a
motion to consolidate all of the aforementioned consumer class action
cases.the district court held a case management conference for the
above cases on february 23, 2009.on february 26, 2009, the district
court consolidated the cases, as well as two other cases pending against
hewlett-packard, under the caption the nvidia gpu litigation and ordered the
plaintiffs to file lead counsel motions by march 2, 2009.on march 2,
2009, several of the parties filed motions for appointment of lead counsel and
briefs addressing certain related issues.a hearing on appointment of
lead counsel is scheduled for march 23, 2009.the district court also
ordered that a consolidated amended complaint be filed on or before may 6,
2009.
in september 2008, three
putative securities class actions, or the actions, were filed in the united
states district court for the northern district of california arising out of our
announcements on july 2, 2008, that we would take a charge against cost of
revenue to cover anticipated costs and expenses arising from a weak
die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp
and gpu products and that we were revising financial guidance for our second
quarter of fiscal year 2009. the actions purport to be brought on behalf of
purchasers of nvidia stock and assert claims for violations of sections 10(b)
and 20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. on october 30,
2008, the actions were consolidated under the caption in re nvidia corporation securities
litigation, civil action no. 08-cv-04260-jw (hrl). lead plaintiffs and
lead plaintiffs' counsel were appointed on december 23, 2008. on february 6,
2009, co-lead plaintiff filed a writ of mandamus with the ninth circuit court of
appeals challenging the designation of co-lead plaintiffs' counsel. on february
19, 2009, co-lead plaintiff filed with the district court, a motion to stay the
district court proceedings pending resolution of the writ of mandamus by the
ninth circuit. on february 24, 2009, judge ware granted the stay. the writ is
still pending in the court of appeals. we intend
to take all appropriate action with respect to the above cases.
intel
corporation
on
february 17, 2009, intel corporation filed suit against nvidia corporation,
seeking declaratory and injunctive relief relating to a licensing agreement that
the parties signed in 2004.the lawsuit was filed in delaware
chancery court.intel seeks an order from the court declaring that
the license does not extend to certain future nvidia chipset products, and
enjoining nvidia from stating that it has licensing rights for these products.
the lawsuit seeks no damages from nvidia.if intel successfully
obtains such a court order, we could be unable to sell our mcp products for use
with intel processors and our competitive position would be
harmed.nvidias response to the intel complaint is currently
due on march 23, 2009.nvidia disputes intels positions and intends
to vigorously defend the case.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
no
matters were submitted to a vote of our security holders during the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2009.
part ii
item 5. market for registrants common equity, related stockholder
matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
our common
stock is traded on the nasdaqglobal selectmarket under the symbol
nvda. public trading of our common stock began on january 22, 1999. prior to
that, there was no public market for our common stock. as of march 10,
2009, we had approximately 460
registered stockholders, not including those shares held in
street or nominee name. the following table sets forth for the periods indicated
the high and low sales price for our common stock as quoted on the
nasdaqglobal selectmarket:
high
low
fiscal
year ending january 31, 2010
first
quarter (through march 10, 2009)
$
9.97
$
7.21
fiscal
year ended january 25, 2009
fourth
quarter
$
9.45
$
5.75
third
quarter
$
14.12
$
5.97
second
quarter
$
25.35
$
10.70
first
quarter
$
27.59
$
17.31
fiscal
year ended january 27, 2008
fourth
quarter
$
38.20
$
22.33
third
quarter (1)
$
39.67
$
27.00
second
quarter (1)
$
31.89
$
21.47
first
quarter (1)
$
23.27
$
18.69
(1)
reflects a three-for-two stock split effective on september 10,
2007.
dividend
policy
we have never
paid and do not expect to pay cash dividends for the foreseeable
future.
issuer
purchases of equity securities
during fiscal
year 2005, we announced that our board of directors, or board, had authorized a
stock repurchase program to repurchase shares of our common stock, subject to
certain specifications, up to an aggregate maximum amount of $300
million.during fiscal year 2007, the board further approved an
increase of $400 million to the original stock repurchase program. in fiscal
year 2008, we announced a stock repurchase programunder which we may
purchase up to an additional $1.0 billion of our common stock over a three year
period through may 2010. on august 12, 2008, we announced that our board further
authorized an additional increase of $1.0 billion to the stock repurchase
program. as a result of these increases, we have an ongoing authorization from
the board, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common
stock up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7 billion through may
2010.
the
repurchases will be made from time to time in the open market, in privately
negotiated transactions, or in structured stock repurchase programs, and may be
made in one or more larger repurchases, in compliance with the securities
exchange act of 1934, or the exchange act, rule 10b-18, subject to market
conditions, applicable legal requirements, and other factors. the program does
not obligate nvidia to acquire any particular amount of common stock and the
program may be suspended at any time at our discretion.as part of our
share repurchase program, we have entered into, and we may continue to enter
into, structured share repurchase transactions with financial institutions.
these agreements generally require that we make an up-front payment in exchange
for the right to receive a fixed number of shares of our common stock upon
execution of the agreement, and a potential incremental number of shares of our
common stock, within a pre-determined range, at the end of the term of the
agreement.
during the
three months ended january 25, 2009, we did not enter into any structured share
repurchase transactions or otherwise purchase any shares of our common stock.
during fiscal year 2009, we entered into structured share repurchase
transactions to repurchase 29.3 million shares for $423.6 million, which we
recorded on the trade date of the transactions.through fiscal year
2009, we have repurchased an aggregate of 90.9 million shares under our stock
repurchase program for a total cost of $1.46billion.as of
january 25, 2009, we are authorized, subject to certain specifications, to
repurchase shares of our common stock up to an additional amount of $1.24
billion through may 2010.
additionally,
during fiscal year 2009, we granted approximately 17.9 million stock options
under the 2007 equity incentive plan. please refer to note 2 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further information regarding stock-based compensation and
stock options granted under our equity incentive program.
stock
performance graphs
the following
graph compares the cumulative total stockholder return for our common stock, the
s & p 500 index and the s & p 500 semiconductors index for the five
years ended january 25, 2009. the graph assumes that $100 was invested on
january 25, 2004 in our common stock or on january 31, 2004 in each of the s
& p 500 index and the s & p semiconductors index. total return assumes
reinvestment of dividends in each of the indices indicated. we have never paid
cash dividends on our common stock. our results are calculated on fiscal
year-end basis and each of the s & p 500 index and the s & p
semiconductors index are calculated on month-end basis. total return is based on
historical results and is not intended to indicate future
performance.
1/25/2004
1/30/2005
1/29/2006
1/28/2007
1/27/2008
1/25/2009
nvidia
corporation
$
100.00
$
99.09
$
200.30
$
272.59
$
324.17
$
100.17
s
& p 500
$
100.00
$
106.23
$
117.26
$
134.28
$
131.17
$
80.50
s
& p semiconductors
$
100.00
$
75.16
$
86.90
$
81.82
$
76.25
$
45.17
*$100
invested on january 25, 2004 in stock or index, including reinvestment of
dividends.indexes calculated on month-end basis.
the
following graph compares the cumulative total stockholder return for our common
stock, the s & p 500 index and the s & p 500 semiconductors index for
the period commencing with our initial public offering through the year ended
january 25, 2009. the graph assumes that $100 was invested at our initial public
offering on january 21, 1999 in our common stock or on december 31, 1998 in each
of the s & p 500 index and the s & p semiconductors index. total return
assumes reinvestment of dividends in each of the indices indicated. we have
never paid cash dividends on our common stock. our results are calculated on
fiscal year-end basis and each of the s & p 500 index and the s & p
semiconductors index are calculated on month-end basis. total return is based on
historical results and is not intended to indicate future
performance.
1/21/1999
1/31/1999
1/30/2000
1/28/2001
1/27/2002
1/24/2003
1/25/2004
1/30/2005
1/29/2006
1/28/2007
1/27/2008
1/25/2009
nvidia
corporation
$
100.00
$
158.33
$
311.46
$
846.88
$
2,182.33
$
339.00
$
769.67
$
762.67
$
1,541.67
$
2,098.00
$
2,495.00
$771.00
s&p
$
100.00
$
104.18
$
114.96
$
113.93
$
95.53
$
73.54
$
98.97
$
105.13
$
116.05
$
132.89
$
129.82
$79.67
s&p
semiconductors
$
100.00
$
119.64
$
180.33
$
145.17
$
112.96
$
50.00
$
99.52
$
74.79
$
86.48
$
81.43
$
75.88
$45.49
*$100
invested on january 21, 1999 in stock or december 31, 1998, in index, including
reinvestment of dividends.indexes calculated on month-end
basis.
item 6. selected financial data
the
following selected financial data should be read in conjunction with our
financial statements and the notes thereto, and with item 7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. the
consolidated statements of operations data for the years ended january 25, 2009,
january 27, 2008 and january 28, 2007 and the consolidated balance sheet data as
of january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008 have been derived from and should be
read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the
notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k. the
consolidated statement of operations data for the years ended january 29, 2006
and january 30, 2005 and the consolidated balance sheet data for the year ended
january 28, 2007, january 29, 2006 and january 30, 2005 are derived from audited
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto which are not included
in this annual report on form 10-k.
year
ended
january
25,
january
27,
january
28,
january
29,
january
30,
(b)
(c)
(c,d)
(e)
(in
thousands, except per share data)
consolidated
statement of operations data:
revenue
$
3,424,859
$
4,097,860
$
3,068,771
$
2,375,687
$
2,010,033
income
(loss) from operations
$
(70,700
)
$
836,346
$
453,452
$
336,664
$
95,176
net
income (loss)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
$
448,834
$
301,176
$
88,615
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.05
)
$
1.45
$
0.85
$
0.59
$
0.18
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.05
)
$
1.31
$
0.76
$
0.55
$
0.17
shares
used in basic per share computation (a)
548,126
550,108
528,606
509,070
498,186
shares
used in diluted per share computation (a)
548,126
606,732
587,256
548,556
527,436
january
25,
january
27,
january
28,
january
29,
january
30,
(in
thousands)
consolidated
balance sheet data:
cash,
cash equivalents and marketable securities
$
1,255,390
$
1,809,478
$
1,117,850
$
950,174
$
670,045
total
assets
$
3,350,727
$
3,747,671
$
2,675,263
$
1,954,687
$
1,663,551
capital
lease obligations, less current portion
$
25,634
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
-
total
stockholders equity
$
2,394,652
$
2,617,912
$
2,006,919
$
1,495,992
$
1,221,091
cash
dividends declared per common share
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
-
(a)
reflects a three-for-two stock-split effective september 10, 2007 and a
two-for-one stock-split effective april 6, 2006.
(b)
fiscal year 2009 includes $196.0 million for a warranty charge against cost of
revenue arising from a weak die/packaging material set; a benefit of $8.0
million received from an insurance provider as reimbursement for some of the
claims towards the warranty cost arising from a weak die/packaging material set;
$18.9 million for a non-recurring charge resulting from the termination of a
development contract related to a new campus construction project we have put on
hold and $8.0 million forrestructuring charges.
(c)
fiscal years 2008 and 2007 include a charge of $4.0 million and $13.4 million
towards in-process research and development expense related to our purchase of
mental images inc. and portalplayer inc., respectively, that had not yet reached
technological feasibility and have no alternative future use.
(d)
fiscal year 2007 included a charge of $17.5 million associated with a
confidential patent licensing arrangement.
(e)
fiscal year 2006 included a charge of $14.2 million related to settlement costs
associated with two litigation matters, 3dfx and american video graphics, lp, or
avg.
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition
and results of operations
the following
discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations
should be read in conjunction with item 1a. risk factors, item 6. selected
financial data, our consolidated financial statements and related notes
thereto, as well as other cautionary statements and risks described elsewhere in
this annual report on form 10-k, before deciding to purchase, hold or sell
shares of our common stock.
overview
our
company
nvidia
corporation is the worldwide leader in visual computing technologies and the
inventor of the graphic processing unit, or the gpu, a high-performance
processor which generates realistic, interactive graphics on workstations,
personal computers, game consoles, and mobile devices. our products are designed
to generate realistic, interactive graphics on consumer and professional
computing devices. we serve the entertainment and consumer market with our
geforce graphics products, the professional design and visualization market with
our quadro graphics products, the high-performance computing market with our
tesla computing solutions products, and the handheld computing market with our
tegra computer-on-a-chip products. we have four major product-line operating
segments: the gpu business, the professional solutions business, or psb, the
media and communications processor, or mcp, business, and the consumer products
business, or cpb.
our gpu
business is comprised primarily of our geforce products that support desktop and
notebook personal computers, or pcs, plus memory products. our psb is comprised
of our nvidia quadro professional workstation products and other professional
graphics products, including our nvidia tesla high-performance computing
products. our mcp business is comprised of nvidia nforce core logic and
motherboard gpu, or mgpu products. our cpb is comprised of our tegra and goforce
mobile brands and products that support netbooks, personal navigation devices,
or pnds, handheld personal media players, or pmps, personal digital assistants,
or pdas, cellular phones and other handheld devices. cpb also includes license,
royalty, other revenue and associated costs related to video game consoles and
other digital consumer electronics devices.original equipment
manufacturers, original design manufacturers, add-in-card manufacturers, system
builders and consumer electronics companies worldwide utilize our processors as
a core component of their entertainment, business and professional
solutions.
we were
incorporated in california in april 1993 and reincorporated in delaware in april
1998. our headquarter facilities are in santa clara, california. our internet
address is www.nvidia.com.the
contents of our website are not a part of this form 10-k.
recent
developments, future objectives and challenges
gpu
business
our gpu
business is comprised primarily of our geforce products that support desktop and
notebook pcs, plus memory products. during fiscal year 2009, we launched several
new gpusin the geforce family, including the geforce 9600 gt, the geforce
9800 gx2, and the geforce 9800 gtx.we also launched the geforce gtx
280 and 260 gpu products, which represent the second generation of our unified
architecture and, based on a variety of benchmarks and resolutions, deliver
approximately 50 percent more gaming performance than our geforce 8800 ultra
gpu. we also launched the geforce gtx 295 and geforce gtx 285 which were
designed based on compute unified device architecture, or cuda,
technology.the geforce gtx 295 is among the worlds fastest dual gpu
solutions featuring the power of two geforce gtx 200 gpus on a single card. the
geforce gtx 285 is among the worlds most powerful single gpu solution and works
efficiently in complex directx 10 environments with extreme hd resolutions. we
also shipped notebook products from the geforce 100m series, which includes the
geforce g105m and the geforce g110m to meet the performance demands of todays
visual computing applications.the geforce g105m is over 55
percentfaster than our previous product in its segment, while the geforce
g110m is 35 percentfaster than our previous mainstream gpu.
in fiscal
year 2009, we completed our acquisition of ageia technologies, inc., or ageia,
an industry leader in gaming physics technology. we believe that the combination
of the gpu and physics engine brands results in an enhanced visual experience
for the gaming world.subsequent to our acquisition of ageia, we launched
the geforce 9800 gtx+, geforce 9800 gt, and geforce 9500 gt gpus, which provide
support for our physx physics engine and cuda parallel processing across a wide
range of price segments.
our share of
the standalone desktop gpu category decreased from 64% to 63% in fiscal year
2009, according to the december 2007 and december 2008 pc graphics report from
mercury research, respectively. our share of the standalone notebook category
decreased from 75% to 63%, according to the december 2007 and december 2008 pc
graphics report from mercury research, respectively, due to increased
competition in the marketplace. during fiscal year 2009, our revenue from
desktop gpu products declined approximately 29% compared to fiscal year 2008.
this decline was driven primarily as a result of a decline of over 20% in the
number of units of desktop gpu products that we sold, while average selling
prices of our desktop gpu products were flat to slightly lower in fiscal year
2009 when compared to fiscal year 2008. we believe that some portion of the
decline in our desktop gpu unit sales reflects a shift in consumer preference
towards notebook pcs and away from desktop pcs, and that the overall global
economic recessionary climate also contributed to the decline. as such, we noted
that unit sales of our notebook gpu products increased over 10% during fiscal
year 2009 when compared to fiscal year 2008. however, the overall global
economic recessionary climate contributed to a significant decline in the demand
for total graphics during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009. if consumer
preferences towards notebook pcs, and away from desktop pcs, continue or
escalate, we may see further declines in sales of our desktop gpu products. in
addition, if the global economic climate does not recover during fiscal year
2010, or deteriorates further, we may see consumer preferences move towards
lower-priced notebook pcs, which may negatively impact sales of our notebook pc
products.
professional
solutions business
our psb is
comprised of our quadro professional workstation products and other professional
graphics products, including our nvidia tesla high-performance computing
products. during fiscal year 2009, we launched several new quadro solutions,
including the quadro fx 3600m professional, and the quadro plex d series, a
dedicated desk side visual computing system, or vcs, system that also can be
configured (using two quadro plex d systems) for a 3u configuration. we also
launched five new quadro fx notebook gpus that spanned from ultra-high
performance to ultra mobility, as well as the quadro cx accelerator for adobes
creative suite 4, or adobe cs4, content creation software.
during fiscal
year 2009, we also launched the tesla c1060 computing processor and the tesla
s1070 computing system. tesla is a new family of gpu computing products that
delivers processing capabilities for high-performance computing applications,
and marks our entry into the high-performance computing industry. the tesla
family also consists of the c870 gpu computing processor, the d870 deskside
supercomputer and the s870 1u computing server. we believe we are in an era of
gpu computing, where our compute unified device architecture, or cuda, parallel
processing architecture can accelerate compute-intensive applications by
significant multiples over that of a cpu alone. nvidia cuda is a general purpose
parallel computing architecture that leverages the parallel compute engine
inour graphics processing units to solve many complex computational
problems in a fraction of the time required on a cpu. in order to program using
the cuda architecture, developers can, today, use c, one of the most widely used
high-level programming languages, which can then be run at great performance on
a cuda enabled processor. we expect other languages to be supported in the
future, including fortran and c++. with cuda, we are able to speed up general
purpose compute-intensive applications like we do for 3d graphics
processing.developers are able to speed-up algorithms in areas
ranging from nano molecular dynamics to image processing, medical image
reconstruction and derivatives modeling for financial risk
analysis.many pc oems now offer high performance computing solutions
with tesla for use by customers around the world. researchers use cuda to
accelerate their time-to-discovery, and popular off-the-shelf software packages
are now cuda accelerated.
we have
achieved a leading position in the professional graphics category by providing
innovative gpu technology, software, and tools that integrate the capabilities
of our gpu with a broad array of visualization
products.
mcp
business
our mcp business is
comprised of nvidia nforce core logic and nvidia geforce mgpu
products. our nvidia nforce and geforce mgpu families of products
address the core logic market.during fiscal year 2008, we announced
a new technology named hybrid sli, which combines a powerful yet
energy-efficient engine with our multi-gpu sli technology. during fiscal year
2009, we shipped hybrid sli directx 10, or dx10, mgpus  the geforce 8000 gpu
series.we also extended the reach of sli technology into the
performance category with the launch of our overclockable nvidia nforce 790i
ultra sli mcp for intel processors.we also launched sli for intel
broomfield cpu platforms.
in fiscal
year 2009, we also launched the geforce 9400m mgpu along with apple, inc., or
apple, for their new lineup of mac notebooks. the geforce 9400m integrates three
complex chips  the northbridge, the input-output network processor, and the
geforce gpu into a single chip and, as a result, significantly improves
performance over intel integrated graphics.apples macbook and
macbook air notebook computers come standard with the geforce 9400m. apples
macbook pro notebook computer comes standard with the hybrid combination of two
geforce gpus - ageforce 9400m for maximum battery life and a geforce 9600m
gt for high performance mode.wealso launched the geforce 9400
and 9300 mgpus for intel desktop pcs.these new mgpus set a new
price/performance standard for integrated graphics by combining the power of
three different chips into one highly compact and efficient gpu.
additionally,
in fiscal year 2009, we announced the nvidia ion platform, which combines the
geforce 9400 gpu with the intel atom cpu. the combination enables netbooks,
small form factor and all-in-one pcs to play rich media and popular games in
high definition.
consumer products business
our cpb is comprised of our tegra and goforce mobile brands and products that
support netbooks, pmps, pdas, cellular phones and other handheld devices. this
business also includes license, royalty, other revenue and associated costs
related to video game consoles and other digital consumer electronics
devices.
during fiscal
year 2009, we launched the nvidia tegra apx 2500 computer-on-a-chip. in february
2009, we announced the nvidia tegra apx 2600 computer-on-a-chip and that we have
worked closely with google inc., or google, and the open handset alliance to
utilize android, an open mobile phone software stack, with the nvidia
tegraseries. during fiscal year 2009, we also launched the nvidia tegra
600 and 650 products, which are small, advanced, highly-integrated visual
computer-on-a-chip products. these products featureenhanced multimedia
functionalityand deliver many times the power efficiency of competing
products.
we also introduced geforce 3d vision, a high-definition 3d stereo solution for
the home. 3d vision is a combination of high-tech wireless glasses, a high-power
infrared emitter and advanced software that transforms hundreds of pc games into
full stereoscopic 3d.
restructuring charges
on september18, 2008, we announced a workforce reduction to allow for
continued investment in strategic growth areas, which was completed in the third
quarter of fiscal year 2009. as a result, we eliminated approximately 360
positions worldwide, or about 6.5% of our global workforce.during
fiscal year 2009, expenses associated with the workforce reduction, which were
comprised primarily of severance and benefits payments to these employees,
totaled $8.0 million. we anticipate that the expected decrease in operating
expenses from this action will be offset by continued investment in strategic
growth areas.
product defect
our products are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to
any number of issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use
within a system. if any of our products or technologies contains a defect,
compatibility issue or other error, we may have to invest additional research
and development efforts to find and correct the issue.such efforts
could divert our managements and engineers attention from the development of
new products and technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce
our gross margin. in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or
related software drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result
in failure to achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be
required to reimburse customers, including for customers costs to repair or
replace the products in the field. a product recall or a significant number of
product returns could be expensive, damage our reputation and could result in
the shifting of business to our competitors. costs associated with correcting
defects, errors, bugs or other issues could be significant and could materially
harm our financial results.
in july 2008, we recorded a $196.0 million charge against cost of revenue to
cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and other
associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in certain
versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in notebook
systems. all of our newly manufactured products and all of our products that are
currently shipping in volume have a different material set that we believe is
more robust.
the previous generation mcp and gpu products that are impacted were included in
a number of notebook products that were shipped and sold in significant
quantities. certain notebook configurations of these mcp and gpu products are
failing in the field at higher than normal rates. while we have not been able to
determine a root cause for these failures, testing suggests a weak material set
of die/package combination, system thermal management designs, and customer use
patterns are contributing factors. we have worked with our customers to develop
and have made available for download a software driver to cause the system fan
to begin operation at the powering up of the system and reduce the thermal
stress on these chips. we have also recommended to our customers that they
consider changing the thermal management of the mcp and gpu products in their
notebook system designs. we intend to fully support our customers in their
repair and replacement of these impacted mcp and gpu products that fail, and
their other efforts to mitigate the consequences of these failures.
we continue to engage in
discussions with our supply chain regarding reimbursement to us for some or all
of the costs we have incurred and may incur in the future relating to the weak
material set. we also continue to seek to access our insurance coverage, which
provided us with $8.0 million in related reimbursement during fiscal year
2009. however, there
can be no assurance that we will recover any additional reimbursement. we
continue to not see any abnormal failure rates in any systems using nvidia
products other than certain notebook configurations. however, we are continuing
to test and otherwise investigate other products. there can be no assurance that
we will not discover defects in other mcp or gpu products.
in september, october and november2008, several putative class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted
mcp and gpu products.please refer to note 12 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further information regarding this litigation.
common stock
at the annual meeting of stockholders held on june 19, 2008, our stockholders
approved an increase in our authorized number of shares of common stock to
2,000,000,000. the par value of our common stock remained unchanged at $0.001
per share.
dependence
on pc market
we derive and expect to continue to derive the majority of our revenuefrom
the sale or license of products for use in the desktop pc and notebook pc
markets, including professional workstations. a reduction in sales of pcs, or a
reduction in the growth rate of pc sales, may reduce demand for our
products.changes in demand for our products could be large and
sudden.during fiscal year 2009, sales of our desktop gpu products
decreased approximately 29% compared to fiscal year 2008.these decreases
were primarily due to the standalone desktop and standalone notebook gpu market
segment decline as reported in the pc graphics december 2008 report from mercury
research. since pc manufacturers often build inventories during periods of
anticipated growth, they may be left with excess inventories if growth slows or
if they incorrectly forecast product transitions. in these cases, pc
manufacturers may abruptly suspend substantially all purchases of additional
inventory from suppliers like us until their excess inventory has been absorbed,
which would have a negative impact on our financial results.
seasonality
our industry is largely focused on the consumer products market. historically,
we have seen stronger revenue in the second half of ourfiscal year than in
the first half of ourfiscal year, primarily due to back-to-school and
holiday demand. this seasonal trend did not occur in fiscal year
2009.revenue in the second half of fiscal year 2009 declined by 33%
when compared to revenue from the first half of fiscal year 2009. the current
recessionary economic environment has created substantial uncertainty in our
business.there can be no assurance that the historical seasonal trend will
resume in the future.
subsequent
event
tender
offer
on february
11, 2009, we announcedthat our board of directors approved a cash tender
offer for certain employee stock options. the tender offer commencedon
february 11, 2009 and expired at 12:00 midnight (pacific time) on march 11,
2009. the tender offer applied to outstanding stock options held by employees
with an exercise price equal to or greater than $17.50 per share. none of the
non-employee members of our board of directors or our officers who file reports
under section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, including our
former chief financial officer, marvin d. burkett, were eligible to participate
in the offer.all eligible options with exercise prices less than $28.00
per share, but not less than $17.50 per share were eligible to receive a cash
payment of $3.00 per option in exchange for the cancellation of the eligible
option. all eligible options with exercise prices greater than $28.00 per share
were eligible to receive a cash payment of $2.00 per option in exchange for the
cancellation of the eligible option.
we use
equity to promote employee retention and provide an incentive vehicle valued by
employees that is also aligned to stockholder interest. however, our stock price
has declined significantly over the past year, and all of our eligible options
are out-of-the-money (i.e., have exercise prices above our stock
price).therefore, we provided an incentive to employees with an
opportunity to obtain cash payment for their eligible options. also, the tender
offeris expected toincrease the number of shares available for
issuance under our 2007 equity incentive plan to the extent eligible options
were tendered in this tender offer. the tender offer is also expected to reduce
the potential dilution to our stockholders that is represented by outstanding
stock options, which become additional outstanding shares of our common stock
upon exercise.
as of january 25, 2009, there were approximately 33.1 million options eligible
to participate in the tender offer. if all these options were tendered and
accepted in the offer, the aggregate cash purchase price for these options would
be approximately $92.0 million.as a result of the tender offer,
wemay incur a non-recurring charge of up to approximately $150.0 million
if all of the unvested eligible options are tendered. this charge would be
reflected in ourfinancial results for the first fiscal quarter of fiscal
year 2010 and represents stock-based compensation expense, consisting of the
remaining unamortized stock-based compensation expense associated with the
unvested portion of the eligible options tendered in the offer, stock-based
compensation expense resulting from amounts paid in excess of the fair value of
the underlying options, if any, plus associated payroll taxes and professional
fees.
we are currently tallying information on the number of options tendered under
the offer to determine the actual aggregate cash to be paid in exchange for the
cancellation of the eligible options and the non-recurring charge to be incurred
pertaining to the unvested eligible options that have been
tendered.
critical
accounting policies and estimates
managements discussion
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our
consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states. the preparation
of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that
affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, cost of revenue,
expenses and related disclosure of contingencies. on an on-going basis, we
evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, cash
equivalents and marketable securities, accounts receivable, inventories, income
taxes, goodwill, stock-based compensation, warranty liabilities, litigation,
investigation and settlement costs and other contingencies. we base our
estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are
believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the
basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and
liabilities.
we believe the following
critical accounting policies affect our significant judgments and estimates used
in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. our management has
discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies
and estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors, or
board.the audit committee has reviewed our disclosures relating to
our critical accounting policies and estimates in this annual report on form
10-k.
revenue recognition
product
revenue
we recognize revenue from product sales when persuasive evidence of an
arrangement exists, the product has been delivered, the price is fixed and
determinable, and collection is reasonably assured. for most sales, we use a
binding purchase order and in certain cases we use a contractual agreement as
evidence of an arrangement. we consider delivery to occur upon shipment provided
title and risk of loss have passed to the customer based on the shipping terms.
at the point of sale, we assess whether the arrangement fee is fixed and
determinable and whether collection is reasonably assured. if we determine that
collection of a fee is not reasonably assured, we defer the fee and recognize
revenue at the time collection becomes reasonably assured, which is generally
upon receipt of payment.
our policy on sales to certain distributors, with rights of return,is to
defer recognition of revenue and related cost of revenue until the distributors
resell the product.
we record estimated reductions to revenue for customer programs at the time
revenue is recognized. our customer programs primarily involve rebates, which
are designed to serve as sales incentives to purchasers of our
products.we account for rebates in accordance with emerging issues
task force issue 01-9, or eitf 01-09, accounting for consideration given
by a vendor to a customer (including a reseller of the vendors products)
and, as such, we accrue for 100% of the potential rebates and do not apply a
breakage factor. rebates typically expire six months from the date of the
original sale, unless we reasonably believe that the customer intends to claim
the rebate. unclaimed rebates are reversed to revenue upon expiration of the
rebate.
our customer programs also include marketing development funds, or mdfs. we
account for mdfs as either a reduction of revenue or an operating expense in
accordance with eitf 01-09. mdfs represent monies paid to retailers, system
builders, original equipment manufacturers, distributors and add-in card
partners that are earmarked for market segment development and expansion and
typically are designed to support our partners activities while also promoting
our products. depending on market conditions, we may take actions to increase
amounts offered under customer programs, possibly resulting in an incremental
reduction of revenue at the time such programs are offered.
we also record a reduction to revenue by establishing a sales return allowance
for estimated product returns at the time revenue is recognized, based primarily
on historical return rates. however, if product returns for a particular fiscal
period exceed historical return rates we may determine that additional sales
return allowances are required to properly reflect our estimated exposure for
product returns.
license and development
revenue
for
license arrangements that require significant customization of our intellectual
property components, we generally recognize this license revenue using the
percentage-of-completion method of accounting over the period that services are
performed. for all license and service arrangements accounted for under the
percentage-of-completion method, we determine progress to completion based on
actual direct labor hours incurred to date as a percentage of the estimated
total direct labor hours required to complete the project. we periodically
evaluate the actual status of each project to ensure that the estimates to
complete each contract remain accurate. a provision for estimated losses on
contracts is made in the period in which the loss becomes probable and can be
reasonably estimated. costs incurred in advance of revenue recognized are
recorded as deferred costs on uncompleted contracts. if the amount billed
exceeds the amount of revenue recognized, the excess amount is recorded as
deferred revenue. revenue recognized in any period is dependent on our progress
toward completion of projects in progress. significant management judgment and
discretion are used to estimate total direct labor hours. any changes in or
deviations from these estimates could have a material effect on the amount of
revenue we recognize in any period.
accounts receivable
we maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts receivable for estimated losses
resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments.
management determines this allowance, which consists of an amount identified for
specific customer issues as well as an amount based on overall estimated
exposure. our accounts receivable are highly concentrated and make us vulnerable
to adverse changes in our customers' businesses, and to downturns in the
industry and the worldwide economy.for example, one customer
accounted for approximately 18% of our accounts receivable balance at january
25, 2009, and we continue to work directly with more foreign customers and it
may be difficult to collect accounts receivable from them. our overall estimated
exposure excludes significant amounts that are covered by credit insurance and
letters of credit. if the financial condition of our customers, the financial
institutions providing letters of credit, or our credit insurance carrier were
to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments,
additional allowances may be required that could adversely affect our operating
results. this risk is heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen,
such as the current period when the worldwide economy is experiencing a
downturn. the current financial turmoil affecting the banking system and
financial markets and the possibility that financial institutions may
consolidate or go out of business have resulted in a tightening in the credit
markets, a low level of liquidity in many financial markets, and extreme
volatility in fixed income, credit, currency and equity markets. there could be
a number of follow-on effects from the credit crisis on our business, including
inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain credit to finance
purchases of our products and/or customer, insolvencies and failure of financial
institutions, which may negatively impact our financial results. furthermore,
there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain credit insurance in the
future. our current credit insurance agreement expires on december 31,
2009.
as of january 25, 2009, our allowance for doubtful accounts receivable was $1.1
million and our gross accounts receivable balance was $336.8 million. of the
$336.8 million, $94.5 million was covered by credit insurance and $5.3 million
was covered by letters of credit. if the financial condition of our customers
were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make
payments, additional allowances may be required and we may have to record
additional reserves or write-offs on certain sales transactions in the future.
factors impacting the allowance include the level of gross receivables, the
financial condition of our customers and the extent to which balances are
covered by credit insurance or letters of credit. as a percentage of our gross
accounts receivable balance, our allowance for doubtful accounts receivable has
ranged between 0.1% and 0.3% during fiscal years 2009 and2008,
respectively. as of january 25, 2009, our allowance for doubtful accounts
receivable represented the high end of this range, at 0.3% of our gross accounts
receivable balance.
inventories
inventory
cost is computed on an adjusted standard basis; which approximates actual cost
on an average or first-in, first-out basis. we write down our inventory for
estimated lower of cost or market, obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal
to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value
based upon assumptions about future demand, future product purchase commitments,
estimated manufacturing yield levels and market conditions. if actual market
conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, or if our
future product purchase commitments to our suppliers exceed our forecasted
future demand for such products, additional future inventory write-downs may be
required that could adversely affect our operating results. for example, during
the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009, we recorded new inventory write-downs of
approximately $50.0 million, which was approximately five to ten times higher
than the level of inventory reserves we recorded during the first three quarters
of fiscal year 2009, reflecting a significant decline in our forecasted future
demand for the related products. this increased level of inventory reserves had
a negative impact on our gross margin and our results of operations. if actual
market conditions are more favorable, we may have higher gross margins when
products are sold, however, sales to date of such products have not had a
significant impact on our gross margin. inventory reserves once established are
not reversed until the related inventory has been sold or scrapped. as of
january 25, 2009, our inventory reserve was $86.9 million. as a percentage of
our gross inventory balance, our inventory reserve has ranged between 7.8% and
13.9% during fiscal years 2009 and 2008. as of january 25, 2009, our inventory
reserve represented the high end of this range at 13.9% of our gross inventory
balance.
warranty
liabilities
cost of revenue includes the estimated cost of product warranties that are
calculated at the point of revenue recognition. under limited circumstances, we
may offer an extended limited warranty to customers for certain
products.our products are complex and may contain defects or
experience failures due to any number of issues in design, fabrication,
packaging, materials and/or use within a system. if any of our products or
technologies contains a defect, compatibility issue or other error, we may have
to invest additional research and development efforts to find and correct the
issue.such efforts could divert our managements and engineers
attention from the development of new products and technologies and could
increase our operating costs and reduce our gross margin. in addition, an error
or defect in new products or releases or related software drivers after
commencement of commercial shipments could result in failure to achieve market
acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be required to reimburse
customers, including our customers costs to repair or replace products in the
field. a product recall or a significant number of product returns could be
expensive, damage our reputation and could result in the shifting of business to
our competitors. costs associated with correcting defects, errors, bugs or other
issues could be significant and could materially harm our financial
results.
in july 2008, we recorded a $196.0 million charge against cost of revenue to
cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and other
associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in certain
versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in notebook
systems. the mcp and gpu products that are impacted were included in a number of
notebook products that were shipped and sold in significant quantities. certain
notebook configurations of these mcp and gpu products are failing in the field
at higher than normal rates. while we have not been able to determine a root
cause for these failures, testing suggests a weak material set of die/package
combination, system thermal management designs, and customer use patterns are
contributing factors. we intend to fully support our customers in their repair
and replacement of these impacted mcp and gpu products that fail, and their
other efforts to mitigate the consequences of these failures. we continue to not
see any abnormal failure rates in any systems using nvidia products other than
certain notebook configurations. however, we are continuing to test and
otherwise investigate other products. there can be no assurance that we will not
discover defects in other mcp or gpu products.
determining the amount of the $196.0 million charge related to this issue
required management to make estimates and judgments based on historical
experience, test data and various other assumptions including estimated field
failure rates that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. the
results of these judgments formed the basis for our estimate of the total charge
to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return and replacement and other
associated costs. however, if actual repair, return, replacement and other
associated costs and/or actual field failure rates exceed our estimates, we may
be required to record additional reserves, which would increase our cost of
revenue and materially harm our financial results.
income taxes
statement
of financial accounting standards no.109, or sfas no.109, accounting for income taxes,
establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effect of
income taxes. in accordance with sfas no.109, we recognize federal, state
and foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on our estimate of taxes
payable or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax jurisdiction. we also
recognize federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets or liabilities, as
appropriate, for our estimate of future tax effects attributable to temporary
differences and carryforwards; and we record a valuation allowance to reduce any
deferred tax assets by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available
evidence and judgment, are not expected to be realized.
united states income tax has not been provided on earnings of our non-u.s.
subsidiaries to the extent that such earnings are considered to be permanently
reinvested.
our
calculation of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on
certain estimates and judgments and involves dealing with uncertainties in the
application of complex tax laws. our estimates of current and deferred tax
assets and liabilities may change based, in part, on added certainty or finality
to an anticipated outcome, changes in accounting standards or tax laws in the
united states, or foreign jurisdictions where we operate, or changes in other
facts or circumstances. in addition, we recognize liabilities for potential
united states and foreign income tax contingencies based on our estimate of
whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes may be due. if we determine
that payment of these amounts is unnecessary or if the recorded tax liability is
less than our current assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax
benefit or additional income tax expense in our financial statements,
accordingly.
as of
january25, 2009, we had a valuation allowance of $92.5million. of
the total valuation allowance, $5.3 million relates to state tax attributes
acquired in certain acquisitions for which realization of the related deferred
tax assets was determined not likely to be realized due, in part, to potential
utilization limitations as a result of stock ownership changes, and $87.2
million relates to state and foreign deferred tax assets that management
determined not likely to be realized due, in part, to projections of future
taxable income. to the extent realization of the deferred tax assets related to
certain acquisitions becomes more-likely-than-not, recognition of these acquired
tax benefits would be reported as a reduction to income tax expense in
accordance with the recent accounting pronouncement, statement of financial
accounting standards no. 141(r), or sfas no. 141(r), business combinations, issued
by the fasb in december 2007.we would also recognize an income tax
benefit during the period that the realization of the deferred tax assets
related to state or foreign tax benefits of $87.2 million becomes
more-likely-than-not.
in accordance
with statement of financial accounting standards no.123(r), or sfas no.
123(r), share based
payment, our deferred tax assets do not include the excess tax benefit
related to stock-based compensation that are a component of our federal and
state net operating loss and research tax credit carryforwards in the amount of
$588.7 million as of january 25, 2009. consistent with prior years, the excess
tax benefit reflected in our net operating loss and research tax credit
carryforwards will be accounted for as a credit to stockholders equity, if and
when realized.in determining if and when excess tax benefits have
been realized, we have elected to do a with-and-without approach with respect to
such excess tax benefits. we have also elected to ignore the indirect tax
effects of stock-based compensation deductions for financial and accounting
reporting purposes, and specifically to recognize the full effect of the
research tax credit in income from continuing operations.
on january
29, 2007, we adopted fasb interpretation no. 48, or fin 48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxes, issued in july 2006. fin 48 applies to all tax positions related
to income taxes subject to sfas no. 109. under fin 48 we recognize the benefit
from a tax position only if it is more-likely-than-not that the position would
be sustained upon audit based solely on the technical merits of the tax
position. the cumulative effect of adoption of fin 48 did not result in a
material adjustment to our tax liability for unrecognized income tax benefits.
our policy to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax
benefits as a component of income tax expense did not change as a result of
implementing the fin 48. please refer to note 13 of these notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for additional information.
goodwill
our impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting
unitin which the goodwill resides to its carrying value. we
determined that our reporting units are equivalent to our operating segments or
components of an operating segment for the purposes of completing
ourstatement of financial accounting standards no. 142, or sfas no. 142,
goodwill and other intangible
assets, impairment test. we utilize a two-step approach to testing
goodwill for impairment. the first step tests for possible impairment by
applying a fair value-based test. in computing fair value of our reporting
units, we use estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows from such
units. the second step, if necessary, measures the amount of such impairment by
applying fair value-based tests to individual assets and liabilities. goodwill
is subject to our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year, or earlier if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair
value-based approach.we completed our most recent annual impairment
test during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 and concluded that there was
no impairment.this assessment is based upon a discounted cash flow
analysis and analysis of our market capitalization. the estimate of cash flow is
based upon, among other things, certain assumptions about expected future
operating performance such as revenue growth rates and operating margins used to
calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future
economic and market conditions, and determination of appropriate market
comparables. our estimates of discounted cash flows may differ from actual cash
flows due to, among other things, economic conditions, changes to our business
model or changes in operating performance. additionally, certain estimates of
discounted cash flows involve businesses with limited financial history and
developing revenue models, which increase the risk of differences between the
projected and actual performance. significant differences between these
estimates and actual cash flows could materially affect our future financial
results. these factors increase the risk of differences between projected and
actual performance that could impact future estimates of fair value of all
reporting units.in addition, determining the number of reporting units and
the fair value of a reporting unit requires us to make judgments and involves
the use of significant estimates and assumptions. we also make judgments and
assumptions in allocating assets and liabilities to each of our reporting units.
we base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but
that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain.the
long-term financial forecast represents the best estimate that we have at this
time and we believe that its underlying assumptions are reasonable. however,
actual performance in the near-term and longer-term could be materially
different from these forecasts, which could impact future estimates of fair
value of our reporting units and may result in a charge to earnings in future
periods due to the potential for a write-down of goodwill in connection with
such tests.
cash equivalents and marketable securities
fair
value
in the
current market environment, the assessment of the fair value of debt instruments
can be difficult and subjective. the volume of trading activity of certain debt
instruments has declined, and the rapid changes occurring in todays financial
markets can lead to changes in the fair value of financial instruments in
relatively short periods of time. statement of financial accounting standards
no. 157, or sfas no. 157, fair
value measurements, establishes three levels of inputs that may be used
to measure fair value. please refer to note17 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k. we measure our cash equivalents and marketable securities at
fair value. the fair values of our financial assets and liabilities are
determined using quoted market prices of identical assets or quoted market
prices of similar assetsfrom active markets. level1 valuations are
obtained from real-time quotes for transactions in active exchange markets
involving identical assets. level2 valuations are obtained from quoted
market prices in active markets involving similar assets. level 3 valuations are
based on unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology and include our own
data about assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or
liability based on the best information available under the
circumstances.each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and
difficulty involved in determining fair value. while most of our cash
equivalents and marketable securities are valued based on level 2 inputs, the
valuation of our holdings of the reserve international liquidity fund, ltd., or
international reserve fund are classified as a level 3 input due to the inherent
subjectivity and the significant judgment involved in its valuation. total
financial assets at fair value classified within level 3 were 3.7% of total
assets on our consolidated balance sheet as of january 25, 2009.
other than temporary impairment
we account
for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no.115,accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities. all of our cash equivalents and marketable
securities are treated as available-for-sale under sfas no.115. all of
our available-for-sale investments are subject to a periodic impairment review.
investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged
to be other-than-temporary when the resulting fair value is significantly below
cost basis and/or the significant decline has lasted for an extended period of
time. the evaluation that we use to determine whether a marketable security is
impaired is based on the specific facts and circumstances present at the time of
assessment, which include the consideration of general market conditions, the
duration and extent to which fair value is below cost, and our intent and
ability to hold an investment for a sufficient period of time to allow for
recovery in value.we also consider specific adverse conditions
related to the financial health of and business outlook for an investee,
including industry and sector performance, changes in technology, operational
and financing cash flow factors, and changes in an investees credit rating.
investments that we identify as having an indicator of impairment are subject to
further analysis to determine if the investment is other than temporarily
impaired, in which case we write down the investment to its estimated fair
value. during fiscal year 2009, werecorded other than temporary impairment
charges of $9.9 million. these charges include $5.6 million related to what we
believe is an other than temporary impairment of our investment in the money
market funds held by the international reserve fund; $2.5 million related to a
decline in the value of publicly traded equity securities and $1.8 million
related to debt securities held by us that were issued by companies that have
filed for bankruptcy as of january 25, 2009.
stock-based
compensation
effective
january 30, 2006, we adopted the provisions of sfas no. 123(r),which establishes
accounting for stock-based awards exchanged for employee services. accordingly,
stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based on the fair value
of the awards, and is recognized as expense over the requisite employee service
period. stock-based compensation expense recognized during fiscal years 2009,
2008 and 2007 was $162.7 million, $133.4 million and $116.7million,
respectively, which consisted of stock-based compensation expense related to
stock options and our employee stock purchase plan. please refer to note 2 of
the notes to the consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15
of this form10-k for further information.
we elected to
adopt the modified prospective application method as provided by sfas no.
123(r), beginning january 30, 2006. we recognize stock-based compensation
expense using the straight-line attribution method. we estimate the value of
employee stock options on the date of grant using a binomial model. the
determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant
using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as
assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. these
variables include, but are not limited to, the expected stock price volatility
over the term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise
behaviors, vesting schedules, death and disability probabilities, expected
volatility and risk-free interest. our management determined that the use of
implied volatility is expected to be more reflective of market conditions and,
therefore, could reasonably be expected to be a better indicator of our expected
volatility than historical volatility. the risk-free interest rate assumption is
based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our employee
stock options. the dividend yield assumption is based on the history and
expectation of dividend payouts. we began segregating options into groups for
employees with relatively homogeneous exercise behavior in order to calculate
the best estimate of fair value using the binomial valuation model.
using the
binomial model, the fair value of the stock options granted under our stock
option plans have been estimated using the following assumptions during the year
ended january 25, 2009:
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
3.6
- 5.8
risk
free interest rate
1.7%
- 3.7
%
volatility
52%
- 105
%
dividend
yield
-
for our employee stock purchase
plan we continue to use the black-scholes model. the fair value of the shares
issued under the employee stock purchase plan has been estimated using the
following assumptions during year ended january 25, 2009:
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
0.5
- 2.0
risk
free interest rate
1.6%
- 2.4
%
volatility
62%
- 68
%
dividend
yield
-
sfas no.
123(r) also requires forfeitures to be estimated at the time of grant and
revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from
those estimates. forfeitures were estimated based on historical experience. if
factors change and we employ different assumptions in the application of sfas
no. 123(r) in future periods, the compensation expense that we record under sfas
no. 123(r) may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current
period.
litigation,
investigation and settlement costs
from time to
time, we are involved in legal actions and/or investigations by regulatory
bodies. we are aggressively defending our current litigation matters for which
we are responsible. however, there are many uncertainties associated with any
litigation or investigations, and we cannot be certain that these actions or
other third-party claims against us will be resolved without costly litigation,
fines and/or substantial settlement payments. if that occurs, our business,
financial condition and results of operations could be materially and adversely
affected. if information becomes available that causes us to determine that a
loss in any of our pending litigation, investigations or settlements is
probable, and we can reasonably estimate the loss associated with such events,
we will record the loss in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the united states. however, the actual liability in any such
litigation or investigations may be materially different from our estimates,
which could require us to record additional costs.
results
of operations
the following
table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain items in our consolidated
statements of operations expressed as a percentage of
revenue.
year
ended
january
25, 2009
january
27, 2008
january
28, 2007
revenue
100.0
%
100.0
%
100.0
%
cost
of revenue
65.7
54.4
57.6
gross
profit
34.3
45.6
42.4
operating
expenses:
research
and development
25.0
16.9
18.0
sales,
general and administrative
10.6
8.3
9.6
restructuring
charges and other
0.8
-
-
total
operating expenses
36.4
25.2
27.6
income
(loss) from operations
(2.1
)
20.4
14.8
interest
and other income, net
0.8
1.6
1.3
income
(loss) before income taxes
(1.3
)
22.0
16.1
income
tax expense (benefit)
(0.4
)
2.5
1.5
net
income (loss)
(0.9
)%
19.5
%
14.6
%
fiscal
years ended january 25, 2009, january 27, 2008 and january 28, 2007
revenue
we report
financial information for four major product-line operating segmentsto our
chief executive officer, who is considered to be our chief operating decision
maker, as follows: the gpu business, psb, mcp business, and cpb.revenue in
the "all other" category is primarily derived fromsales of
components.please refer to note 16 of our notes to the consolidated
financial statements in partiv, item15 of this form10-k for
further information.
fiscal year 2009 vs. fiscal year
revenue was
$3.42billion for fiscal year 2009, compared to $4.10 billion for fiscal
year 2008, which represents a decrease of 16%.for the first
quarter of fiscal 2010, we expect revenue to remain flat or improve slightly
when compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009. a discussion of
our revenue results for each of our operating segments is as
follows:
gpu business. gpu business revenue
decreased by 24% to $1.91 billion for fiscal year 2009, compared to $2.52
billion for fiscal year 2008. this decrease resultedfrom
decreasedsales of our desktop gpu and memory products, offset by increased
sales of our notebook gpu products.sales of our desktop gpu and memory
products decreased approximately 29% and 59%, respectively, in fiscal year 2009
when compared to fiscal year 2008.these decreases were primarily due
to a decline in the standalone desktop market segment as reported in the
december 2008 pc graphics report from mercury research, driven by a combination
of market migration from desktop pcs towards notebook pcs and an overall market
shift in the mix of products towards lower priced products. this overall market
decline translated into a decline of over 20% in the number of units of desktop
gpu products that we sold in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008. the
decline in desktop gpu revenue also reflects the impact of a slight average
sales price regression in our products and a decline in our share position
during the middle portion of fiscal year 2009 as a result of increased
competition. memory sales declinedas a result of a decline in sales of our
high-end desktop gpu products.sales of our notebook gpu products increased
approximately 3% in fiscal year 2009 when compared to fiscal year 2008, due to
higher unit sales aided by a market move toward notebook pcs over desktop pcs,
offset by a slight decline in average selling prices.additionally,
the overall global economic recessionary climate contributed to a significant
decline in the demand for total graphics during the fourth quarter of fiscal
year 2009.
psb.psb revenue
increased by 18% to $693.4 million for fiscal year 2009, compared to $588.4
million for fiscal year 2008. our nvidia professional workstation product sales
increased due to an overall unit increase of approximately 15% in shipments of
boards and chips as compared to fiscal year 2008, due to strong demand and our
transition from previous generations of nvidia quadro professional workstation
products to geforce 8-based and geforce 9-based products. sales of nvidia quadro
cx for adobes cs4 software, which we launched in the third quarter of fiscal
year 2009, also contributed towards the increase in sales in fiscal year
2009.
mcp
business.mcp business revenue
decreased by 8% to $655.6 millionfor fiscal year 2009, compared to $710.4
million for fiscal year 2008. this decrease was due to a decline of
approximately 32% in sales of our amd-based platform products resulting from
increased competition in amd-based products, offset by an increase of
approximately 120% in sales of our intel-based platform products. the increase
in intel-based product sales was driven by sales of our geforce 9400m mgpu,
which we launched in october 2008 along with apple inc., or apple, for their new
lineup of mac notebooks, and our new geforce 9400 and 9300 mgpus for intel
desktop pcs.
cpb.cpb revenue decreased
by 46% to $136.3 millionfor fiscal year 2009, compared to $251.1 million
for fiscal year 2008. the decline in cpb revenue is primarily driven by a
combination of a decrease in revenue from our cell phone products and a decrease
in revenue from sony computer entertainment, or sce. the decrease in revenue
from our cell phone products resulted from our shift from marketing and
developing legacy products to achieving design wins and marketing our newer
tegra products.the decrease in our revenue from sce resulted from a
decline in license revenue and a decline in royalty revenue that was caused by a
lower number of units shipped as well as by a step-down in the per unit royalty
rate during the year due to achievement of a unit-based milestone in our
agreement with sce.
fiscal year 2008 vs. fiscal
year 2007
revenue was
$4.10billion for fiscal year 2008, compared to $3.07 billion for fiscal
year 2007, which represents an increase of 34%.a discussion of our
revenue results for each of our operating segments is as follows:
gpu business.
gpu business revenue increased by 47% to $2.52 billion in fiscal year 2008,
compared to $1.71 billion in fiscal year 2007. this improvement was primarily
due to increased sales of our desktop gpu products and notebook gpu
products.sales of our desktop gpu products increased by
approximately 38% compared to fiscal year 2007, primarily due to growth of the
standalone desktop market as reported in the december 2007 pc graphics report
from mercury research.our leadership position in the standalone
desktop market was driven by our geforce 8-based products.sales of
our notebook gpu products increased by approximately 114% compared to fiscal
year 2007.notebook gpu revenue growth was primarily due to share
gains in the standalone notebook category as reported in the december 2007 pc
graphics report from mercury research.our share gains in the
standalone notebook category were primarily a result of shipments of products
used in notebook pc design wins related to intels santa rosa platform used in
notebooks.
psb. psb
revenue increased by 29% to $588.4 million in fiscal year 2008, compared to
$454.7 million in fiscal year 2007.our professional workstation
product sales increased due to an overall increase in shipments of boards and
chips.this increase in shipments was primarily driven by our
transition from previous generations of nvidia quadro professional workstation
products to geforce 8-based products.
mcp business.
mcp business revenue increased by 7% to$710.4 millionin fiscal year
2008, compared to $661.5 million in fiscal year 2007. the increase
resulted from an approximate225% increase in sales of our intel-based
platform products as compared to fiscal year 2007.we began ramping
up shipments of our intel-based platform products after the third quarter of
fiscal year 2007.this increase was offset by a decline in
sales of our amd-based platform products and sales of products related to our
acquisition of uli electronics, inc. in february 2006.
cpb. cpb
revenue increased by 8% to $251.1 million in fiscal year 2008, compared to
$233.2 million in fiscal year 2007. the overall increase in cpb revenue is
primarily due to increased royalties from sony computer entertainment, or sce,
but was offset by decreases in revenue from our cell phone products and our
contractual development arrangements with sce.
concentration of revenue
we generated
87%, 89% and 86% of our total revenue for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively, from sales to customers outside the united states and other
americas. revenue by geographic region is allocated to individual countries
based on the location to which the products are initially billed even if the
foreign contract equipment manufacturers, or cems, add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers revenue is attributable to end customers in a different
location.
revenue from
significant customers, those representing approximately 10% or more of total
revenue for the respective periods, is summarized as follows:
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
revenue:
customer
a
%
%
%
customer
b
%
%
%
gross profit
and gross margin
gross profit
consists of total revenue, net of allowances, less cost of revenue. cost of
revenue consists primarily of the cost of semiconductors purchased from
subcontractors, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging,
manufacturing support costs, including labor and overhead associated with such
purchases, final test yield fallout, inventory and warranty provisions, and
shipping costs.cost of revenue also includes development costs for license
and service arrangements.
gross margin is the percentage of gross profit to revenue. our gross margin was
34.3%, 45.6% and 42.4% for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007,
respectively.our gross margin is significantly impacted by the mix
of products we sell. product mix is often difficult to estimate with
accuracy.therefore, if we experience product transition or
competitive challenges, if we achieve significant revenue growth in our lower
margin product lines, or if we are unable to earn as much revenue as we expect
from higher margin product lines, our gross margin may be negatively
impacted.
we will continue to focus on improving our gross margin by delivering cost
effective product architectures, enhancing business processes and delivering
profitable growth.a discussion of our gross margin results for each
of our operating segments is as follows:
fiscal year 2009 vs. fiscal year 2008
our gross margin declined to 34.3% in fiscal year 2009 from 45.6% for fiscal
year 2008. the gross margin for fiscal year 2009 includes the impact of a $196.0
million charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty,
repair, return, replacement and associated costs arising from a weak
die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp
and gpu products used in notebook systemsoffset by allocated insurance
claim proceeds of $6.7 million from an insurance provider. this warranty charge
had an adverse impact of approximately 6.0% on our gross margin for fiscal year
2009. additionally, inventory reserves taken during fiscal year 2009 were
approximately $50.0 million higher compared to fiscal year 2008,reflecting
a significant decline in our forecasted future demand for the related products
and having a negative impact on our gross margin.
gpu
business. the gross margin of our gpu business decreased during fiscal
year 2009 as compared to fiscal year 2008.this decrease was due to a
charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair,
return, replacement and associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging
material set in certain versions of our previous generation gpu products used in
notebook systems, the negative impact of inventory reserves taken during the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009, and average sales price regression in our
geforce 9-based and previous generations of desktop products resulting from
increased competition. the average sales price regression was also driven by a
combination of market migration from desktop pcs towards notebook pcs and an
overall market shift in the mix of products towards lower priced
products.
psb. the
gross margin of our psb increased slightly during fiscal year 2009 as compared
to fiscal year 2008.this increase was primarily due to increased
sales of our geforce 9-based nvidia quadro products, which began selling in the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, and geforce 8-based nvidia quadro products,
which generally have higher gross margins than our previous generations of
nvidia quadro products.
mcp
business. the gross margin of our mcp business decreased during fiscal
year 2009 as compared to fiscal year 2008, due to decline in the margins of our
amd and intel-based products.during fiscal year 2009, gross margins
declined primarily due to a charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated
customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and associated costs arising from
a weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation
mcp products used in notebook systems.
cpb. the
gross margin of our cpb increased during fiscal year 2009 as compared to fiscal
year 2008.this increase was primarily due to changes in the product
mix in our cpb product lines.we experienced greater revenue decline
in our lower margin cell phone and other handheld devices product lines as
compared to higher margin sce transactions in the current year.
fiscal year 2008 vs. fiscal year
gpu business.
the gross margin of our gpu business increased during fiscal year 2008 as
compared to fiscal year 2007.this increase was primarily due to
increased sales of our geforce 8-series gpus, which began selling in the third
quarter of fiscal year 2007.our geforce 8-series gpus generally have
higher gross margins than our previous generations of gpus. additionally, the
more favorable costs of memory purchases during fiscal year 2008, positively
impacted our gross margin.
psb. the gross
margin of our psb increased during fiscal year 2008 as compared to fiscal year
2007.this increase was primarily due to increased sales of our
geforce 8-based nvidia quadro products, which began selling in the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2007 and generally have higher gross margins than our
previous generations of nvidia quadro products.
mcp business.
the gross margin of our mcp business increased during fiscal year 2008 as
compared to fiscal year 2007.this increase was primarily due to a
shift in product mix towards intel-based platform products, which began to ramp
up shipments after the third quarter of fiscal year 2007, and inventory reserves
that we recorded as a charge to cost of revenue during the first quarter of
fiscal year 2007 of approximately $4.1 million related to certain nvidia nforce
purchase commitments that we believed had exceeded future demand.
cpb. the gross
margin of our cpb decreased during fiscal year 2008 as compared to fiscal year
2007.this decrease was primarily due to a drop in gross profit
realized from sales of our high-end feature cellular phone and other handheld
devices.however, increased royalties from sce during fiscal year
2008, offset the decreases.
operating
expenses
year
ended
year
ended
january
25,
january
27,
$
change
%
change
january
27,
january28,
$
change
%
change
(in
millions)
(in
millions)
research
and development expenses
$
855.9
$
691.6
$
164.3
%
$
691.6
$
553.5
$
138.1
%
sales,
general and administrative expenses
362.2
341.3
20.9
%
341.3
293.5
47.8
%
restructuring
charges and other
26.9
-
26.9
%
-
-
-
-
total operating expenses
$
1,245.0
$
1,032.9
$
212.1
%
$
1,032.9
$
847.0
$
185.9
%
research
and development as a percentage of net revenue
%
%
%
%
sales,
general and administrative as a percentage of net
revenue
%
%
%
%
research and
development
fiscal year 2009 vs. fiscal
year 2008
research and development expenses were $855.9 million and $691.6 million during
fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively, an increase of $164.3 million, or 24%.
the increase was primarily due to increase in salaries and benefits by
approximately $64.9 million primarily as a result of the net addition of
approximately 500 personnel in departments related to research and development
functions, offset by lower expenses during fiscal year 2009 related to our
variable compensation programs when compared to fiscal year
2008.stock-based compensation expense increased by $21.4 million primarily
because of the impact of new hire and semi-annual stock awards granted
subsequent to the third quarter of fiscal year 2008, offset by a reduction in
expense related to older stock awards that were almost fully vested and for
which the related expense had been almost fully amortized by the end of the
first quarter of fiscal year 2009.development expenses increased by
$18.8 millionprimarily due to increase in expenses related to engineering
services, prototype materials and internal board requests.other
increases in research and development expenses are primarily related to costs
that were driven by personnel growth, including depreciation and amortization,
facilities, and computer software and equipment.
fiscal year 2008 vs. fiscal
year 2007
research and
development expenses were $691.6 million and $553.5 million during fiscal years
2008 and 2007, respectively, an increase of $138.1 million, or
25%.the increase is primarily related to an increase in salaries and
benefits by approximately $95.3 million as a result of personnel growth in
departments related to research and development functions by approximately 600
additional personnel in fiscal year 2008.additionally, salaries and
benefits expenses also increased due to the increase in our variable
compensation expense as a result of our financial performance for fiscal year
2008. facilities expenses and expenses related to computer software and
equipment also increased as a result of the personnel growth.
in order to
remain competitive, we anticipate that we will continue to devote substantial
resources to research and development. research and development expenses are
likely to fluctuate from time to time to the extent we make periodic incremental
investments in research and development and these investments may be independent
of our level of revenue.
sales, general and administrative
fiscal year 2009 vs. fiscal
year 2008
sales, general and administrative expenseswere $362.2 million and $341.3
million during fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively, an increase of $20.9
million, or 6%. outside professional fees increased by $17.5 million
primarily due to increased legal fees pertaining to ongoing
litigationmatters described in note 12 of the notes to the consolidated
financial statements in partiv, item15 of this form10-k.
marketing and advertising expenses increased by $22.3 million, primarily due to
increased advertising campaign related activities and trade shows in the current
year. depreciation and amortization expense increased by $15.4 million primarily
due to amortization of intangible assets acquired from our acquisitions of
mental images and ageia, and from increased capital expenditures. stock-based
compensation expense increased by $6.9 million primarily due to the impact of
new hire and semi-annual stock awards granted subsequent to the third quarter of
fiscal year 2008, offset by a reduction in expense related to older stock awards
that were almost fully vested and for which the related expense had been almost
fully amortized by the end of the first quarter of fiscal year
2009.headcount related to personnel in departments related to sales,
general and administrative functions remained relatively flat year-over-year,
but labor and related expenses decreased by $13.9 million due to lower expenses
during fiscal year 2009 related to our variable compensation programs when
compared to fiscal year 2008.
fiscal year 2008 vs. fiscal year
sales, general and administrative expenseswere $341.3 million and $293.5
million during fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively, an increase of $47.8
million, or 16%.the increase is primarily due to an increase in
salaries and benefits by approximately $31.4 million related to the growth in
personnel by approximately 180 additional personnel. additionally, salaries and
benefits expenses also increased due to the increase in our variable
compensation expense as a result of our financial performance for fiscal year
2008. advertising and promotion expenses increased by $4.2 million primarily due
to costs incurred for sponsorships and increased advertising campaign
costs.the increase in personnel during the year and the expansion of
our facilities worldwide to support additional personnelresulted in
increases in our facilities expenses, stock-based compensation expense and
depreciation and amortization expenses.
in response to the current economic environment, we have commenced several cost
reduction measures which are designed to reduce our operating expenses and will
continue to focus on reducing our operating expenses during fiscal year 2010.
please refer to the discussion in note 19 to the notes to the consolidated
financial statements in partiv, item15 of this form10-k for
the potential impact of the tender offer on operating expenses during the first
quarter of fiscal year 2010.
in-process research and development
in connection with our acquisition of mental images in november 2007 and
portalplayer in january 2007, we wrote-off $4.0 million and $13.4 million during
fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively, of in-process research and
development, or ipr&d, that had not yet reached technological feasibility
and had no alternative future use. in accordance with sfas no.2, accounting for research and
development costs, as clarified by fin 4, applicability of sfas no.2 to
business combinations accounted for by the purchase method an interpretation of
sfas no.2,amounts assigned to ipr&d meeting the
above-stated criteria must be charged to expense as part of the allocation of
the purchase price.
restructuring charges
and other
on september18, 2008, we announced a workforce reduction to allow for
continued investment in strategic growth areas, which was completed in the third
quarter of fiscal year 2009. as a result, we eliminated approximately 360
positions worldwide, or about 6.5% of our global workforce.during
fiscal year 2009, expenses associated with the workforce reduction, which were
comprised primarily of severance and benefits payments to these employees,
totaled $8.0 million. we anticipate that the expected decrease in operating
expenses from this action will be offset by continued investment in strategic
growth areas.
restructuring and other expenses also included a non-recurring charge of $18.9
million associated with the termination of a development contract related to a
new campus construction project that has been put on hold.
interest
income and interest expense
interest
income consists of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities. interest income decreased to $42.9 million in fiscal year 2009, from
$64.3 million in fiscal year 2008, primarily due to the result of lower average
balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and lower interest
rates in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008. interest income
increased to $64.3 million in fiscal year 2008 from $41.8 million in fiscal year
2007 primarily due to the result of higher average balances of cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities and higher interest rates in fiscal year
2008 compared to fiscal year 2007.
other
income (expense), net
other income and
expense primarily consists of realized gains and losses on the sale of
marketable securities and foreign currency translation.other income
(expense) was $(14.7) million and $0.8 million in fiscal years 2009 and 2008,
respectively, a decrease of $15.5 million.this decrease was
primarily due to other than temporary impairment charges of $9.9 million that we
recorded during fiscal year 2009.these charges include $5.6 million
related to what we believe is an other than temporary impairment of our
investment in the money market funds held by the reserve international liquidity
fund, ltd., or international reserve fund; $2.5 million related to a decline in
the value of publicly traded equity securities and $1.8 million related to debt
securities held by us that were issued by companies that have filed for
bankruptcy as of january 25, 2009.please refer to note 17 of the
notes to the consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of
this form10-k for further discussion. other income (expense) was $0.8
million and $(0.8) million for fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively, an
increase of $1.5 million.the increase in other income during fiscal year
2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 is primarily due to approximately $2.0 million
of realized gains on sale of an investment offset by an increase in foreign
currency transaction losses in fiscal year 2008.
income taxes
we recognized income tax expense (benefit) of $(12.9) million, $103.7 million
and $46.4 million during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. income
tax expense (benefit) as a percentage of income (loss) before taxes, or our
annual effective tax rate, was (30.0) % in fiscal year 2009, 11.5% in fiscal
year 2008 and 9.4% in fiscal year 2007.
the difference in the effective tax rates amongst the three years was primarily
a result of changes in our geographic mix of income subject to tax, with the
additional impact of the federal research tax credit recognized in fiscal year
2009 relative to the loss before taxes in such fiscal year.
please refer to note 13 of the notes to consolidated financial statements for
further information regarding the components of our income tax
expense.
liquidity
and capital resources
january
25, 2009
january
27, 2008
(in
millions)
cash
and cash equivalents
$
417.7
$
727.0
marketable
securities
837.7
1,082.5
cash,
cash equivalents, and marketable securities
$
1,255.4
$
1,809.5
year
ended
january
25,
january
27,
january
28,
(in
millions)
net
cash provided by operating activities
$
249.4
$
1,270.2
$
572.7
net
cash used in investing activities
(209.4
)
(761.3
)
(526.4
)
net
cash used in financing activities
(349.3
)
(326.3
)
(53.6
)
as of january
25, 2009, we had $1.26 billion in cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities, a decrease of $554.1 million from the end of fiscal year 2008. our
portfolio of cash equivalents and marketable securities is managed by several
financial institutions. our investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier
investment grade securities, the diversification of asset types and includes
certain limits on our portfolio duration.
operating activities
operating
activities generated cash of $249.4 million, $1.27 billion and $572.7 million
during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the cash provided by
operating activities decreased in fiscal year 2009 due to a decrease in our net
income compared to fiscal year 2008 plus the impact of non-cash charges to
earnings and deferred income taxes.during fiscal year 2009, non-cash
charges to earnings included stock-based compensation of $162.7 million and
depreciation and amortization on our long-term assets of $185.0
million.additionally, operating cash flows for fiscal year 2009 also
declined due to changes in operating assets and liabilities, including the
timing of payments to vendors and a decrease in inventory
turnover.additionally, we incurred $21.8 million in net cash
outflows in fiscal year 2009 towards a confidential patent licensing agreement
that we entered into in fiscal year 2007.
the increase in cash flows from operating activities in fiscal year 2008 when
compared to fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to an increase in our net income
during the comparable periods plus the impact of non-cash charges to
earnings.during fiscal year 2008, non-cash charges to earnings
included stock-based compensation of $133.4 million and depreciation and
amortization on our long-term assets of $133.2 million.additionally,
operating cash flows for fiscal year 2008 also improved due to changes in
operating assets and liabilities, including the timing of payments to vendors
and an improvement in inventory turnover.these increases were offset
by approximately $57.3 million in net cash outflows towards a confidential
patent licensing agreement that we entered into in fiscal year
2007.
the increase in cash flows from operating activities in fiscal year 2007 when
compared to fiscal year 2006 was primarily due to an increase in our net income
during the comparable periods plus the impact of non-cash charges to
earnings.additionally, the increase is related to the $116.7 million
of stock-based compensation expense recorded upon adoption of sfas no. 123(r) in
fiscal year 2007 and changes in operating assets and liabilities in fiscal years
2007 and 2006.
investing activities
investing activities
have consisted primarily of purchases and sales of marketable securities,
acquisition of businesses and purchases of property and equipment, which include
leasehold improvements for our facilities and intangible assets. investing
activities used cash of $209.4 million, $761.3 million and $526.4 million during
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.investing activities
for fiscal year 2009 provided cash of $226.7 million from the net proceeds from
sales of marketable securities and used $27.9 million in connection with our
acquisition of ageia.investing activities also included $407.7
million cash used for capital expenditures, as we built additional facilities to
accommodate our growing employee headcount, new research and development
equipment, testing equipment to support our increased production requirements,
technology licenses, software, intangible assets and leasehold improvements at
our facilities in various international locations. investing activities for
capital expenditures in fiscal year 2009 included payment of approximately
$183.8 million for purchase of a property in santa clara, california, that
includes approximately 25 acres of land and ten commercial buildings. our
original plans for the purchased property included constructing a new campus on
the site. we are currently re-evaluating those plans.
investing activities for fiscal year 2008 used cash of $496.4 million towards
the net purchases of marketable securities, resulting from the need to invest
the additional amounts of cash we received from operating activities, and $75.5
million for our acquisition of mental images.investing activities
for fiscal 2008 also included $187.7 million of capital expenditures. capital
expenditures included purchase of property in anticipation of building
additional facilities to accommodate our growing employee headcount, new
research and development equipment, testing equipment to support our increased
production requirements, technology licenses, software, intangible assets and
leasehold improvements at our facilities in various international
locations.
in fiscal year 2007, net cash used in investing activities included $401.8
million used for our acquisitions of portalplayer, uli and hybrid
graphics.additionally, net cash used in investing activities
included capital expenditures of $130.8 million attributable to new research and
development equipment, hardware equipment, technology licenses, software,
intangible assets and leasehold improvements at our various
facilities.
financing activities
financing activities used cash of $349.3 million, $326.3 million and $53.6
million during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.net
cash used by financing activities in fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to
$423.6 million used in our stock repurchase program, offset by cash proceeds of
$73.5 million from common stock issued under our employee stock
plans.
net cash used by financing activities in fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to
$552.5 million used in our stock repurchase program, offset by cash proceeds of
$226.0 million from common stock issued under our employee stock
plans.
during fiscal year 2007, net cash used by financing activities towards payments
under our stock repurchase program was $275.0 million. these uses of cash in
financing activities were offset by cash proceeds from common stock issued under
our employee stock plans of $221.2 million for fiscal year
2007.
liquidity
our primary source of liquidity is cash generated by our operations. our
investment portfolio consisted of cash and cash equivalents, asset-backed
securities, commercial paper, mortgage-backed securities issued by
government-sponsored enterprises, equity securities, money market funds and debt
securities of corporations, municipalities and the united statesgovernment
and its agencies. these investments are denominated in united states dollars. as
of january 25, 2009, we did not have any investments in auction-rate preferred
securities.
we account for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of
financial accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no. 115, accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities. all of the cash equivalents and marketable
securities are treated as available-for-sale under sfas no. 115. investments
in both fixed rate and floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree
of interest rate risk. fixed rate debt securities may have their market value
adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates, while floating rate
securities may produce less income than expected if interest rates fall. due in
part to these factors, our future investment income may fall short of
expectations due to changes in interest rates or if the decline in fair value of
our publicly traded debt or equity investments is judged to be
other-than-temporary. we may suffer losses in principal if we are forced to sell
securities that decline in market value due to changes in interest rates.
however, because any debt securities we hold are classified as
available-for-sale, no gains or losses are realized in our statement of
operations due to changes in interest rates unless such securities are sold
prior to maturity or unless declines in market values are determined to be
other-than-temporary.these securities are reported at fair value
with the related unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other
comprehensive income, a component of stockholders equity, net of
tax.
as of january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008, we had $1.26 billion and $1.81
billion, respectively, in cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities.our investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier
investment grade securities, the diversification of asset types and includes
certain limits on our portfolio duration, as specified in our investment policy
guidelines. these guidelines also limit the amount of credit exposure to any one
issue, issuer or type of instrument.as of january 25, 2009, we were in
compliance with our investment policy.as of january 25, 2009, our
investments in government agencies and government sponsored enterprises
represented approximately 71% of our total investment portfolio, while the
financial sector, which has been negatively impacted by recent market liquidity
conditions, accounted for approximately 17% of our total investment portfolio.
substantially all of our investments are with a/a2 or better rated securities
with the substantial majority of the securities rated aa-/aa3 or
better.
we performed an impairment review of our investment portfolio as of january 25,
2009.currently, we have the intent and ability to hold our investments
with impairment indicators until maturity. based on our quarterly impairment
review and having considered the guidance in statement of financial accounting
standards staff position no. 115-1, or fsp no. 115-1, a guide to the implementation of
statement 115 on accounting for certain investments in debt and equity
securities, werecorded other than temporary impairment charges of
$9.9 million during fiscal year 2009. these charges include $5.6 million related
to what we believe is an other than temporary impairment of our investment in
the money market funds held by the reserve international liquidity fund, ltd.,
or international reserve fund; $2.5 million related to a decline in the value of
publicly traded equity securities and $1.8 million related to debt securities
held by us that were issued by companies that have filed for bankruptcy as of
january 25, 2009.please refer to note 17 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further details. we concluded that our investments were
appropriately valued and that except for the $9.9 million impairment charges
recognized in the year, no other than temporary impairment charges
werenecessary on our portfolio of available for sale investments as of
january 25, 2009.
net
realized gains (losses), excluding any impairment charges, for fiscal year 2009
was $2.1 million. net realized gains (losses) for fiscal years 2008 and 2007
were not material. as of january 25, 2009, we had a net unrealized gain of $4.4
million, which was comprised of gross unrealized gains of $7.8
million,offset by $3.4 million of gross unrealized losses. as of
january 27, 2008, we had a net unrealized gain of $10.7 million, which was
comprised of gross unrealized gains of $11.1 million,offset by $0.4
million of gross unrealized losses.
as of january 25, 2009, our money market investment in the international reserve
fund, which was valued at $124.4 million, net of other than temporary impairment
charges, was classified as marketable securities in our consolidated balance
sheet due to the halting of redemption requests in september 2008 by the
international reserve fund. subsequent to year-end, on january 30, 2009, we
received $84.4 million from the international reserve fund. this was our portion
of a payout of approximately 65% of the total assets of the fund. each
shareholders percentage of this distribution was determined by dividing the
shareholders total unfunded redeemed shares by the aggregate unfunded redeemed
shares of the fund, which was then used to calculate the shareholders pro rata
portion of this distribution. we expect to receive the proceeds of our remaining
investment in the international reserve fund, excluding the $5.6 million that we
have recorded as an other than temporary impairment, by no later than october
2009, when all of the underlying securities held by the international reserve
fund are scheduled to have matured. however, redemptions from the international
reserve fund are currently subject to pending litigation, which could cause
further delay in receipt of our funds.
our
accounts receivable are highly concentrated and make us vulnerable to adverse
changes in our customers' businesses, and to downturns in the industry and the
worldwide economy.one customer accounted for approximately 18% of
our accounts receivable balance at january 25, 2009. while we strive to limit
our exposure to uncollectible accounts receivable using a combination of credit
insurance and letters of credit, difficulties in collecting accounts receivable
could materially and adversely affect our financial condition and results of
operations. these difficulties are heightened during periods when economic
conditions worsen. we continue to work directly with more foreign customers and
it may be difficult to collect accounts receivable from them. we maintain an
allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the
inability of our customers to make required payments. this allowance consists of
an amount identified for specific customers and an amount based on overall
estimated exposure. if the financial condition of our customers were to
deteriorate, resulting in an impairment in their ability to make payments,
additional allowances may be required, we may be required to defer revenue
recognition on sales to affected customers, and we may be required to pay higher
credit insurance premiums, any of which could adversely affect our operating
results. in the future, we may have to record additional reserves or write-offs
and/or defer revenue on certain sales transactions which could negatively impact
our financial results.
cash
tender offer
on february 11, 2009, we announcedthat our board of directors approved a
cash tender offer for certain employee stock options. the tender offer
commencedon february 11, 2009 and expired at 12:00 midnight (pacific time)
on march 11, 2009. the tender offer applied to outstanding stock options held by
employees with an exercise price equal to or greater than $17.50 per share. none
of the non-employee members of our board of directors or our officers who file
reports under section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934,
including our former chief financial officer, marvin d. burkett, were eligible
to participate in the offer.all eligible options with exercise prices less
than $28.00 per share, but not less than $17.50 per share were eligible to
receive a cash payment of $3.00 per option in exchange for the cancellation of
the eligible option. all eligible options with exercise prices greater than
$28.00 per share were eligible to receive a cash payment of $2.00 per option in
exchange for the cancellation of the eligible option. please refer to note 19
for further discussion regarding the cash tender offer for certain employee
stock options that our board of directors approved in february
2009.
stock
repurchase program
during fiscal year
2005, we announced that our board of directors, or board, had authorized a stock
repurchase program to repurchase shares of our common stock, subject to certain
specifications, up to an aggregate maximum amount of $300
million.during fiscal year 2007, the board further approved an
increase of $400 million to the original stock repurchase program. in fiscal
year 2008, we announced a stock repurchase programunder which we may
purchase up to an additional $1.0 billion of our common stock over a three year
period through may 2010. on august 12, 2008, we announced that our board further
authorized an additional increase of $1.0 billion to the stock repurchase
program. as a result of these increases, we have an ongoing authorization from
the board, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common
stock up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7 billion through may
2010.
the repurchases will
be made from time to time in the open market, in privately negotiated
transactions, or in structured stock repurchase programs, and may be made in one
or more larger repurchases, in compliance with the securities exchange act of
1934, or the exchange act, rule 10b-18, subject to market conditions, applicable
legal requirements, and other factors. the program does not obligate nvidia to
acquire any particular amount of common stock and the program may be suspended
at any time at our discretion.as part of our share repurchase program, we
have entered into, and we may continue to enter into, structured share
repurchase transactions with financial institutions. these agreements generally
require that we make an up-front payment in exchange for the right to receive a
fixed number of shares of our common stock upon execution of the agreement, and
a potential incremental number of shares of our common stock, within a
pre-determined range, at the end of the term of the agreement.
during the three months ended january 25, 2009, we did not enter into any
structured share repurchase transactions or otherwise purchase any shares of our
common stock. during fiscal year 2009, we entered into structured share
repurchase transactions to repurchase 29.3 million shares for $423.6 million,
which we recorded on the trade date of the transactions.through
fiscal year 2009, we have repurchased an aggregate of 90.9 million shares under
our stock repurchase program for a total cost of
$1.46billion.as of january 25, 2009, we are authorized,
subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common stock up
to an additional amount of $1.24 billion through may 2010.
operating capital and capital expenditure requirements.
we
believe that our existing cash balances and anticipated cash flows from
operations will be sufficient to meet our operating, acquisition and capital
requirements for at least the next twelve months. however, there is no assurance
that we will not need to raise additional equity or debt financing within this
time frame. additional financing may not be available on favorable terms or at
all and may be dilutive to our then-current stockholders. we also may require
additional capital for other purposes not presently contemplated. if we are
unable to obtain sufficient capital, we could be required to curtail capital
equipment purchases or research and development expenditures, which could harm
our business. factors that could affect our cash used or generated from
operations and, as a result, our need to seek additional borrowings or capital
include:
decreased
demand and market acceptance for our products and/or our customers
products;
inability
to successfully develop and produce in volume production our
next-generation products;
competitive
pressures resulting in lower than expected average selling prices;
and
new
product announcements or product introductions by our
competitors.
we expect to
spend approximately $200 million to $250 million for capital expenditures during
fiscal year 2010, primarily for property development, leasehold improvements,
software licenses, emulation equipment, computers and engineering
workstations.in addition, we may continue to use cash in connection
with the acquisition of new businesses or assets.
for
additional factors see item 1a. risk factors - risks related to our business
and industry - our revenue may
fluctuate while our operating expenses are relatively fixed, which makes our
results difficult to predict and could cause our results to fall short of
expectations.
3dfx asset purchase
on december 15,
2000, nvidia corporation and one of our indirect subsidiaries entered into an
asset purchase agreement, or apa, which closed on april 18, 2001, to purchase
certain graphics chip assets from 3dfx. under the terms of the apa, the cash
consideration due at the closing was $70.0 million, less $15.0 million that was
loaned to 3dfx pursuant to a credit agreement dated december15, 2000. the
asset purchase agreement also provided, subject to the other provisions thereof,
that if 3dfx properly certified that all its debts and other liabilities had
been provided for, then we would have been obligated to pay 3dfx one million
shares, which due to subsequent stock splits now totals six million shares, of
nvidia common stock. if 3dfx could not make such a certification, but instead
properly certified that its debts and liabilities could be satisfied for less
than $25.0 million, then 3dfx could have elected to receive a cash payment equal
to the amount of such debts and liabilities and a reduced number of shares of
our common stock, with such reduction calculated by dividing the cash payment by
$25.00 per share. if 3dfx could not certify that all of its debts and
liabilities had been provided for, or could not be satisfied, for less than
$25.0 million, we would not be obligated under the agreement to pay any
additional consideration for the assets.
in october 2002, 3dfx filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the united
states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california. in march 2003,
we were served with a complaint filed by the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy
court which sought, among other things, payments from us as additional purchase
price related to our purchase of certain assets of 3dfx. in early november
2005, after several months of mediation, nvidia and the official committee of
unsecured creditors, or the creditors committee, agreed to a plan of
liquidation of 3dfx, which included a conditional settlement of the trustees
claims against us. this conditional settlement was subject to a confirmation
process through a vote of creditors and the review and approval of the
bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement called for a payment by nvidia of
approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx estate. under the settlement, $5.6
million related to various administrative expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0
million related to the satisfaction of debts and liabilities owed to the general
unsecured creditors of 3dfx. accordingly, during the three month period ended
october 30, 2005, we recorded $5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and
$25.0 million as additional purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee
advised that he intended to object to the settlement. the conditional settlement
never progressed substantially through the confirmation process.
on december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court scheduled a trial for one portion of
the trustees case against nvidia. on january 2, 2007, nvidia terminated the
settlement agreement on grounds that the bankruptcy court had failed to proceed
toward confirmation of the creditors committees plan. a non-jury trial began
on march 21, 2007 on valuation issues in the trustee's constructive fraudulent
transfer claims against nvidia. specifically, the bankruptcy court tried four
questions: (1) what did 3dfx transfer to nvidia in the apa?; (2) of what was
transferred, what qualifies as "property" subject to the bankruptcy court's
avoidance powers under the uniform fraudulent transfer act and relevant
bankruptcy code provisions?; (3) what is the fair market value of the "property"
identified in answer to question (2)?; and (4) was the $70 million that nvidia
paid "reasonably equivalent" to the fair market value of that property? the
parties completed post-trial briefing on may 25, 2007.
on april 30, 2008, the bankruptcy court issued its memorandum decision after
trial, in which it provided a detailed summary of the trial proceedings and the
parties' contentions and evidence and concluded that "the creditors of 3dfx were
not injured by the transaction."this decision did not entirely
dispose of the trustee's action, however, as the trustee's claims for successor
liability and intentional fraudulent conveyance were still
pending.on june 19, 2008, nvidia filed a motion for summary judgment
to convert the memorandum decision after trial to a final
judgment.that motion was granted in its entirety and judgment was
entered in nvidias favor on september 11, 2008. the trustee filed a notice of
appeal from that judgment on september 22, 2008, and on september 25, 2008,
nvidia exercised its election to have the appeal heard by the united states
district court, where the appeal is pending.
while the conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed
through the confirmation process, the trustees case still remains pending
appeal.as such, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6 million -
$5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx  that we recorded during the three months ended october
30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees case. we do not
believe the resolution of this matter will have a material impact on our results
of operations or financial position.
please refer to note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k for further information
regarding this litigation.
product defect
our products are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to
any number of issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use
within a system. if any of our products or technologies contains a defect,
compatibility issue or other error, we may have to invest additional research
and development efforts to find and correct the issue.such efforts
could divert our managements and engineers attention from the development of
new products and technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce
our gross margin. in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or
related software drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result
in failure to achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be
required to reimburse customers, including for customers costs to repair or
replace the products in the field. a product recall or a significant number of
product returns could be expensive, damage our reputation and could result in
the shifting of business to our competitors. costs associated with correcting
defects, errors, bugs or other issues could be significant and could materially
harm our financial results.
in july 2008, we recorded a $196.0 million charge against cost of revenue to
cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and other
associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in certain
versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in notebook
systems. all of our newly manufactured products and all of our products that are
currently shipping in volume have a different material set that we believe is
more robust.
the previous generation mcp and gpu products that are impacted were included in
a number of notebook products that were shipped and sold in significant
quantities. certain notebook configurations of these mcp and gpu products are
failing in the field at higher than normal rates. while we have not been able to
determine a root cause for these failures, testing suggests a weak material set
of die/package combination, system thermal management designs, and customer use
patterns are contributing factors. we have worked with our customers to develop
and have made available for download a software driver to cause the system fan
to begin operation at the powering up of the system and reduce the thermal
stress on these chips. we have also recommended to our customers that they
consider changing the thermal management of the mcp and gpu products in their
notebook system designs. we intend to fully support our customers in their
repair and replacement of these impacted mcp and gpu products that fail, and
their other efforts to mitigate the consequences of these failures.
we continue to engage in discussions with our supply chain regarding
reimbursement to us for some or all of the costs we have incurred and may incur
in the future relating to the weak material set. we also continue to seek to
access our insurance coverage, which provided us with $8.0 million in related
reimbursement during fiscal year 2009. however, there can be no assurance that
we will recover any additional reimbursement. we continue to not see any
abnormal failure rates in any systems using nvidia products other than certain
notebook configurations. however, we are continuing to test and otherwise
investigate other products. there can be no assurance that we will not discover
defects in other mcp or gpu products.
determining the amount of the $196.0 million charge related to this issue
required management to make estimates and judgments based on historical
experience, test data and various other assumptions including estimated field
failure rates that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. the
results of these judgments formed the basis for our estimate of the total charge
to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return and replacement and other
associated costs. however, if actual repair, return, replacement and other
associated costs and/or actual field failure rates exceed our estimates, we may
be required to record additional reserves, which would increase our cost of
revenue and materially harm our financial results.
in september, october and november2008, several putative class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted
mcp and gpu products.please refer to note 12 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further information regarding this
litigation.
contractual obligations
the following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of january 25,
2009:
contractual
obligations
total
within
1 year
2-3
years
4-5
years
after
5 years
all
other
(in
thousands)
operating
leases
$
153,625
$
44,448
$
83,959
$
21,150
$
4,068
$
-
capital
lease
47,976
4,185
8,751
9,283
25,757
-
purchase
obligations (1)
290,662
290,662
-
-
-
-
fin
48 liability and interest (2)
107,116
-
-
-
-
107,116
capital
purchase obligations
20,328
20,328
-
-
-
-
total
contractual obligations
$
619,707
$
359,623
$
92,710
$
30,433
$
29,825
$
107,116
(1) represents our
inventory purchase commitments as of january 25, 2009.
(2) represents our fin 48
liability and fin 48 net interest/penalty payable for $95.3 million and $11.8
million, respectively, as of january 25, 2009.we are unable to
reasonably estimate the timing of fin 48 liability and interest/penalty payments
in individual years due to uncertainties in the timing of the effective
settlement of tax positions.
off-balance sheet arrangements
as of january 25, 2009, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as
defined in regulation s-k 303(a)(4)(ii).
adoption
of new accounting pronouncements
please see note 1of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k fora discussion of
adoption of new accounting pronouncements.
recently
issued accounting pronouncements
please see note 1of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k fora discussion of
recently issued accounting pronouncements.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk
investment
and interest rate risk
as of january
25, 2009 and january 27, 2008, we had $1.26 billion and $1.81 billion,
respectively, in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.we
invest in a variety of financial instruments, consisting principally of cash and
cash equivalents, asset-backed securities, commercial paper, mortgage-backed
securities issued by government-sponsored enterprises, equity securities, money
market funds and debt securities of corporations, municipalities and the united
statesgovernment and its agencies. as of january 25, 2009, we did not have
any investments in auction-rate preferred securities. our investments are
denominated in united states dollars.
we account
for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of financial
accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no. 115, accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities. all of the cash equivalents and marketable
securities are treated as available-for-sale under sfas no. 115. investments
in both fixed rate and floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree
of interest rate risk. fixed rate securities may have their market value
adversely impacted due to a rise in interest rates, while floating rate
securities may produce less income than expected if interest rates fall. due in
part to these factors, our future investment income may fall short of
expectations due to changes in interest rates or if the decline in fair value of
our publicly traded debt or equity investments is judged to be
other-than-temporary. we may suffer losses in principal if we are forced to sell
securities that decline in securities market value due to changes in interest
rates. however, because any debt securities we hold are classified as
available-for-sale, no gains or losses are realized in our consolidated
statements of operationsdue to changes in interest rates unless such
securities are sold prior to maturity or unless declines in value are determined
to be other-than-temporary.these securities are reported at fair value
with the related unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss), a component of stockholders equity, net of
tax.
as of january
25, 2009, we performed a sensitivity analysis on our floating and fixed rate
financial investments. according to our analysis, parallel shifts in the yield
curve of both plus or minus 0.5% would result in changes in fair market values
for these investments of approximately $4.4 million.
the current
financial turmoil affecting the banking system and financial markets and the
possibility that financial institutions may consolidate or go out of business
have resulted in a tightening in the credit markets, a low level of liquidity in
many financial markets, and extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency
and equity markets. there could be a number of follow-on effects from the credit
crisis on our business, including insolvency of key suppliers resulting in
product delays; inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain
credit to finance purchases of our products and/or customer, including channel
partner, insolvencies; and failure of financial institutions, which may
negatively impact our treasury operations. other income and expense could also
vary materially from expectations depending on gains or losses realized on the
sale or exchange of financial instruments; impairment charges related to debt
securities as well as equity and other investments; interest rates; and cash,
cash equivalent and marketable securities balances. the current volatility in
the financial markets and overall economic uncertainty increases the risk that
the actual amounts realized in the future on our financial instruments could
differ significantly from the fair values currently assigned to them. for
instance, werecorded other than temporary impairment charges of $9.9
million during fiscal year 2009. these charges include $5.6 million related to
what we believe is an other than temporary impairment of our investment in the
money market funds held by the reserve international liquidity fund, ltd., or
international reserve fund; $2.5 million related to a decline in the value of
publicly traded equity securities and $1.8 million related to debt securities
held by us that were issued by companies that have filed for bankruptcy as of
january 25, 2009.please refer to note 17 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further details. as of january 25, 2009, our investments in
government agencies and government sponsored enterprises represented
approximately 71% of our total investment portfolio, while the financial sector
accounted for approximately 17% of our total investment portfolio. substantially
all of our investments are with a/a2 or better rated securities with the
substantial majority of the securities rated aa-/aa3 or better.if
the fair value of our investments in these sectors was to decline by 2%-5%, it
would result in changes in fair market values for these investments by
approximately $25-$63 million.
exchange
rate risk
we consider
our direct exposure to foreign exchange rate fluctuations to be
minimal.gains or losses from foreign currency remeasurement are
included in other income (expense), net in our consolidated financial
statements and to date have not been significant.the impact of
foreign currency transaction loss included in determining net income (loss) for
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $2.0 million, $1.7 million and $0.5
million, respectively.currently, sales and arrangements with
third-party manufacturers provide for pricing and payment in united states
dollars, and, therefore, are not subject to exchange rate fluctuations.
increases in the value of the united states dollar relative to other currencies
would make our products more expensive, which could negatively impact our
ability to compete. conversely, decreases in the value of the united states
dollar relative to other currencies could result in our suppliers raising their
prices in order to continue doing business with us. fluctuations in currency
exchange rates could harm our business in the future.
we may enter into certain transactions such as forward contracts which are
designed to reduce the future potential impact resulting from changes in foreign
currency exchange rates. there were no forward exchange contracts outstanding at
january 25, 2009.
item8. financial statements and supplementary
data
the
information required by this item is set forth in our consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto included in this annual report on form
10-k.
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a. controls and procedures
controls
and procedures
disclosure
controls and procedures
based on their evaluation as of january25, 2009, our management, including
our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, has concluded that our
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rule 13a-15(e) under the
exchange act of 1934) were effective.
managements
annual report on internal control over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal
control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in exchange act
rule13a-15(f). under the supervision and with the participation of our
management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer,
we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over
financial reporting as of january25, 2009 based on the criteria set forth
in internal control -
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations
of the treadway commission. based on our evaluation under the criteria set forth
in internal control
integrated framework, our management concluded that our internal control
over financial reporting was effective as of january25, 2009.
the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of
january25, 2009 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in its report which is
included herein.
changes
in internal control over financial reporting
there were no changes in our internal controls over financial reporting during
our last fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely
to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting.
inherent
limitations on effectiveness of controls
our management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial
officer, does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our
internal controls, will prevent all error and all fraud. a control system, no
matter how well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not
absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. further,
the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource
constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their
costs. because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation
of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances
of fraud, if any, within nvidia have been detected.
item9b.other information
none.
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
identification
of directors
reference is made to
the information regarding directors appearing under the heading proposal 1 -
election of directors in our 2009 proxy statement, which information is hereby
incorporated by reference.
identification
of executive officers
reference is made to the information regarding executive officers appearing
under the heading executive officers of the registrant in part i of this
annual report on form 10-k, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
identification of audit committee and
financial expert
reference is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the
heading report of the audit committee of the board of directors and
information about the board of directors and corporate governance in our 2009
proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
material changes to procedures for
recommending directors
reference is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the
heading information about the board of directors and corporate governance in
our 2009 proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
compliance with section16(a) of
the exchange act
reference is made to
the information appearing under the heading section 16(a) beneficial ownership
reporting compliance in our 2009 proxy statement, which information is hereby
incorporated by reference.
code of conduct
reference is made to the information appearing under the heading information
about the board of directors and corporate governance - code of conduct in our
2009 proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by reference. the
full text of our worldwide code of conduct and financial team code of
conduct are published on the investor relations portion of our web site, under
corporate governance, at www.nvidia.com. the
contents of our website are not a part of this annual report on form
10-k.
item 11. executive compensation
the information
required by this item is hereby incorporate by reference from the sections
entitled executive compensation,compensation committee interlocks and
insider participation, director compensationand compensation
committee report in our 2009 proxy statement.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters
ownership
of nvidia securities
the information required by this
item is hereby incorporated by reference from the section entitled security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management in our 2009 proxy
statement.
equity
compensation plan information
information regarding our equity
compensation plans, including both stockholder approved plans and
non-stockholder approved plans, will be contained in our 2009 proxy statement
under the caption "equity compensation plan information," and is incorporated by
reference into this annual report on form 10-k.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and
director independence
the information
required by this item is hereby incorporated by reference from the sections
entitled transactions with related persons, review of transactions with
related persons and information about the board of directors and corporate
governance -independence of the members of the board of directors in our
2009 proxy statement.
item 14. principal accounting fees and services
the information
required by this item is hereby incorporated by reference from the section
entitled fees billed by the independent registered public accounting firm in
our 2009 proxy statement.
part iv
item15.exhibits,
financial statement schedule
page
(a)
1.
consolidated
financial statements
report of independent
registered public accounting firm, pricewaterhousecoopers
llp
consolidated
statements of operations for the years ended january 25, 2009, january 27, 2008 and january 28,
consolidated balance
sheets as of january 25, 2009 and january 27,
consolidated statements
of stockholders equity and comprehensive income (loss) for the years
endedjanuary 25, 2009, january 27, 2008 and january 28,
consolidated statements of
cash flows for the years ended january 25, 2009, january 27, 2008 and
january 28, 2007
notes to the consolidated
financial statements
(a)
2.
financial
statement schedule
schedule ii valuation and
qualifying accounts
(a)
3.
exhibits
the exhibits listed in the
accompanying index to exhibits are filed or incorporated by reference as a
part of this annual report on form 10-k.
report of independent registered public accounting
firm
to
thestockholders
and board of directors of nvidia corporation:
in our
opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the index appearing
under item 15(a)(1) present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of nvidia corporation and its subsidiaries at january 25, 2009 and
january 27, 2008, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended january 25, 2009 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america.in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement
schedule listed in the index appearing under item 15(a)(2) presents fairly, in
all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in
conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.also
in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of january 25, 2009, based on
criteria established in internal control - integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission (coso).the company's management is responsible
for these financial statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining
effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in
management's annual report on internal control over financial reporting
appearing under item 9a.our responsibility is to express opinions on
these financial statements, on the financial statement schedule, and on the
company's internal control over financial reporting based on our integrated
audits.we conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of
the public company accounting oversight board (united states).those
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects.our audits of the financial
statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts
and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles
used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation.our audit of internal control over
financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over
financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and
testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
control based on the assessed risk.our audits also included
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. we believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our
opinions.
a
companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles.a companys internal
control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(i)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of
the company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the company; and
(iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that
could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements.also, projections of any evaluation
of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
san jose,
ca
march 13,
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of operations
(in
thousands, except per share data)
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
revenue
$
3,424,859
$
4,097,860
$
3,068,771
cost
of revenue
2,250,590
2,228,580
1,768,322
gross
profit
1,174,269
1,869,280
1,300,449
operating
expenses:
research and development
855,879
691,637
553,467
sales,
general and administrative
362,222
341,297
293,530
restructuring
charges and other
26,868
-
-
total
operating expenses
1,244,969
1,032,934
846,997
income
(loss) from operations
(70,700
)
836,346
453,452
interest
income
42,859
64,289
41,820
interest
expense
(406
)
(54
)
(21
)
other
income (expense), net
(14,707
)
(771
)
income
(loss) before income tax
(42,954
)
901,341
494,480
income
tax expense (benefit)
(12,913
)
103,696
46,350
income
(loss) before change in accounting principle
(30,041
)
797,645
448,130
cumulative
effect of change in accounting principle, net of tax
-
-
net
income (loss)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
$
448,834
basic
income (loss) per share:
income
(loss) before change in accounting principle
$
(0.05
)
$
1.45
$
0.85
cumulative
effect of change in accounting principle
-
-
-
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.05
)
$
1.45
$
0.85
shares
used in basic per share computation (1)
548,126
550,108
528,606
diluted
income (loss) per share:
income
(loss) before change in accounting principle
$
(0.05
)
$
1.31
$
0.76
cumulative
effect of change in accounting principle
-
-
-
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.05
)
$
1.31
$
0.76
shares
used in diluted per share computation(1)
548,126
606,732
587,256
(1) reflects a
three-for-two stock split effective on september 10, 2007 and a two-for-one
stock split effective on april 6, 2006.
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
balance sheets
(in
thousands, except share and per share data)
january
25, 2009
january
27, 2008
assets
current
assets :
cash and cash equivalents
$
417,688
$
726,969
marketable securities
837,702
1,082,509
accounts receivable, less allowances of $18,399 and $19,693 in 2009 and
2008, respectively
318,435
666,494
inventories
537,834
358,521
prepaid expenses and other
39,794
43,068
deferred income taxes
16,505
11,268
total
current assets
2,167,958
2,888,829
property
and equipment, net
625,798
359,808
goodwill
369,844
354,057
intangible
assets, net
147,101
106,926
deposits
and other assets
40,026
38,051
total
assets
$
3,350,727
$
3,747,671
liabilities
and stockholders equity
current
liabilities:
accounts payable
$
218,864
$
492,099
accrued liabilities and other
559,727
475,062
total
current liabilities
778,591
967,161
other
long-term liabilities
151,850
162,598
capital
lease obligations, long term
25,634
commitments
and contingencies - see note 12
stockholders
equity:
preferred stock, $.001 par value; 2,000,000 shares authorized; none
issued
common stock, $.001 par value; 2,000,000,000 shares authorized;
629,386,584 shares issued and 538,460,766 outstanding in 2009; and
618,701,483 shares issued and 557,102,588 outstanding in
2008, respectively
additional paid-in capital
1,889,257
1,654,681
treasury stock, at cost (90,925,818 shares in 2009 and
61,598,895shares in 2008)
(1,463,268
)
(1,039,632
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
3,865
8,034
retained earnings
1,964,169
1,994,210
total
stockholders' equity
2,394,652
2,617,912
total
liabilities and stockholders' equity
$
3,350,727
$
3,747,671
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
nvidia corporation
and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity
and
comprehensive income (loss)
(in
thousands, except share data)
common
stock
outstanding
shares
(1)
amount(1)
additional
paid-in capital (1)
deferred
compensation
treasury
stock
accumulated
other comprehensive income(loss)
retained
earnings
total
stockholders' equity
total
comprehensive income
balances,
january 29, 2006
514,432,368
$
$
965,424
$
(3,604
)
$
(212,142
)
$
(1,957
)
$
747,731
$
1,495,992
$
302,682
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
42,571,532
221,117
-
-
-
-
221,160
stock
repurchase
(15,506,144
)
-
-
-
(274,978
)
-
-
(274,978
)
tax
deficit from stock-based compensation
-
-
(8,482
)
-
-
-
-
(8,482
)
reversal
of deferred compensation upon adoption of sfas no. 123(r)
-
-
(3,604
)
3,604
-
-
-
-
stock-based
compensation expense related to acquisitions
-
-
2,914
-
-
-
-
2,914
stock-based
compensation related to employees
-
-
118,790
-
-
-
-
118,790
unrealized
gain, net of $1,223 tax effect
-
-
-
-
-
3,509
-
3,509
3,509
reclassificationadjustment
for net realized gains included in net income, net of $78 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
-
(116
)
-
(116
)
(116
)
impact
of change in accounting principle, net of ($379) tax
effect
-
-
(704
)
-
-
-
-
(704
)
net
income
-
-
-
-
-
-
448,834
448,834
448,834
balances,
january 28, 2007
541,497,756
1,295,455
-
(487,120
)
1,436
1,196,565
2,006,919
452,227
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
36,238,014
225,933
-
-
-
-
225,969
stock
repurchase
(20,633,182
)
-
-
-
(552,512
)
-
-
(552,512
)
tax
benefitfrom stock-based compensation
-
-
-
-
-
-
stock-based
compensation related to employees
-
-
133,073
-
-
-
-
133,073
unrealized
gain, net of $2,860 tax effect
-
-
-
-
-
6,703
-
6,703
6,703
reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of $4 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
-
(105
)
-
(105)
(105
)
net
income
-
-
-
-
-
797,645
797,645
797,645
balances,
january 27, 2008
557,102,588
1,654,681
-
(1,039,632
)
8,034
1,994,210
2,617,912
804,243
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
10,685,101
73,537
-
-
-
-
73,547
stock
repurchase
(29,326,923
)
-
-
-
(423,636
)
-
-
(423,636
)
tax
deficit from stock-based compensation
-
-
(2,946
)
-
-
-
-
(2,946
)
stock-based
compensation related toemployees
-
-
163,985
-
-
-
-
163,985
unrealized
loss, net of $2,054 tax effect
-
-
-
-
-
(3,920
)
-
(3,920
)
(3,920
)
reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of $135 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
-
(249
)
-
(249
)
(249
)
net
loss
-
-
-
-
-
-
(30,041
)
(30,041)
(30,041
)
balances,
january 25, 2009
538,460,766
$
$
1,889,257
$
-
$
(1,463,268
)
$
3,865
$
1,964,169
$
2,394,652
$
(34,210
)
(1)
reflects
a three-for-two stock split effective on september 10, 2007 and a
two-for-one stock split effective on april 6,
2006.
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of cash flows
(in
thousands)
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
cash
flows from operating activities:
net
income (loss)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
$
448,834
adjustments
to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating
activities:
stock-based compensation expense related to
employees
162,706
133,365
116,735
depreciation and amortization
185,023
133,192
107,562
impairment charge on investments
9,891
-
-
deferred income taxes
(23,277
)
89,516
41,766
payments under patent licensing arrangement
(21,797
)
(57,255
)
(14,430
)
in-process research and development expenses
-
4,000
14,002
tax benefit (deficit) from stock-based compensation
(2,946
)
(8,482
)
cumulative effect of change in accounting principle
-
-
(704
)
other
3,134
(436
)
changes
in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects of
acquisitions:
accounts receivable
348,873
(146,055
)
(175,261
)
inventories
(177,295
)
(3,690
)
(91,395
)
prepaid expenses and other current assets
21,528
(6,293
)
(5,294
)
deposits and other assets
(2,108
)
(13,914
)
7,314
accounts payable
(283,207
)
216,875
38,613
accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities
58,876
123,026
93,153
net
cash provided by operating activities
249,360
1,270,196
572,681
cash
flows from investing activities:
purchases of marketable securities
(999,953
)
(1,250,248
)
(220,834
)
proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable
securities
1,226,646
753,839
227,067
purchases of property and equipment and intangible
assets
(407,670
)
(187,745
)
(130,826
)
acquisition of businesses, net of cash and cash
equivalents
(27,948
)
(75,542
)
(401,800
)
other
(442
)
(1,622
)
-
net
cash used in investing activities
(209,367
)
(761,318
)
(526,393
)
cash
flows from financing activities:
payments for stock repurchases
(423,636
)
(552,512
)
(274,978
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock under employee stock
plans
73,547
225,969
221,160
other
net
cash used in financing activities
(349,274
)
(326,323
)
(53,630
)
change
in cash and cash equivalents
(309,281
)
182,555
(7,342
)
cash
and cash equivalents at beginning of period
726,969
544,414
551,756
cash
and cash equivalents at end of period
$
417,688
$
726,969
$
544,414
supplemental
disclosures of cash flow information:
cash
paid for income taxes, net
$
7,620
$
2,328
$
26,628
yearended
january25,
january27,
january28,
non-cash
activities:
change
in unrealized gains (losses) from marketable
securities
$
(6,360
)
$
9,462
$
4,492
assets
acquired by assuming related liabilities
$
47,236
$
18,072
$
37,251
acquisition
of business - goodwill adjustment
$
3,411
$
2,633
$
17,862
deferred
stock-based compensation
$
-
$
-
$
3,604
acquisition
of business - stock option conversion
$
-
$
-
$
2,914
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
note
1 - organization and summary of significant accounting policies
our
company
nvidia
corporation is the worldwide leader in visual computing technologies and the
inventor of the graphics processing unit, or gpu. our products are designed to
generate realistic, interactive graphics on consumer and professional computing
devices. we have four major product-line operating segments: the graphics
processing unit, or gpu, business, the professional solutions business, or psb,
the media and communications processor, or mcp, business, and the consumer
products business, or cpb.our gpu business is comprised primarily of
our geforce products that support desktop and notebook personal computers, or
pcs, plus memory products. our psb is comprised of our nvidia quadro
professional workstation products and other professional graphics products,
including our nvidia tesla high-performance computing products. our mcp business
is comprised of nvidia nforce core logic and motherboard gpu products. our cpb
is comprised of our tegra and goforce mobile brands and products that support
handheld personal media players, or pmps, personal digital assistants, or pdas,
cellular phones and other handheld devices. cpb also includes license, royalty,
other revenue and associated costs related to video game consoles and other
digital consumer electronics devices.we were incorporated in
california in april 1993 and reincorporated in delaware in april 1998. our
headquarter facilities are in santa clara, california. our internet address is
www.nvidia.com.
the contents of our website are not a part of these notes to the consolidated
financial statements.
all
references to nvidia, we, us, our or the company mean nvidia
corporation and its subsidiaries, except where it is made clear that the term
means only the parent company.
fiscal year
we operate on a 52 or 53-week year, ending on the last sunday in january. fiscal
years 2009, 2008 and 2007 were 52-week years.
stock splits
in august 2007,our board of directors, or the board, approved a
three-for-two stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock on monday,
august 20, 2007 to be effected in the form of a stock dividend.the stock
split was effective on monday,september 10, 2007 and entitled each
stockholder of record on august 20, 2007 to receive one additional share for
every two outstanding shares of common stock held and cash in lieu of fractional
shares. all share and per-share numbers contained herein have been retroactively
adjusted to reflect this stock split.
in march 2006, our board approved a two-for-one stock split of our outstanding
shares of common stock to be effected in the form of a 100% stock dividend. the
stock split was effective on thursday, april 6, 2006 for stockholders of record
at the close of business on friday, march 17, 2006. all share and per-share
numbers contained herein have been retroactively adjusted to reflect this stock
split.
reclassifications
certain prior fiscal year balances have been reclassified to conform to the
current fiscal year presentation.
principles of consolidation
our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of nvidia
corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. all material intercompany
balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
use of estimates
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of america requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during
the reporting period. actual results could differ from those estimates. on an
on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue
recognition, cash equivalents and marketable securities, accounts receivable,
inventories, income taxes, goodwill, stock-based compensation, warranty
liabilities, litigation, investigation and settlement costs and other
contingencies. these estimates are based on historical facts and various other
assumptions that we believe are reasonable.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
revenue recognition
product
revenue
we recognize revenue from product sales when persuasive evidence of an
arrangement exists, the product has been delivered, the price is fixed and
determinable, and collection is reasonably assured. for most sales, we use a
binding purchase order and in certain cases we use a contractual agreement as
evidence of an arrangement. we consider delivery to occur upon shipment provided
title and risk of loss have passed to the customer based on the shipping terms.
at the point of sale, we assess whether the arrangement fee is fixed and
determinable and whether collection is reasonably assured. if we determine that
collection of a fee is not reasonably assured, we defer the fee and recognize
revenue at the time collection becomes reasonably assured, which is generally
upon receipt of payment.
our policy on sales
to certain distributors, with rights of return,is to defer recognition of
revenue and related cost of revenue until the distributors resell the
product.
we record estimated reductions to revenue for customer programs at the time
revenue is recognized. our customer programs primarily involve rebates, which
are designed to serve as sales incentives to resellers of our products in
various target markets. we account for rebates in accordance with emerging
issues task force issue 01-9, or eitf 01-09, accounting for consideration given
by a vendor to a customer (including a reseller of the vendors products)
and, as such, we accrue for 100% of the potential rebates and do not apply a
breakage factor. rebates typically expire six months from the date of the
original sale, unless we reasonably believe that the customer intends to claim
the rebate. unclaimed rebates are reversed to revenue upon expiration of the
rebate.
our customer programs also include marketing development funds, or mdfs. we
account for mdfs as either a reduction of revenue or an operating expense in
accordance with eitf 01-09. mdfs represent monies paid to retailers, system
builders, original equipment manufacturers, or oems, distributors and add-in
card partners that are earmarked for market segment development and expansion
and typically are designed to support our partners activities while also
promoting nvidia products. depending on market conditions, we may take actions
to increase amounts offered under customer programs, possibly resulting in an
incremental reduction of revenue at the time such programs are
offered.
we also record a reduction to revenue by establishing a sales return allowance
for estimated product returns at the time revenue is recognized, based primarily
on historical return rates. however, if product returns for a particular fiscal
period exceed historical return rates we may determine that additional sales
return allowances are required to properly reflect our estimated exposure for
product returns.
license and development
revenue
for license arrangements that require significant customization of our
intellectual property components, we generally recognize this license revenue
using the percentage-of-completion method of accounting over the period that
services are performed. for all license and service arrangements accounted for
under the percentage-of-completion method, we determine progress to completion
based on actual direct labor hours incurred to date as a percentage of the
estimated total direct labor hours required to complete the project. we
periodically evaluate the actual status of each project to ensure that the
estimates to complete each contract remain accurate. a provision for estimated
losses on contracts is made in the period in which the loss becomes probable and
can be reasonably estimated. costs incurred in advance of revenue recognized are
recorded as deferred costs on uncompleted contracts. if the amount billed
exceeds the amount of revenue recognized, the excess amount is recorded as
deferred revenue. revenue recognized in any period is dependent on our progress
toward completion of projects in progress. significant management judgment and
discretion are used to estimate total direct labor hours. any changes in or
deviations from these estimates could have a material effect on the amount of
revenue we recognize in any period.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
advertising expenses
we expense advertising costs in the period in which they are incurred.
advertising expenses for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 were $28.5 million,
$11.4 million and $14.8 million, respectively.
rent expense
we recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease period and
accrue for rent expense incurred, but not paid.
product
warranties
we generally offer limited warranty to end-users that ranges from one to three
years for products in order to repair or replace products for any manufacturing
defects or hardware component failures. cost of revenue includes the estimated
cost of product warranties that are calculated at the point of revenue
recognition. under limited circumstances, we may offer an extended limited
warranty to customers for certain products. we also accrue for known warranty
and indemnification issues if a loss is probable and can be reasonably
estimated.
stock-based compensation
effective january 30, 2006, we adopted the provisions ofstatement of
financial accounting standards no. 123(r), or sfas no. 123(r), share-based payment. sfas no.
123(r)establishes accounting for stock-based awards exchanged for employee
services. accordingly, we measure stock-based compensation at grant date, based
on the fair value of the awards, and we recognize that compensation as expense
using the straight-line attribution method over the requisite employee service
period, which is typically the vesting period of each award. we elected to adopt
the modified prospective application method provided by sfas no. 123(r). our
estimates of the fair values of employee stock options are calculated using a
binomial model.
litigation, investigation and settlement costs
from time to time, we are involved in legal actions and/or investigations by
regulatory bodies. we are aggressively defending our current litigation matters
for which we are responsible. however, there are many uncertainties associated
with any litigation or investigation, and we cannot be certain that these
actions or other third-party claims against us will be resolved without costly
litigation, fines and/or substantial settlement payments. if that occurs, our
business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially and
adversely affected. if information becomes available that causes us to determine
that a loss in any of our pending litigation, investigations or settlements is
probable, and we can reasonably estimate the loss associated with such events,
we will record the loss in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the united states. however, the actual liability in any such
litigation or investigations may be materially different from our estimates,
which could require us to record additional costs.
foreign currency translation
we use the united
states dollar as our functional currency for all of our subsidiaries. foreign
currency monetary assets and liabilities are remeasured into united states
dollars at end-of-period exchange rates. non-monetary assets and liabilities
such as property and equipment, and equity, are remeasured at historical
exchange rates. revenue and expenses are remeasured at average exchange rates in
effect during each period, except for those expenses related to the previously
noted balance sheet amounts, which are remeasured at historical exchange rates.
gains or losses from foreign currency remeasurement are included in other
income (expense), net in our consolidated financial statements and to date have
not been significant.
the impact of foreign currency transaction loss included in determining net
income (loss) for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $2.0 million, $1.7
million and $0.5 million, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
income
taxes
statement of financial accounting standards no.109, or sfas no.109,
accounting for income
taxes, establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the
effect of income taxes. in accordance with sfas no.109, we recognize
federal, state and foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on our
estimate of taxes payable or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax
jurisdiction. we also recognize federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets
or liabilities, as appropriate, for our estimate of future tax effects
attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards; and we record a
valuation allowance to reduce any deferred tax assets by the amount of any tax
benefits that, based on available evidence and judgment, are not expected to be
realized.
united
statesincome tax has not been provided on earnings of our
non-unitedstatessubsidiaries to the extent that such earnings are
considered to be permanently reinvested.
our calculation of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on
certain estimates and judgments and involves dealing with uncertainties in the
application of complex tax laws. our estimates of current and deferred tax
assets and liabilities may change based, in part, on added certainty or finality
to an anticipated outcome, changes in accounting standards or tax laws in the
united states or foreign jurisdictions where we operate, or changes in other
facts or circumstances. in addition, we recognize liabilities for potential
united states and foreign income tax contingencies based on our estimate of
whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes may be due. if we determine
that payment of these amounts is unnecessary or if the recorded tax liability is
less than our current assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax
benefit or additional income tax expense in our financial statements,
accordingly.
on january 29, 2007, we adopted fasb interpretation no. 48, or fin 48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxes, issued in july 2006. fin 48 applies to all tax positions related
to income taxes subject to sfas no. 109. under fin 48 we recognize the benefit
from a tax position only if it is more-likely-than-not that the position would
be sustained upon audit based solely on the technical merits of the tax
position. the cumulative effect of adoption of fin 48 did not result in a
material adjustment to our tax liability for unrecognized income tax benefits.
our policy to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax
benefits as a component of income tax expense did not change as a result of
implementing the fin 48. please refer to note 13 of these notes to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.
comprehensive income
(loss)
comprehensive income
(loss) consists of net income (loss) and other comprehensive income or loss.
other comprehensive income or loss components include unrealized gains or losses
on available-for-sale securities, net of tax.
net income(loss) per share
basic net
income (loss) per share is computed using the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the period. diluted net income (loss) per share is
computed using the weighted average number of common and dilutive common
equivalent shares outstanding during the period, using the treasury stock
method. under the treasury stock method, the effect of stock options outstanding
is not included in the computation of diluted net income (loss) per share for
periods when their effect is anti-dilutive.
cash and cash equivalents
we consider all highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into cash
and have an original maturity of three months or less at the time of purchase to
be cash equivalents. as of january 25, 2009 and january27, 2008, our cash
and cash equivalents were $417.7 million and $727.0 million, which includes
$14.6 million and $218.1 million invested in money market funds for fiscal year
2009 and fiscal year 2008, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
marketable securities
we account for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of
financial accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no.115,accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities. all of our cash equivalents and marketable
securities are treated as available-for-sale under sfas no.115. cash
equivalents consist of financial instruments which are readily convertible into
cash and have original maturities of three months or less at the time of
acquisition. marketable securities consist primarily of highly liquid
investments with a maturity of greater than three months when
purchased.we classify our marketable securities at the date of
acquisition in the available-for-sale category as our intention is to convert
them into cash for operations. these securities are reported at fair value with
the related unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss), a component of stockholders equity, net of
tax.any unrealized losses which are considered to be
other-than-temporary impairments are recorded in the other income (expense)
section of our consolidated statements of operations.realized gains
(losses) on the sale of marketable securities are determined using the
specific-identification method and recorded in the other income (expense)
section of our consolidated statements of operations.
all of our available-for-sale investments are subject to a periodic impairment
review. investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value
is judged to be other-than-temporary when the resulting fair value is
significantly below cost basis and/or the significant decline has lasted for an
extended period of time. the evaluation that we use to determine whether a
marketable security is impaired is based on the specific facts and circumstances
present at the time of assessment, which include the consideration of general
market conditions, the duration and extent to which fair value is below cost,
and our intent and ability to hold an investment for a sufficient period of time
to allow for recovery in value.we also consider specific adverse
conditions related to the financial health of and business outlook for an
investee, including industry and sector performance, changes in technology,
operational and financing cash flow factors, and changes in an investees credit
rating. investments that we identify as having an indicator of impairment are
subject to further analysis to determine if the investment is other than
temporarily impaired, in which case we write down the investment to its
estimated fair value.
fair value of financial instruments
the carrying value of cash, cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts
payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values due to their
relatively short maturities as of january25, 2009 and january27,
2008. marketable securities are comprised of available-for-sale securities that
are reported at fair value with the related unrealized gains and losses included
in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a component of stockholders
equity, net of tax. fair value of the marketable securities is determined based
on quoted market prices.
concentration of credit risk
financial instruments that potentially subject us to concentrations of credit
risk consist primarily of cash equivalents, marketable securities and accounts
receivable. our investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier investment
grade securities, the diversification of asset type and includes certain limits
on our portfolio duration. all marketable securities are held in our name,
managed by several investment managers and held by one major financial
institution under a custodial arrangement.accounts receivable from
significant customers, those representing 10% or more of total accounts
receivable aggregated approximately 38% of our accounts receivable balance from
three customers at january 25, 2009 and approximately 12% of our accounts
receivable balance from one customer at january27, 2008. we perform
ongoing credit evaluations of our customers financial condition and maintain an
allowance for potential credit losses. this allowance consists of an amount
identified for specific customers and an amount based on overall estimated
exposure. our overall estimated exposure excludes amounts covered by credit
insurance and letters of credit.
accounts receivable
we maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts receivable for estimated losses
resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. we
determine this allowance, which consists of an amount identified for specific
customer issues as well as an amount based on overall estimated exposure.
factors impacting the allowance include the level of gross receivables, the
financial condition of our customers and the extent to which balances are
covered by credit insurance or letters of credit.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
inventories
inventory cost is computed on an adjusted standard basis, which approximates
actual cost on an average or first-in, first-out basis. inventory costs consist
primarily of the cost of semiconductors purchased from subcontractors, including
wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging, manufacturing support costs,
including labor and overhead associated with such purchases, final test yield
fallout, inventory provisions and shipping costs. we write down our inventory
for estimated amounts related to lower of cost or market, obsolescence or
unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and
the estimated market value based upon assumptions about future demand, future
product purchase commitments, estimated manufacturing yield levels and market
conditions. if actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected
by management, or if our future product purchase commitments to our suppliers
exceed our forecasted future demand for such products, additional future
inventory write-downs may be required that could adversely affect our operating
results. if actual market conditions are more favorable, we may have higher
gross margins when products are sold. sales to date of such products have not
had a significant impact on our gross margin. inventory reserves once
established are not reversed until the related inventory has been sold or
scrapped.
property and equipment
property and equipment are stated at cost. depreciation of property and
equipment is computed using the straight-line method based on the estimated
useful lives of the assets, generally three to five years.the
estimated useful lives of our buildings have estimated useful lives of up to
twenty-five years. depreciation expense includes the amortization of assets
recorded under capital leases. leasehold improvements and assets recorded under
capital leases are amortized over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated
useful life of the asset.
goodwill
we account for goodwill in accordance with statement of financial accounting
standards no.142, or sfas no.142, goodwill and other intangible
assets. goodwill is subject to our annual impairment test during the
fourth quarter of our fiscal year, or earlier if indicators of potential
impairment exist, using a fair value-based approach. our impairment review
process compares the fair value of the reporting unitin which the goodwill
resides to its carrying value.for the purposes of completing oursfas
no.142impairment test, weperform our analysison a
reporting unit basis.we utilize a two-step approach to testing goodwill
for impairment. the first step tests for possible impairment by applying a fair
value-based test. in computing fair value of our reporting units, we use
estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows from such units. the second
step, if necessary, measures the amount of such impairment by applying fair
value-based tests to individual assets and liabilities.
intangible assets
intangible assets primarily represent rights acquired under technology licenses,
patents, acquired intellectual property, trademarks and customer
relationships.we currently amortize our intangible assets with
definitive lives over periods ranging from one to ten years using a method that
reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible asset are
consumed or otherwise used up or, if that pattern can not be reliably
determined, using a straight-line amortization method.
impairment of long-lived assets
in accordance with statement of financial accounting standards no.144, or
sfas no.144, accounting
for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, long-lived assets,
such as property and equipment and intangible assets subject to amortization,
are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. recoverability of
assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of
an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by
the asset. if the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash
flows, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying
amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. fair value is
determined based on the estimated discounted future cash flows expected to be
generated by the asset. assets and liabilities to be disposed of would be
separately presented in the consolidated balance sheet and the assets would be
reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell,
and would no longer be depreciated.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
accounting for asset retirement obligations
we account for asset retirement obligations in accordance with statement of
financial accounting standards no.143, or sfas no.143, accounting for asset retirement
obligations, which addresses financial accounting and reporting for
obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the
associated asset retirement costs. sfas no.143 applies to legal
obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets that result from
the acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. sfas
no.143 requires that the fair value of a liability for an asset retirement
obligation be recognized in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable
estimate of fair value can be made. the fair value of the liability is added to
the carrying amount of the associated asset and this additional carrying amount
is depreciated over the life of the asset.during fiscal years 2009 and
2008, we recorded asset retirement obligations to return the leasehold
improvements to their original condition upon lease termination at our
headquarters facility in santa clara, california and certain laboratories at our
international locations.as of january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008,
our net asset retirement obligations were $9.5 million and $6.5 million,
respectively.
adoption of new accounting pronouncements
on january 28, 2008, we adopted statement of financial accounting standards no.
157, or sfas no. 157, fair
value measurementsfor all financial assets and liabilities. sfas
no. 157 applies to all financial assets and financial liabilities recognized or
disclosed at fair value in the financial statements. sfas no. 157 establishes a
framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about fair value
measurements. the changes to current practice resulting from the application of
sfas no. 157 relate to the definition of fair value, the methods used to measure
fair value, and the expanded disclosures about fair value
measurements.the adoption of sfas no.157 for financial assets
and liabilities did not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial
statements, and the resulting fair values calculated under sfas no.157
after adoption were not significantly different than the fair values that would
have been calculated under previous guidance. please refer to note 17 of these
notes to the consolidated financial statements for further details on our fair
value measurements.
additionally, in february 2008, the financial accounting standards board, or
fasb, issued fasb staff position no.fas157-2, or fsp no. 157-2,
effective date of fasb
statement no.157, to partially defer fasb statement no.157, fair
value measurements.fspno. 157-2 defers the effective
date of sfasno. 157 for non-financial assets and non-financial
liabilities, except those that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the
financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually), to fiscal years,
and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after november15,
2008. we do not believe the adoption of fsp no.157-2 will have a material
impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash
flows.
in october2008, the fasb issued staff position no. fas 157-3, or fsp no.
157-3, determining the fair
value of a financial asset when the market for that asset is not active.
fsp no. 157-3 clarifies the application of sfas no.157 in a market that is
not active, and addresses application issues such as the use of internal
assumptions when relevant observable data does not exist, the use of observable
market information when the market is not active, and the use of market quotes
when assessing the relevance of observable and unobservable data. fsp no. 157-3
is effective for all periods presented in accordance with sfas no.157. the
adoption of fsp no. 157-3 did not have a significant impact on our consolidated
financial statements, and the resulting fair values calculated under sfas
no.157 after adoption were not significantly different than the fair
values that would have been calculated under previous guidance.
on january 28, 2008, we adopted statement of financial accounting standards no.
159, or sfas no.159, the
fair value option for financial assets and financial liabilities. sfas
no.159 permits companies to choose to measure certain financial
instruments and certain other items at fair value using an
instrument-by-instrument election. the standard requires that unrealized gains
and losses on items for which the fair value option has been elected be reported
in earnings. under sfas no. 159, we did not elect the fair value option for any
of our assets and liabilities. the adoption of sfas no.159 did not have an
impact on our consolidated financial statements.
in june2007, the fasb ratified emerging issues task forceissue
no.07-3, or eitf 07-3, accounting for nonrefundable advance
payments for goods or services to be used in future research and development
activities. eitf 07-3 requires non-refundable advance payments for goods
and services to be used in future research and development activities to be
recorded as an asset and the payments to be expensed when the research and
development activities are performed. we adopted the provisions of eitf 07-3
beginning with our fiscal quarter ended april 27, 2008. the adoption of eitf
07-3 did not have any impact on our consolidated financial position, results of
operations and cash flows.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
recently issued accounting pronouncements
in december 2007, the fasb issued statement of financial accounting
standardsno.141 (revised 2007), or sfas no. 141(r), business combinations. under
sfasno.141(r), an entity is required to recognize the assets
acquired, liabilities assumed, contractual contingencies, and contingent
consideration at their fair value on the acquisition date. it further requires
that acquisition-related costs be recognized separately from the acquisition and
expensed as incurred, restructuring costs generally be expensed in periods
subsequent to the acquisition date, and changes in accounting for deferred tax
asset valuation allowances and acquired income tax uncertainties after the
measurement period impact income tax expense. in addition, acquired in-process
research and development, or ipr&d, is capitalized as an intangible asset
and amortized over its estimated useful life.we are required to
adopt the provisions of sfas no. 141(r) beginning with our fiscal quarter ending
april 26, 2009.the adoption of sfasno.141(r) is expected
to change our accounting treatment for business combinations on a prospective
basis beginning in the period it is adopted.
in april 2008, the fasb issued fasb staff position no. fasno.142-3, or fsp
no. 142-3, determination of
useful life of intangible assets. fspno. 142-3 amends the factors
that should be considered in developing the renewal or extension assumptions
used to determine the useful life of a recognized intangible asset under
statement of financial accounting standards no. 142, or sfasno. 142, goodwill and other intangible
assets. fspno. 142-3 also requires expanded disclosure regarding
the determination of intangible asset useful lives. fspno. 142-3 is
effective for fiscal years beginning after december15, 2008. earlier
adoption is not permitted. we are currently evaluating the potential impact the
adoption of fspno. 142-3 will have on our consolidated financial position,
results of operations and cash flows.
note
2 - stock-based compensation
the statement of operations includes stock-based compensation expense and the
amortization of amounts capitalized as inventory, as follows:
year
ended
january
25,
january
27,
january
28,
(in
thousands)
cost
of revenue
$
11,939
$
10,886
$
8,200
research
and development
98,007
76,617
70,077
sales,
general and administrative
52,760
45,862
38,458
total
$
162,706
$
133,365
$
116,735
impact of the adoption of sfas no. 123(r)
we elected to adopt the modified prospective application method beginning
january 30, 2006 as provided by sfas no. 123(r). accordingly, during fiscal year
2007, we recorded stock-based compensation expense for awards granted prior to,
but not yet vested, as of january 29, 2006, equal to the amount that would have
been recognized if the fair value method required for pro forma disclosure under
sfas no. 123 had been in effect for expense recognition purposes, adjusted for
estimated forfeitures. previously reported amounts have not been
restated.
our adoption of sfas
no. 123(r) resulted in a cumulative benefit from the accounting change of $0.7
million during fiscal year 2007, which reflects the net cumulative impact of
estimating forfeitures in the determination of period expense by reversing the
previously recognized cumulative compensation expense related to those
forfeitures, rather than recording forfeitures when they occur as previously
permitted.
stock-based compensation expense that would have been recorded under apb no. 25
during the year ended january 28, 2007 was approximately $3.0 million. upon our
adoption of sfas no. 123(r), at january 30, 2006, we reclassified the unearned
stock-based compensation expense balance of approximately $3.6 million that
would have been recorded under apb no. 25 to additional paid-in capital in our
consolidated balance sheet. the adoption of sfas no. 123(r) reduced our basic
and diluted earnings per share by $0.19 and $0.17, respectively, and reduced our
net income by $102.7 million for the year ended january 28, 2007.
prior to adopting sfas no.
123(r), we presented all tax benefits resulting from the exercise of stock
options as operating cash flows in our consolidated statement of cash flows.
however, as required by our adoption of sfas no. 123(r), since fiscal year 2007,
we began classifying cash flows resulting from gross tax benefits as a part of
cash flows from financing activities. gross tax benefits are realized tax
benefits from tax deductions for exercised options in excess of cumulative
compensation cost for those instruments recognized in our consolidated financial
statements. the effect of this change in classification on our consolidated
statement of cash flows resulted in cash used from operations of $0.9 million
and $0.2 million and cash provided by financing activities of $0.9 million and
$0.2 million for the years ended january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008,
respectively. during year ended january 28, 2007, cash used from
operations and cash provided by financing activities was $0.2 million
each.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
subsequent to the adoption of sfas no. 123(r)
as of january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008, the aggregate amount of unearned
stock-based compensation expense related to our stock options was $193.8 million
and $233.6 million, respectively, adjusted for estimated forfeitures, which we
will recognize over an estimated weighted average amortization period of 1.82
and 2.08 years, respectively.
stock-based compensation capitalized in inventories resulted in a benefit of
$2.0 million and a charge of $0.3 million in cost of revenue during the years
ended january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008, respectively.
during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, we granted approximately 17.9 million,
17.2 million and 17.9 million stock options, respectively, with estimated total
grant-date fair values of $143.6 million, $207.4 million and $138.4 million,
respectively, and weighted average grant-date fair values of $8.03, $11.98 and
$7.85 per option, respectively. of these amounts, we estimated that the
stock-based compensation expense related to the awards that are not expected to
vest for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $23.8 million, $40.0 million and
$26.7 million, respectively.
valuation assumptions
we
utilize a binomial model for calculating the estimated fair value of new
stock-based compensation awards granted under our stock option plans. we
have determined that the use of implied volatility is expected to be reflective
of market conditions and, therefore, can be expected to be a reasonable
indicator of our expected volatility. we also segregate options into groups of
employees with relatively homogeneous exercise behavior in order to calculate
the best estimate of fair value using the binomial valuation model. as
such, the expected term assumption used in calculating the estimated fair value
of our stock-based compensation awards using the binomial model is based on
detailed historical data about employees' exercise behavior, vesting schedules,
and death and disability probabilities. our management believes the
resulting binomial calculation provides a reasonable estimate of the fair value
of our employee stock options. for our employee stock purchase plan we continue
to use the black-scholes model.
sfas no.
123(r) requires forfeitures to be estimated at the time of grant and revised, if
necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those
estimates. forfeitures are estimated based on historical experience. if factors
change and we employ different assumptions in the application of sfas no. 123(r)
in future periods, the compensation expense that we record under sfas no. 123(r)
may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current
period.
the fair
value of stock options granted under our stock option plans and shares issued
under our employee stock purchase plan have been estimated at the date of grant
with the following assumptions:
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
stock
options
(usingabinomial
model)
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
3.6-5.8
3.8-5.8
3.6
- 5.1
risk
free interest rate
1.7%
- 3.7
%
3.3%
- 5.0
%
4.7%
- 5.1
%
volatility
52%
-105
%
37%
-54
%
39%
- 51
%
dividend
yield
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
employee
stock purchase plan
(usingthe
black-scholes model)
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
0.5
- 2.0
0.5
- 2.0
0.5
- 2.0
risk
free interest rate
1.6%
- 2.4
%
3.5%
- 5.2
%
1.6%
- 5.2
%
volatility
62%
- 68
%
38%
- 54
%
30%
- 47
%
dividend
yield
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
equity incentive program
we consider
equity compensation to be long-term compensation and an integral component of
our efforts to attract and retain exceptional executives, senior management and
world-class employees. we believe that properly structured equity compensation
aligns the long-term interests of stockholders and employees by creating a
strong, direct link between employee compensation and stock appreciation, as
stock options are only valuable to our employees if the value of our common
stock increases after the date of grant.
equity incentive plan
at the annual meeting of stockholders held on june21, 2007, our
stockholders approved the nvidia corporation 2007 equity incentive plan, or the
2007 plan.
the 2007 plan authorizes the issuance of incentive stock options, nonstatutory
stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock unit, stock appreciation
rights, performance stock awards, performance cash awards, and other stock-based
awards to employees, directors and consultants. only our employees may receive
incentive stock options. the 2007 plan succeeds our 1998 equity incentive plan,
our 1998 non-employee directors stock option plan, our 2000 nonstatutory equity
incentive plan, and the portalplayer, inc. 2004 stock incentive plan, or the
prior plans. all options and stock awards granted under the prior plans shall
remain subject to the terms of the prior plans with respect to which they were
originally granted. up to 101,845,177 shares which, due to the subsequent stock
split now totals 152,767,766 shares, of our common stock may be issued pursuant
to stock awards granted under the 2007 plan or the prior plans.as of
january 25, 2009, 29.5 million shares were available for future issuance under
the 2007 plan.
options granted to new employees generally vest ratably quarterly over a
three-year period. grants to existing employees in recognition of performance
generally vest as to 25% of the shares two years and three months after the date
of grant and as to the remaining 75% of the shares subject to the option in
equal quarterly installments over a nine month period.options granted
under the 2007 plan generally expire in six years from the date of
grant.
unless terminated sooner, the 2007 plan is scheduled to terminate on
april23, 2017. our board may suspend or terminate the 2007 plan at any
time. no awards may be granted under the 2007 plan while the 2007 plan is
suspended or after it is terminated. the board may also amend
the 2007 plan at any time. however, if legal, regulatory or listing requirements
require stockholder approval, the amendment will not go into effect until the
stockholders have approved the amendment.
portalplayer, inc. 1999
stock option plan
we assumed options issued under the portalplayer, inc. 1999 stock option plan,
or the 1999 plan, when we completed our acquisition of portalplayer on january
5, 2007. the 1999 plan was terminated upon completion of portalplayers initial
public offering of common stock in calendar 2004. no shares of common stock are
available for issuance under the 1999 plan other than to satisfy exercises of
stock options granted under the 1999 plan prior to its termination and any
shares that become available for issuance as a result of expiration or
cancellation of an option that was issued pursuant to the 1999 plan. previously
authorized yet unissued shares under the 1999 plan were cancelled upon
completion of portalplayers initial public offering.
each option we assumed in connection with our acquisition of portalplayer was
converted into the right to purchase that number of shares of nvidia common
stock determined by multiplying the number of shares of portalplayer common
stock underlying such option by 0.3601 and then rounding down to the nearest
whole number of shares. the exercise price per share for each assumed option was
similarly adjusted by dividing the exercise price by 0.3601 and then rounding up
to the nearest whole cent. vesting schedules and expiration dates did not
change.
under the 1999 plan, incentive stock options were granted at a price that was
not less than 100% of the fair market value of portalplayers common stock, as
determined by its board of directors, on the date of grant. non-statutory stock
options were granted at a price that was not less than 85% of the fair market
value of portalplayers common stock, as determined by its board of directors,
on the date of grant.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
generally,
options granted under the 1999 plan are exercisable for a period of ten years
from the date of grant, and shares vest at a rate of 25% on the first
anniversary of the grant date of the option, and an additional 1/48th of the
shares upon completion of each succeeding full month of continuous employment
thereafter.
1998 employee stock purchase
plan
in
february 1998, our board approved the 1998 employee stock purchase plan, or the
purchase plan. in june 1999, the purchase plan was amended to increase the
number of shares reserved for issuance automatically each year at the end of our
fiscal year for the next 10 years (commencing at the end of fiscal 2000 and
ending 10 years later in 2009) by an amount equal to 2% of the outstanding
shareson each such date, including on an as-if-converted basis preferred
stock and convertible notes, and outstanding options and warrants, calculated
using the treasury stock method; provided that the maximum number of shares of
common stock available for issuance from the purchase plan could not exceed
52,000,000 shares which, due to subsequent stock-splits, is now 78,000,0000
shares. the number of shares will no longer be increased annually as we reached
the maximum permissible number of shares at the end of fiscal year 2006. there
are a total of 78,000,000 shares authorized for issuance. at january25,
2009, 33,395,699 shares had been issued under the purchase plan
and44,604,301 shares were available for future issuance.
the purchase plan is intended to qualify as an employee stock purchase plan
under section423 of the internal revenue code. under the purchase plan,
the board has authorized participation by eligible employees, including
officers, in periodic offerings following the adoption of the purchase plan.
under the purchase plan, separate offering periods shall be no longer than 27
months. under the current offering adopted pursuant to the purchase plan, each
offering period is 24 months, which is divided into four purchase periods of 6
months.
employees are eligible to participate if they are employed by us or an affiliate
of us as designated by the board. employees who participate in an offering may
have up to 10% of their earnings withheld pursuant to the purchase plan up to
certain limitationsand applied on specified dates determined by the board
to the purchase of shares of common stock. the board may increase this
percentage at its discretion, up to 15%. the price of common stock purchased
under the purchase plan will be equal to the lower of the fair market value of
the common stock on the commencement date of each offering period and the
purchase date of each offering period at 85% at the fair market value of the
common stock on the relevant purchase date. during fiscal years 2009, 2008 and
2007, employees purchased approximately 3.0 million, 2.1 million and 5.7 million
shares with weighted-average prices of $12.79, $14.29 and $4.28 per share,
respectively, and grant-date fair values of $5.90, $5.48 and $2.43 per share,
respectively. employees may end their participation in the purchase plan at any
time during the offering period, and participation ends automatically on
termination of employment with us and in each case their contributions are
refunded.
the following
summarizes the transactions under our equity incentive plans:
options
available for grant
options
outstanding
weighted
average exercise price per share
balances,
january 29, 2006
46,966,464
131,937,720
$
6.33
authorized
1,637,075
-
-
granted
and assumed
(18,809,418
)
18,809,418
$
19.73
exercised
-
(36,878,840
)
$
5.34
cancelled
2,876,306
(2,876,306
)
$
8.95
balances,
january28, 2007
32,670,427
110,991,992
$
8.86
authorized
25,114,550
-
-
granted
(17,201,305
)
17,201,305
$
27.32
exercised
-
(34,151,892
)
$
5.74
cancelled
3,460,332
(3,460,332
)
$
18.45
balances,
january27, 2008
44,044,004
90,581,073
$
13.18
authorized
-
-
-
granted
(17,888,695
)
17,888,695
$
8.03
exercised
-
(7,670,038
)
$
3.14
cancelled
3,345,450
(3,345,450
)
$
7.66
balances,
january25, 2009
29,500,759
97,454,280
$
13.83
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes to the
consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the total intrinsic value
of options exercised was $84.9 million, $757.5 million and $530.7 million for
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. the total fair value of options
vested was $117.0 million, $102.8 million and $100.9 million for fiscal years
2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
the following table summarizes the options outstanding, options vested and
expected to vest and options exercisable as of january 25, 2009:
weighted
average remaining contractual term
aggregate
intrinsic value (1)
options
outstanding
3.16
years
$
59.1
million
options
vested and expected to vest (2)
3.09
years
$
59.1
million
options
exercisable
2.18
years
$
59.0
million
(1)
the aggregate intrinsic value in the table above represents the total pre-tax
intrinsic value for in-the-money options at january 25, 2009, based on the $7.71
closing stock price of our common stock on the nasdaq global select market,
which would have been received by the option holders had all in-the-money option
holders exercised their options as of that date. the total number of
in-the-money options outstanding and exercisable as of january 25, 2009 was 19.7
million shares and 19.2 million shares, respectively.
(2)
options vested and expected to vest include 93.7 million options with a
weighted average exercise price of $13.59 per share.
the
following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding as of
january25, 2009:
options
outstanding
options
exercisable
range
of exercise prices
number
outstanding
weighted
average
remaining
contractual
life
(years)
weighted
average
exercise
price
number
exercisable
weighted
average
exercise
price
$
0.01
- $5.00
11,047,215
1.3
$
3.49
11,047,215
$
3.49
5.01-7.50
7,920,796
1.7
$
6.14
7,729,362
$
6.11
7.51-10.00
27,082,933
2.9
$
8.86
18,645,057
$
8.46
10.01
-15.00
14,067,091
2.8
$
12.15
12,997,641
$
12.13
15.01
-20.00
24,566,194
4.2
$
18.63
6,022,747
$
18.75
20.01
- 50.00
12,744,164
4.5
$
30.56
3,424,924
$
26.79
50.00
and above
25,887
6.7
$
64.05
25,887
$
67.12
97,454,280
3.2
$
13.83
59,892,833
$
10.15
we settle
employee stock option exercises with newly issued common shares. we do not have
any equity instruments outstanding other than the options described above as of
january 25, 2009.
please refer
to note 19 for further discussion regarding the cash tender offer for certain
employee stock options that our board of directors approved in february
2009.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
3  restructuring charges and other
on
september18, 2008, we announced a workforce reduction to allow for
continued investment in strategic growth areas, which was completed in the third
quarter of fiscal year 2009. as a result, we eliminated approximately 360
positions worldwide, or about 6.5% of our global workforce.during
fiscal year 2009, expenses associated with the workforce reduction, which were
comprised primarily of severance and benefits payments to these employees,
totaled $8.0 million.the remaining accrual of $0.2 million as of january
25, 2009 relates to severance and benefits payments, which are expected to be
paid during the first quarter of fiscal year 2010.
the following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities and
related liabilities recorded in accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance
sheet as of january 25, 2009:
accrued
restructuring charges :
(in
thousands)
balance
at january 27, 2008
$
-
charges
7,956
cash
payments
(7,440
)
non-cash
charges
(330
)
balance
at january 25, 2009
$
restructuring and other expenses for fiscal year 2009 also included a
non-recurring charge of $18.9 million associated with the termination of a
development contract related to a new campus construction project that has been
put on hold.
note
4  net income (loss) per share
the following
is a reconciliation of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted
net income (loss) per share computations for the periods presented:
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
(in
thousands, except per share data)
numerator:
net
income (loss)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
$
448,834
denominator:
denominator
for basic net income (loss) per share, weighted average
shares
548,126
550,108
528,606
effect
of dilutive securities:
stock
options outstanding
-
56,624
58,650
denominator
for diluted net income (loss) per share, weighted average
shares
548,126
606,732
587,256
net
income (loss) per share:
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.05
)
$
1.45
$
0.85
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.05
)
$
1.31
$
0.76
all of our
outstanding stock options were anti-dilutive during fiscal year 2009 and
excluded from the computation of diluted earnings per share due to the net loss
for fiscal year 2009. diluted net income (loss) per share does not include the
effect of anti-dilutive common equivalent shares from stock options outstanding
of11.9 million and 13.4million for fiscal years 2008 and 2007,
respectively. the weighted average exercise price of stock options excluded from
the computation of diluted earnings per share was $32.05 and $20.09 for fiscal
years 2008 and 2007, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
5 - 3dfx
during fiscal
year 2002, we completed the purchase of certain assets from 3dfx interactive,
inc., or 3dfx, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $74.2 million.
on december 15, 2000, nvidia corporation and one of our indirect subsidiaries
entered into an asset purchase agreement, or the apa, which closed on april 18,
2001, to purchase certain graphics chip assets from 3dfx. under the terms of the
apa, the cash consideration due at the closing was $70.0 million, less $15.0
million that was loaned to 3dfx pursuant to a credit agreement dated
december15, 2000. the apa also provided, subject to the other provisions
thereof, that if 3dfx properly certified that all its debts and other
liabilities had been provided for, then we would have been obligated to pay 3dfx
one million shares, which due to subsequent stock splits now totals six million
shares, of nvidia common stock. if 3dfx could not make such a certification, but
instead properly certified that its debts and liabilities could be satisfied for
less than $25.0 million, then 3dfx could have elected to receive a cash payment
equal to the amount of such debts and liabilities and a reduced number of shares
of our common stock, with such reduction calculated by dividing the cash payment
by $25.00 per share. if 3dfx could not certify that all of its debts and
liabilities had been provided for, or could not be satisfied, for less than
$25.0 million, we would not be obligated under the apa to pay any additional
consideration for the assets.
in october 2002, 3dfx filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the united
states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california. in march 2003,
the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to represent 3dfxs bankruptcy
estate served his complaint on nvidia.the trustees complaint
asserts claims for, among other things, successor liability and fraudulent
transfer and seeks additional payments from us.on october 13, 2005,
the bankruptcy court heard the trustees motion for summary adjudication, and on
december 23, 2005, denied that motion in all material respects and held that
nvidia may not dispute that the value of the 3dfx transaction was less than $108
million. the bankruptcy court denied the trustees request to find that the
value of the 3dfx assets conveyed to nvidia was at least $108 million. in early
november 2005, after several months of mediation, nvidia and the official
committee of unsecured creditors, or the creditors committee, agreed to a plan
of liquidation of 3dfx, which included a conditional settlement of the trustees
claims against us. this conditional settlement was subject to a confirmation
process through a vote of creditors and the review and approval of the
bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement called for a payment by nvidia of
approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx estate. under the settlement, $5.6
million related to various administrative expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0
million related to the satisfaction of debts and liabilities owed to the general
unsecured creditors of 3dfx. accordingly, during the three month period ended
october 30, 2005, we recorded $5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and
$25.0 million as additional purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee
advised that he intended to object to the settlement. the conditional settlement
never progressed substantially through the confirmation process.
on
december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court scheduled a trial for one portion of the
trustees case against nvidia. on january 2, 2007, nvidia terminated the
settlement agreement on grounds that the bankruptcy court had failed to proceed
toward confirmation of the creditors committees plan. a non-jury trial began
on march 21, 2007 on valuation issues in the trustee's constructive fraudulent
transfer claims against nvidia. specifically, the bankruptcy court tried four
questions: (1) what did 3dfx transfer to nvidia in the apa?; (2) of what was
transferred, what qualifies as "property" subject to the bankruptcy court's
avoidance powers under the uniform fraudulent transfer act and relevant
bankruptcy code provisions?; (3) what is the fair market value of the "property"
identified in answer to question (2)?; and (4) was the $70 million that nvidia
paid "reasonably equivalent" to the fair market value of that property? the
parties completed post-trial briefing on may 25, 2007. on april 30, 2008, the
bankruptcy court issued its memorandum decision after trial, in which it
provided a detailed summary of the trial proceedings and the parties'
contentions and evidence and concluded that "the creditors of 3dfx were not
injured by the transaction."this decision did not entirely dispose
of the trustee's action, however, as the trustee's claims for successor
liability and intentional fraudulent conveyance were still
pending.on june 19, 2008, nvidia filed a motion for summary judgment
to convert the memorandum decision after trial to a final
judgment.that motion was granted in its entirety and judgment was
entered in nvidias favor on september 11, 2008. the trustee filed a notice of
appeal from that judgment on september 22, 2008, and on september 25, 2008,
nvidia exercised its election to have the appeal heard by the united states
district court, where the appeal is pending.
while the conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed
through the confirmation process, the trustees case still remains pending
appeal.as such, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6 million -
$5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx  that we recorded during the three months ended october
30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees case. we do not
believe the resolution of this matter will have a material impact on our results
of operations or financial position.
the 3dfx asset purchase price of $95.0 million and $4.2 million of direct
transaction costs were allocated based on fair values presented below. the final
allocation of the purchase price of the 3dfx assets is contingent upon the
outcome of all of the 3dfx litigation. please refer to note 12 of these notes to
the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding this
litigation.
fair
market value
straight-line
amortization period
(in
thousands)
(years)
property
and equipment
$
2,433
1-2
trademarks
11,310
goodwill
85,418
--
total
$
99,161
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
6  business combinations
on february 10, 2008, we acquired ageia technologies, inc., or ageia, an
industry leader in gaming physics technology. the combination of the graphics
processing unit, or gpu, and physics engine brands is expected to enhance the
visual experience of the gaming world. the aggregate purchase price consisted of
total consideration of approximately $29.7 million.
on
november 30, 2007, we completed our acquisition of mental images, inc., or
mental images, an industry leader in photorealistic rendering technology. the
aggregate purchase price consisted of total consideration of approximately $88.3
million. the total consideration also includes approximately $7.8 million which
reflects an initial investment we made in mental images in prior periods and
$5.6 million primarily towards guaranteed paymentssubsequent to completion
of our acquisition.
we
allocated the purchase price of each of these acquisitions to tangible assets,
liabilities and identifiable intangible assets acquired, as well as ipr&d,
if identified, based on their estimated fair values. the excess of purchase
price over the aggregate fair values was recorded as goodwill. the fair value
assigned to identifiable intangible assets acquired was based on estimates and
assumptions made by management. purchased intangibles are amortized on a
straight-line basis over their respective useful lives.
as of
january 25, 2009, the estimated fair values of the purchase price allocated to
assets we acquired and liabilities we assumed on the respective acquisition
dates were as follows:
mental
images
ageia
fair
market values
(in
thousands)
cash
and cash equivalents
$
$
1,744
marketable
securities
-
accounts
receivable
1,462
prepaid
and other current assets
1,149
property
and equipment
in-process
research and development
4,000
-
goodwill
59,252
19,198
intangible
assets:
existing technology
14,400
13,450
customer relationships
6,500
patents
5,000
-
trademark
1,200
total
assets acquired
93,846
37,719
current
liabilities
(1,243
)
(6,969
)
acquisition
related costs
(1,313
)
(1,030
)
long-term
liabilities
(2,970
)
-
total
liabilities assumed
(5,526
)
(7,999
)
purchase
price allocation
$
88,320
$
29,720
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
mental
images
ageia
(straight-line
depreciation/amortization period)
property
and equipment
-5 years
1-2
years
intangible
assets:
existing technology
4-5
years
years
customer relationships
4-5
years
years
patents
years
-
trademark
years
years
the amount of the ipr&d represents the value assigned to research and
development projects of mental images that had commenced but had not yet reached
technological feasibility at the time of the acquisition and for which we had no
alternative future use. in accordance with statement of financial accounting
standards no. 2, or sfas no. 2, accounting for research and
development costs, as clarified by fasb issued interpretation no. 4, or
fin 4, applicability of fasb
statement no. 2 to business combinations accounted for by the
purchase method an interpretation of fasb statement no. 2, amounts
assigned to ipr&d meeting the above-stated criteria were charged to research
and development expenses as part of the allocation of the purchase
price.
the pro forma results of operations for our acquisitions during fiscal years
2009 and 2008 have not been presented because the effects of the acquisitions,
individually or in the aggregate, were not material to our results.
note
7 - goodwill
the
carrying amount of goodwill is as follows:
january25,
january27,
(in
thousands)
portalplayer
$
104,896
$
104,473
3dfx
75,326
75,326
mental
images
59,252
63,086
mediaq
35,167
35,167
uli
31,115
31,115
hybrid
graphics
27,906
27,906
ageia
19,198
-
other
16,984
16,984
total goodwill
$
369,844
$
354,057
during fiscal year 2009, goodwill increased by $15.8 million, primarily due to
$19.2 million of goodwill associated with our acquisition of ageia on february
10, 2008.this increase in goodwill was offset by a decrease of $3.8
million for mental images related to the reassessment of estimates made during
the preliminary purchase price allocation.
goodwill
is subject to our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year, or earlier if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair
value-based approach.we completed our most recent annual impairment
test during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 and concluded that there was
no impairment. in computing fair value of our reporting units, we use
estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows from such units. this
assessment is based upon a discounted cash flow analysis and analysis of our
market capitalization. the estimate of cash flow is based upon, among other
things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance such as
revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future
cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions,
and determination of appropriate market comparables. our estimates of discounted
cash flows may differ from actual cash flows due to, among other things,
economic conditions, changes to our business model or changes in operating
performance. additionally, certain estimates of discounted cash flows involve
businesses with limited financial history and developing revenue models, which
increase the risk of differences between the projected and actual performance.
significant differences between these estimates and actual cash flows could
materially affect our future financial results. these factors increase the risk
of differences between projected and actual performance that could impact future
estimates of fair value of all reporting units.in addition, determining
the number of reporting units and the fair value of a reporting unit requires us
to make judgments and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions.
we also make judgments and assumptions in allocating assets and liabilities to
each of our reporting units. we base our fair value estimates on assumptions we
believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently
uncertain.the long-term financial forecast represents
the best estimate that we have at this time and we believe that its underlying
assumptions are reasonable. however, actual performance in the near-term and
longer-term could be materially different from these forecasts, which could
impact future estimates of fair value of our reporting units and may result in a
charge to earnings in future periods due to the potential for a write-down of
goodwill in connection with such tests.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the amount of goodwill allocated to our gpu, psb, mcp and cpb segments as of
january25, 2009, was $86.9 million, $95.1 million, $46.2 million and
$141.6 million, respectively. as of january27, 2008, the amount of
goodwill allocated to our gpu, psb, mcp and cpb segments, was$67.8
million, $99.0 million, $46.3 million and $141.0 million,
respectively.please refer to note 16of these notes to the
consolidated financial statements for further segment information.
note 8
- amortizable intangible assets
the components of our amortizable intangible assets are as follows:
january25,2009
january27,2008
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
netcarrying
amount
weighted
average useful life
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
netcarrying
amount
weighted
average useful life
(in
thousands)
(in years)
(in
thousands)
(in years)
technology
licenses
$
130,654
$
(34,610
)
$
96,044
9.4
$
94,970
$
(32,630
)
$
62,340
9.1
acquired
intellectual property
75,340
(35,200
)
40,140
4.0
77,900
(41,030
)
36,870
4.1
patents
18,588
(7,671
)
10,917
5.3
35,348
(27,632
)
7,716
4.3
other
-
-
-
-
1,494
(1,494
)
-
-
total intangible
assets
$
224,582
$
(77,481
)
$
147,101
$
209,712
$
(102,786
)
$
106,926
the increase
in the gross carrying amount of technology licenses as of january 25, 2009 when
compared tojanuary 27, 2008 is primarily related to approximately $21.8
million of net cash outflows during fiscal year 2009 under a confidential patent
licensing arrangement that we originally entered into during fiscal year 2007
and $25.0 million towards the purchase of a non-exclusive license related to
advanced power management and other computing technologies that we entered into
during fiscal year 2009.these increases were offset by amortization
for fiscal year 2009. additionally, the increase in the net carrying value of
acquired intellectual property is primarily related to the intangible assets
that resulted from our acquisition of ageia during fiscal year 2009, offset by
amortization for fiscal year 2009. please refer to note 6 of these notes to the
consolidated financial statements for further information.during fiscal
year 2009, the increase in the gross carrying amount of the intangible assets
was offset by the write-off of fully amortized intangible assets that are no
longer in use.
amortization expense associated with intangible assets for fiscal years 2009,
2008 and 2007 was $32.6 million, $24.5 million and $19.8
million,respectively. future amortization expense for the net carrying
amount of intangible assets at january25, 2009 is estimated to be, $30.9
million in fiscal year 2010, $27.2 million in fiscal year 2011, $24.6 million in
fiscal year 2012, $18.6 million in fiscal year 2013, $14.1million in fiscal year
2014 and $31.7 million in fiscal years subsequent to fiscal year
2014.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes to the
consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note 9
- marketable securities
we account for our investment instruments in accordance with statement of
financial accounting standards no. 115, or sfas no.115,accounting for certain investments
in debt and equity securities. all of our cash equivalents and marketable
securities are treated as available-for-sale under sfas no.115. our
investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier investment grade securities,
the diversification of asset type and certain limits on our portfolio duration,
as specified in our investment policy guidelines. these guidelines also limit
the amount of credit exposure to any one issue, issuer or type of instrument.
the following is a summary of cash equivalents and marketable securities at
january25, 2009 and january27, 2008:
january25,
amortized
cost
unrealized
gain
unrealized
loss
estimated
fair
value
(in
thousands)
debt
securities of united statesgovernment agencies
$
313,319
$
4,815
$
(13
)
$
318,121
corporate
debt securities
252,265
(1,771
)
251,174
mortgage
backed securities issued by united states government-sponsored
enterprises
162,243
(1,405
)
161,199
money
market funds
139,046
-
-
139,046
commercial
paper
56,995
-
56,997
debt
securities issued by united states treasury
53,407
1,868
-
55,275
asset-backed
securities
39,014
(227
)
38,858
total
$
1,016,289
$
7,797
$
(3,416
)
$
1,020,670
classified
as:
cash
equivalents
$
182,968
marketable
securities
837,702
total
$
1,020,670
january27,
amortized
cost
unrealized
gain
unrealized
loss
estimated
fair value
(in
thousands)
commercial
paper
$
513,887
$
$
(2
)
$
513,916
debt
securities of united statesgovernment agencies
363,434
4,365
(69
)
367,730
corporate
debt securities
361,452
2,844
(281
)
364,015
money
market funds
218,055
-
-
218,055
asset-backed
securities
110,287
1,232
(11
)
111,508
mortgage
backed securities issued by united states government-sponsored
enterprises
69,620
(5
)
70,384
debt
securities issued by united states treasury
29,327
-
29,583
equity
securities
2,491
1,613
-
4,104
total
$
1,668,553
$
11,110
$
(368
)
$
1,679,295
classified
as:
cash
equivalents
$
596,786
marketable
securities
1,082,509
total
$
1,679,295
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the
following table provides the breakdown of the investments with unrealized losses
at january25, 2009:
less
than 12 months
months or greater
total
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
(in
thousands)
corporate
debt securities
90,253
(885
)
55,888
(886
)
146,141
(1,771
)
mortgage
backed securities issued by united states government-sponsored
enterprises
4,851
(79
)
95,552
(1,326
)
100,403
(1,405
)
debt
securities of united states government agencies
24,971
(3
)
20,003
(10
)
44,974
(13
)
asset-backed
securities
$
18,484
$
(151
)
$
3,669
$
(76
)
$
22,153
$
(227
)
total
$
138,559
$
(1,118
)
$
175,112
$
(2,298
)
$
313,671
$
(3,416
)
we performed
an impairment review of our investment portfolio as of january 25,
2009.factors consider general market conditions, the duration and extent
to which fair value is below cost, and our intent and ability to hold an
investment for a sufficient period of time to allow for recovery in
value.we also consider specific adverse conditions related to the
financial health of and business outlook for an investee, including industry and
sector performance, changes in technology, operational and financing cash flow
factors, and changes in an investees credit rating. investments that we
identify as having an indicator of impairment are subject to further analysis to
determine if the investment was other than temporarily impaired.
as of january 25, 2009 we had fifty seven investments that were in an unrealized
loss position with unrealized loss duration of less than one year. the gross
unrealized losses related to fixed income securities were due to changes in
interest rates.we have determined that the gross unrealized losses on
investment securities at january25, 2009 are temporary in nature.
currently, we have the intent and ability to hold our investments with
impairment indicators until maturity. based on our quarterly impairment review
and having considered the guidance in statement of financial accounting
standards staff position no. 115-1, or fsp no. 115-1, a guide to the implementation of
statement 115 on accounting for certain investments in debt and equity
securities, werecorded other than temporary impairment charges of
$9.9 million during the year ended january 25, 2009. these charges include $5.6
million related to what we believe is an other than temporary impairment of our
investment in the money market funds held by the reserve international liquidity
fund, ltd., or international reserve fund; $2.5 million related to a decline in
the value of publicly traded equity securities and $1.8 million related to debt
securities held by us that were issued by companies that have filed for
bankruptcy as of january 25, 2009.please refer to note 17 of these
notes to the consolidated financial statements for further details. we concluded
that our investments were appropriately valued and that, except for the $9.9
million impairment charges recognized during fiscal year 2009, no other than
temporary impairment charges werenecessary on our portfolio of available
for sale investments as of january 25, 2009.
net realized gains (losses), excluding any impairment charges, for fiscal year
2009 was $2.1 million. net realized gains (losses) for fiscal years 2008 and
2007 were not material. as of january 25, 2009, we had a net unrealized gain of
$4.4 million, which was comprised of gross unrealized gains of $7.8
million,offset by $3.4 million of gross unrealized losses.as
of january 27, 2008, we had a net unrealized gain of $10.7 million, which was
comprised of gross unrealized gains of $11.1 million,offset by $0.4
million of gross unrealized losses.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the amortized cost and estimated fair value of cash equivalents and marketable
securities which are primarily debt instruments, are classified as
available-for-sale at january25, 2009 and january27, 2008 and are
shown below by contractual maturity.
january25,
january27,
amortized
cost
estimated
fair
value
amortized
cost
estimated
fair
value
(in
thousands)
less
than one year
$
484,869
$
484,616
$
1,141,725
$
1,144,021
due
in 1 - 5 years
369,177
374,855
454,717
460,786
due
in 6 - 7 years
-
-
-
-
mortgage-backed
securities issued by government-sponsored enterprises not due at a single
maturity date
162,243
161,199
69,620
70,384
total
$
1,016,289
$
1,020,670
$
1,666,062
$
1,675,191
note
10 - balance sheet components
certain balance sheet components are as follows:
january25,
january27,
inventories:
(in
thousands)
raw
materials
$
27,804
$
31,299
work
in-process
132,960
107,835
finished
goods
377,070
219,387
total
inventories
$
537,834
$
358,521
january25,
january27,
estimated
usefullife
(in
thousands)
(years)
property
and equipment:
land
$
217,866
$
38,442
(a)
building
29,216
4,104
3-25
test
equipment
234,368
186,774
software
and licenses
201,560
246,725
3 -
leasehold
improvements
136,008
103,353
(b)
computer
equipment
125,533
137,642
office
furniture and equipment
32,224
28,220
capital
leases
26,618
-
(c)
construction
in process
5,360
8,258
(d)
1,008,753
753,518
accumulated
depreciation and amortization
(382,955
)
(393,710
)
total property and
equipment, net
$
625,798
$
359,808
the increase in property and equipment, net, at january 25, 2009 compared to
january 27, 2008, includes the purchase of a property that is comprised of
approximately 25 acres of land and ten commercial buildings in santa clara,
california, for approximately $194.8 million.during fiscal year
2009, the increase in the gross carrying amount of the property and equipment
was offset by the write-off of fully depreciated assets that were no longer in
use.
(a) land
is a non-depreciable asset.
(b)leasehold
improvements are amortized based on the lesser of either the assets estimated
useful life or the remaining lease term.
(c)capital
leases are amortized based on the lesser of either the assets estimated useful
life or the remaining lease term.
(d)construction
in process represents assets that are not in service as of the balance sheet
date.
depreciation expense for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $152.4 million,
$111.0 million and $88.0 million, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
january25,
january27,
prepaid
expenses and other
(in
thousands)
prepaid
maintenance
$
11,268
$
10,996
prepaid
insurance
5,400
6,140
prepaid
taxes
3,571
prepaid
rent
3,254
2,912
other
16,301
23,017
total prepaid expenses and other
$
39,794
$
43,068
january25,
january27,
deposits
and other assets
(in
thousands)
prepaid
maintenance, long term
$
20,005
$
20,958
lease
deposits
10,583
8,372
investment
in non-affiliates
6,412
7,481
other
3,026
1,240
total deposits and other assets
$
40,026
$
38,051
january
25,
january27,
accrued
liabilities:
(in
thousands)
accrued
customer programs (1)
$
239,797
$
271,869
warranty
accrual (2)
150,629
5,707
accrued
payroll and related expenses
82,449
122,284
accrued
legal settlement (3)
30,600
30,600
deferred
rent
11,643
11,982
deferred
revenue
3,774
5,856
other
40,835
26,764
total accrued liabilities and other
$
559,727
$
475,062
the decrease in accrued payroll and related expenses as of as of january 25,
2009 when compared to january 27, 2008 primarily relates to decreases in accrued
bonus and variable compensation accruals in fiscal year 2009.
(1)please
refer to note 1 of these notes to these consolidated financial statements for
discussion regarding the nature of accrued customer programs and their
accounting treatment related to our revenue recognition policies and
estimates.
(2)please
refer to note 11 of these notes to these consolidated financial statements for
discussion regarding the warranty accrual.
(3)please
refer to note 12 of these notes to these consolidated financial statements for
discussion regarding the 3dfx litigation.
january
25,
january27,
other
long term liabilities:
(in
thousands)
deferred
income tax liability
$
75,252
$
86,900
income
tax payable
49,248
44,235
asset
retirement obligations
9,515
6,469
other
17,835
24,994
total other long-term liabilities
$
151,850
$
162,598
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
11 - guarantees
fasb interpretation no.45, or fin 45, guarantors accounting and
disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of
indebtedness of others, requires that upon issuance of a guarantee, the
guarantor must recognize a liability for the fair value of the obligation it
assumes under that guarantee. in addition, fin 45 requires disclosures about the
guarantees that an entity has issued, including a tabular reconciliation of the
changes of the entitys product warranty liabilities.
product defect
our products are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to
any number of issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use
within a system. if any of our products or technologies contains a defect,
compatibility issue or other error, we may have to invest additional research
and development efforts to find and correct the issue.such efforts
could divert our managements and engineers attention from the development of
new products and technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce
our gross margin. in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or
related software drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result
in failure to achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be
required to reimburse customers, including for customers costs to repair or
replace the products in the field. a product recall or a significant number of
product returns could be expensive, damage our reputation and could result in
the shifting of business to our competitors. costs associated with correcting
defects, errors, bugs or other issues could be significant and could materially
harm our financial results.
in july 2008, we recorded a $196.0 million charge against cost of revenue to
cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and other
associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in certain
versions of our previous generation media and communications processor, or mcp,
and gpu products used in notebook systems. all of our newly manufactured
products and all of our products that are currently shipping in volume have a
different material set that we believe is more robust.
the previous generation mcp and gpu products that are impacted were included in
a number of notebook products that were shipped and sold in significant
quantities. certain notebook configurations of these mcp and gpu products are
failing in the field at higher than normal rates. while we have not been able to
determine a root cause for these failures, testing suggests a weak material set
of die/package combination, system thermal management designs, and customer use
patterns are contributing factors. we have worked with our customers to develop
and have made available for download a software driver to cause the system fan
to begin operation at the powering up of the system and reduce the thermal
stress on these chips. we have also recommended to our customers that they
consider changing the thermal management of the mcp and gpu products in their
notebook system designs. we intend to fully support our customers in their
repair and replacement of these impacted mcp and gpu products that fail, and
their other efforts to mitigate the consequences of these failures.
we continue to engage in discussions with our supply chain regarding
reimbursement to us for some or all of the costs we have incurred and may incur
in the future relating to the weak material set. we also continue to seek to
access our insurance coverage, which provided us with $8.0 million in related
reimbursement during fiscal year 2009. however, there can be no assurance that
we will recover any additional reimbursement. we continue to not see any
abnormal failure rates in any systems using nvidia products other than certain
notebook configurations. however, we are continuing to test and otherwise
investigate other products. there can be no assurance that we will not discover
defects in other mcp or gpu products.
in september, october and november2008, several putative class
action lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims related to the
impacted mcp and gpu products.please refer to note 12 of these notes
to these consolidated financial statements for further information regarding
this litigation.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
accrual for estimated product returns and product warranty
liabilities
we record a reduction to revenue for estimated product returns at the time
revenue is recognized primarily based on historical return rates. cost of
revenue includes the estimated cost of product warranties that are calculated at
the point of revenue recognition. under limited circumstances, we may offer an
extended limited warranty to customers for certain
products.additionally, we accrue for known warranty and
indemnification issues if a loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated.
the estimated product returns and estimated product warranty liabilities for
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 are as follows:
january
25, 2009
january
27, 2008
january28,
(in
thousands)
balanceat
beginningof period
$
24,432
$
17,959
$
10,239
additions(1),(4)
217,114
27,763
40,515
deductions(2),(5)
(73,579
)
(21,290
)
(32,795
)
balanceat
end of period(3)
$
167,967
$
24,432
$
17,959
(1)includes $27.9 million,
$25.5 million and $37.0 million, respectively, for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and
2007, towards allowance for sales returns estimated at the time revenue is
recognized primarily based on historical return rates and is charged as a
reduction to revenue.
(2)
includes $29.2 million, $21.3 million and $32.8 million, respectively, for
fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, written off against allowance for sales
returns.
(3)includes $17.3 million,
$18.7 million and $14.5 million, respectively, as of january 25, 2009, january
27, 2008 and january28, 2007 relating to allowance for sales
returns.
(4)
includes $196.0 million for fiscal year 2009 for incremental repair and
replacement costs from a weak die/packaging material set, offset by $6.7 million
for fiscal year 2009 related to the reimbursement of claims received from an
insurance provider that were allocated to cost of revenue.
(5)
includes $43.6 million for fiscal year 2009 in deductions towards warranty
accrual associated with incremental repair and replacement costs from a weak
die/packaging material set.
in connection with
certain agreements that we have executed in the past, we have at times provided
indemnities to cover the indemnified party for matters such as tax, product and
employee liabilities. we have also on occasion included intellectual property
indemnification provisions in our technology related agreements with third
parties. maximum potential future payments cannot be estimated because many of
these agreements do not have a maximum stated liability. as such, we have not
recorded any liability in our consolidated financial statements for such
indemnifications. fasb interpretation no.45, or fin 45, guarantors accounting and
disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of
indebtedness of others, requires that upon issuance of a guarantee, the
guarantor must recognize a liability for the fair value of the obligation it
assumes under that guarantee. in addition, fin 45 requires disclosures about the
guarantees that an entity has issued, including a tabular reconciliation of the
changes of the entitys product warranty liabilities.
note
12 - financial arrangements, commitments and contingencies
inventory purchase obligations
at january25, 2009 and january27, 2008, we had outstanding inventory
purchase obligations totaling $290.7 million and $651.6 million,
respectively.
capital purchase obligations
at january25, 2009 and january27, 2008, we had outstanding capital
purchase obligations totaling $20.3 million and $11.8 million,
respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
lease obligations
our headquarters complex is located in santa clara, california and is comprised
of eleven buildings that are a combination of owned and leased properties. the
lease agreements for five of the seven leased properties expire in fiscal year
2013 and include two seven-year renewals at our option; one leased property
expires in fiscal year 2012 with an option to extend for one year; and the
remaining leased building expires in fiscal year 2015 with one option to extend
for seven years.future minimum lease payments under these operating
leases total $92.3 million over the remaining terms of the leases, including
predetermined rent escalations, and are included in the future minimum lease
payment schedule below.
in addition to the commitment of our headquarters, we have other domestic and
international office facilities under operating leases expiring through fiscal
year 2018. future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating
leases as of january25, 2009, are as follows:
future
minimum lease obligations
(inthousands)
year
ending january:
$
44,448
42,763
41,196
13,244
7,906
and thereafter
4,068
total
$
153,625
rent expense for the years ended january 25, 2009, january 27, 2008 and january
28, 2007 was $43.0 million, $38.2 million and $32.6 million,
respectively.
in addition to these operating leases, we have a capital lease for a data center
located near our headquarters complex in santa clara, california. future minimum
lease payments under this capital lease total $48.0 million over the remaining
lease term, including predetermined rent escalations, and are included in the
future minimum lease payment schedule below:
future
capital lease obligations
(inthousands)
year
ending january:
$
4,185
4,311
4,440
4,573
4,710
and thereafter
25,757
total
$
47,976
present value of minimum
lease payments
$
26,562
current
portion
$
long term
portion
$
25,634
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
litigation
3dfx
on december 15, 2000, nvidia and one of our indirect subsidiaries entered into
an asset purchase agreement, or apa, to purchase certain graphics chip assets
from 3dfx.the transaction closed on april 18, 2001.that
acquisition, and 3dfx's october 2002 bankruptcy filing, led to four lawsuits
against nvidia: two brought by 3dfx's former landlords, one by 3dfx's bankruptcy
trustee and the fourth by a committee of 3dfx's equity security holders in the
bankruptcy estate.
landlord lawsuits
in may
2002, we were served with a california state court complaint filed by the
landlord of 3dfxs san jose, california commercial real estate lease, carlyle
fortran trust, or carlyle. in december 2002, we were served with a california
state court complaint filed by the landlord of 3dfxs austin, texas commercial
real estate lease, carramerica realty corporation, or carramerica. the landlords
both asserted claims for, among other things, interference with contract,
successor liability and fraudulent transfer. the landlords sought to recover
damages in the aggregate amount of approximately $15 million, representing
amounts then owed on the 3dfx leases.the cases were later removed to
the united states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california when
3dfx filed its bankruptcy petition and consolidated for pretrial purposes with
an action brought by the bankruptcy trustee.
in 2005, the u.s. district court for the northern district of california
withdrew the reference to the bankruptcy court for the landlords actions, and
on november 10, 2005, granted our motion to dismiss both landlords
complaints.the landlords filed amended complaints in early february
2006, and nvidia again filed motions to dismiss those claims. on september 29,
2006, the district court dismissed the carramerica action in its entirety and
without leave to amend.on december 15, 2006, the district court also
dismissed the carlyle action in its entirety.both landlords filed
timely notices of appeal from those orders.
on july 17, 2008, the united
states court of appeals for the ninth circuit held oral argument on the
landlords' appeals. on november 25, 2008, the court of appeals issued its
opinion affirming the dismissal of carlyles complaint in its
entirety.the court of appeals also affirmed the dismissal of most of
carramericas complaint, but reversed the district courts dismissal of
carramericas claims for interference with contractual relations and
fraud.on december 8, 2008, carlyle filed a request for rehearing
en banc, which
carramerica joined. that same day, carlyle also filed a motion for clarification
of the courts opinion.on january 22, 2009, the court of appeals
denied the request for rehearing en banc, but clarified its
opinion affirming dismissal of the claims by stating that carramerica had
standing to pursue claims for interference with contractual relations, fraud,
conspiracy and tort of another, and remanding carlyles case with instructions
that the district court evaluate whether the trustee had abandoned any claims,
which carlyle might have standing to pursue.
the district court
held a status conference in the carramerica and carlyle cases on march 9,
2009.that same day, 3dfxs bankruptcy trustee filed in the
bankruptcy court a notice of trustees intention to compromise controversy with
carlyle fortran trust.according to that notice, the trustee would
abandon any claims it has against us for intentional interference with contract,
negligent interference with prospective economic advantage, aiding and abetting
breach of fiduciary duty, declaratory relief, unfair business practices and tort
of another, in exchange for which carlyle will withdraw irrevocably its proof of
claim against the 3dfx bankruptcy estate and waive any further right of
distribution from the estate.in light of the trustees notice, the
district court ordered the parties to seek a hearing on the notice on or before
april 24, 2009, ordered carlyle and carramerica to file amended complaints by
may 10, 2009, and set a further case management conference for may 18, 2009. we
continue to believe that there is no merit to carlyle or carramericas remaining
claims.
trustee lawsuit
in march 2003, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to represent 3dfxs
bankruptcy estate served his complaint on nvidia.the trustees
complaint asserts claims for, among other things, successor liability and
fraudulent transfer and seeks additional payments from us.the
trustee's fraudulent transfer theory alleged that nvidia had failed to pay
reasonably equivalent value for 3dfx's assets, and sought recovery of the
difference between the $70 million paid and the alleged fair value, which the
trustee estimated to exceed $50 million.the trustee's successor
liability theory alleged nvidia was effectively 3dfx's legal successor and was
therefore responsible for all of 3dfx's unpaid liabilities.this
action was consolidated for pretrial purposes with the landlord cases, as noted
above.
on october 13, 2005, the bankruptcy court heard the trustees motion for summary
adjudication, and on december 23, 2005, denied that motion in all material
respects and held that nvidia may not dispute that the value of the 3dfx
transaction was less than $108 million. the bankruptcy court denied the
trustees request to find that the value of the 3dfx assets conveyed to nvidia
was at least $108 million.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
in early november 2005, after several months of mediation, nvidia and the
official committee of unsecured creditors, or the creditors committee, agreed
to a plan of liquidation of 3dfx, which included a conditional settlement of the
trustees claims against us. this conditional settlement was subject to a
confirmation process through a vote of creditors and the review and approval of
the bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement called for a payment by nvidia
of approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx estate. under the settlement, $5.6
million related to various administrative expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0
million related to the satisfaction of debts and liabilities owed to the general
unsecured creditors of 3dfx. accordingly, during the three month period ended
october 30, 2005, we recorded $5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and
$25.0 million as additional purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee
advised that he intended to object to the settlement. the conditional settlement
never progressed substantially through the confirmation process.
on december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court scheduled a trial for one portion of
the trustees case against nvidia. on january 2, 2007, nvidia terminated the
settlement agreement on grounds that the bankruptcy court had failed to proceed
toward confirmation of the creditors committees plan. a non-jury trial began
on march 21, 2007 on valuation issues in the trustee's constructive fraudulent
transfer claims against nvidia. specifically, the bankruptcy court tried four
questions: (1) what did 3dfx transfer to nvidia in the apa?; (2) of what was
transferred, what qualifies as "property" subject to the bankruptcy court's
avoidance powers under the uniform fraudulent transfer act and relevant
bankruptcy code provisions?; (3) what is the fair market value of the "property"
identified in answer to question (2)?; and (4) was the $70 million that nvidia
paid "reasonably equivalent" to the fair market value of that property? the
parties completed post-trial briefing on may 25, 2007.
on april 30, 2008, the bankruptcy court issued its memorandum decision after
trial, in which it provided a detailed summary of the trial proceedings and the
parties' contentions and evidence and concluded that "the creditors of 3dfx were
not injured by the transaction."this decision did not entirely
dispose of the trustee's action, however, as the trustee's claims for successor
liability and intentional fraudulent conveyance were still
pending.on june 19, 2008, nvidia filed a motion for summary judgment
to convert the memorandum decision after trial to a final
judgment.that motion was granted in its entirety and judgment was
entered in nvidias favor on september 11, 2008. the trustee filed a notice of
appeal from that judgment on september 22, 2008, and on september 25, 2008,
nvidia exercised its election to have the appeal heard by the united states
district court, where the appeal is pending.
while the conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed
through the confirmation process, the trustees case still remains pending
appeal.as such, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6 million -
$5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx  that we recorded during the three months ended october
30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees case. we do not
believe the resolution of this matter will have a material impact on our results
of operations or financial position.
the equity committee lawsuit
on december 8, 2005, the trustee filed a form 8-k on behalf of 3dfx, disclosing
the terms of the conditional settlement agreement between nvidia and the
creditors committee. thereafter, certain 3dfx shareholders filed a petition
with the bankruptcy court to appoint an official committee to represent the
claimed interests of 3dfx shareholders. the court granted that petition and
appointed an equity securities holders committee, or the equity committee. the
equity committee thereafter sought and obtained an order granting it standing to
bring suit against nvidia, for the benefit of the bankruptcy estate, to compel
nvidia to pay the stock consideration then unpaid from the apa, and filed its
own competing plan of reorganization/liquidation. the equity committees plan
assumes that 3dfx can raise additional equity capital that would be used to
retire all of 3dfxs debts, and thus to trigger nvidia's obligation to pay six
million shares of stock consideration specified in the apa. nvidia contends,
among other things, that such a commitment is not sufficient and that its
obligation to pay the stock consideration had long before been extinguished. on
may 1, 2006, the equity committee filed its lawsuit for declaratory relief to
compel nvidia to pay the stock consideration. in addition, the equity committee
filed a motion seeking bankruptcy court approval of investor protections for
harbinger capital partners master fund i, ltd., an equity investment fund that
conditionally agreed to pay no more than $51.5 million for preferred stock in
3dfx. the hearing on that motion was held on january 18, 2007, and the
bankruptcy court approved the proposed protections.
nvidia corporation and
subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
after the bankruptcy court denied our motion to dismiss on september 6, 2006,
the equity committee again amended its complaint, and nvidia moved to dismiss
that amended complaint as well. on december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court
granted the motion as to one of the equity committees claims, and denied it as
to the others. however, the bankruptcy court also ruled that nvidia would only
be required to answer the first three causes of action by which the equity
committee seeks determinations that (1) the apa was not terminated before 3dfx
filed for bankruptcy protection, (2) the 3dfx bankruptcy estate still holds some
rights in the apa, and (3) the apa is capable of being assumed by the bankruptcy
estate.
because of the trial of the trustee's fraudulent transfer claims against nvidia,
the equity committee's lawsuit did not progress substantially in
2007.on july 31, 2008, the equity committee filed a motion for
summary judgment on its first three causes of action.on september
15, 2008, nvidia filed a cross-motion for summary judgment.on
october 24, 2008, the court held a hearing on the parties cross-motions for
summary judgment.on january 6, 2009, the bankruptcy court issued a
memorandum decision granting nvidias motion and denying the equity committees
motion, and entered an order to that effect on january 30, 2009. on february 27,
2009, the bankruptcy court entered judgment in favor of nvidia. the equity
committee has waived its right to appeal by stipulation entered on february 18,
2009, and the judgment is now final.
proceedings, sec inquiry and lawsuits related to our historical stock option
granting practices
in june 2006, the audit committee of the board of nvidia ("audit committee"),
began a review of our stock option practices based on the results of an internal
review voluntarily undertaken by management. the audit committee, with the
assistance of outside legal counsel, completed its review on november 13, 2006
when the audit committee reported its findings to our full board. the review
covered option grants to all employees, directors and consultants for all grant
dates during the period from our initial public offering in january 1999 through
june 2006. based on the findings of the audit committee and our internal review,
we identified a number of occasions on which we used an incorrect measurement
date for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
we voluntarily contacted the sec regarding the audit committees
review.in late august 2006, the sec initiated an inquiry related to
our historical stock option grant practices. in october 2006, we met with the
sec and provided it with a review of the status of the audit committees review.
in november 2006, we voluntarily provided the sec with additional documents. we
continued to cooperate with the sec throughout its inquiry.on
october 26, 2007, the sec formally notified us that the sec's investigation
concerning our historical stock option granting practices had been terminated
and that no enforcement action was recommended.
concurrently with our internal review and the secs inquiry, since september 29,
2006, ten derivative cases have been filed in state and federal courts asserting
claims concerning errors related to our historical stock option granting
practices and associated accounting for stock-based compensation expense. these
complaints have been filed in various courts, including the california superior
court, santa clara county, the united states district court for the northern
district of california, and the court of chancery of the state of delaware in
and for new castle county. the california superior court cases were subsequently
consolidated as were the cases pending in the northern district of california.
all of the cases purport to be brought derivatively on behalf of nvidia against
members of our board and several of our current and former officers and
directors. plaintiffs in these actions allege claims for, among other things,
breach of fiduciary duty, unjust enrichment, insider selling, abuse of control,
gross mismanagement, waste, and constructive fraud. the northern district of
california action also alleges violations of federal provisions, including
sections 10(b) and 14(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934. the plaintiffs
seek to recover for nvidia, among other things, damages in an unspecified
amount, rescission, punitive damages, treble damages for insider selling, and
fees and costs. plaintiffs also seek an accounting, a constructive trust and
other equitable relief.
on august 5, 2007, our board authorized the formation of a special litigation
committee to investigate, evaluate, and make a determination as to how nvidia
should proceed with respect to the claims and allegations asserted in the
underlying derivative cases brought on behalf of nvidia. the special litigation
committee has made substantial progress in completing its work, but has not yet
issued a report.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
between june 2007 and september 2008 the parties to the actions engaged in
settlement discussions, including four mediation sessions before the honorable
edward infante (ret.).on september 22, 2008, we disclosed that we
had entered into memoranda of understanding regarding the settlement of all
derivative actions concerning our historical stock option granting
practices.on november 10, 2008, the definitive settlement agreements
were concurrently filed in the chancery court of delaware and the united states
district court for the northern district of california and are subject to
approval by both such courts.the settlement agreements do not
contain any admission of wrongdoing or fault on the part of nvidia, our board of
directors or executive officers.the terms of the settlement
agreements include, among other things, the agreement by the board of directors
to continue and to implement certain corporate governance changes;
acknowledgement of the prior amendment of certain options through re-pricings
and limitations of the relevant exercise periods; an agreement by jen-hsun
huang, our president and chief executive officer, to amend additional options to
increase the aggregate exercise price of such options by $3.5 million or to
cancel options with an intrinsic value of $3.5 million; an $8.0 million cash
payment by our insurance carrier to nvidia; and an agreement to not object to
attorneys fees to be paid by nvidia to plaintiffs counsel of no more than
$7.25 million, if approved by the courts.on january 24, 2009, a
notice of pendency and settlement of shareholder derivative actions was mailed
to shareholders of record and posted on www.nvidia.com.on
march 11, 2009, a final settlement hearing was held in the delaware chancery
courtand, on the same date, the court entereda final order and
judgment, which approved the requested attorneys' fees and dismissed the
delaware action with prejudice. the final approval hearing in the northern
district of california is scheduled for march 17, 2009.
department of justice subpoena and investigation, and civil cases
on november 29, 2006, we received a subpoena from the san francisco office of
the antitrust division of the united states department of justice, or doj, in
connection with the doj's investigation into potential antitrust violations
related to gpus and cards.on october 10, 2008, the doj
formally notified us that the doj investigation has been closed. no specific
allegations were made against nvidia during the investigation.
as of january 25, 2009, over 50 civil complaints have been filed against us. the
majority of the complaints were filed in the northern district of california,
several were filed in the central district of california, and other cases were
filed in several other federal district courts.on april 18, 2007,
the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation transferred the actions currently
pending outside of the northern district of california to the northern district
of california for coordination of pretrial proceedings before the honorable
william h. alsup.by agreement of the parties, judge alsup will
retain jurisdiction over the consolidated cases through trial or other
resolution.
in the consolidated proceedings, two groups of plaintiffs (one putatively
representing all direct purchasers of gpus and the other putatively representing
all indirect purchasers) filed consolidated, amended class-action complaints.
these complaints purport to assert federal antitrust claims based on alleged
price fixing, market allocation, and other alleged anti-competitive agreements
between us and ati technologies, ulc., or ati, and advanced micro devices, inc.,
or amd, as a result of its acquisition of ati.the indirect
purchasers consolidated amended complaint also asserts a variety of state law
antitrust, unfair competition and consumer protection claims on the same
allegations, as well as a common law claim for unjust enrichment.
plaintiffs filed their first consolidated complaints on june 14,
2007.on july 16, 2007, we moved to dismiss those
complaints.the motions to dismiss were heard by judge alsup on
september 20, 2007.the court subsequently granted and denied the
motions in part, and gave the plaintiffs leave to move to amend the
complaints.on november 7, 2007, the court granted plaintiffs motion
to file amended complaints, ordered defendants to answer the complaints, lifted
a previously entered stay on discovery, and set a trial date for january 12,
2009.plaintiffs filed motions for class certification on april 24,
2008.we filed oppositions to the motions on may 20,
2008.on july 18, 2008, the court ruled on plaintiffs class
certification motions.the court denied class certification for the
proposed class of indirect purchasers.the court granted in part
class certification for the direct purchasers but limited the direct purchaser
class to individual purchasers that acquired graphics processing cards products
directly from nvidia or ati from their websites between december 4, 2002 and
november 7, 2007.
on september16, 2008, we executed a settlement agreement, or the
agreement, in connection with the claims of the certified class of direct
purchaser plaintiffs approved by the court.pursuant to the
agreement, nvidia has paid $850,000 into a $1.7 million fund to be made
available for payments to the certified class. we are not obligated under the
agreement to pay plaintiffs attorneys fees, costs, or make any other payments
in connection with the settlement other than the payment of $850,000. the
agreement is subject to court approval and, if approved, would dispose of all
claims and appeals raised by the certified class in the complaints against
nvidia. a final settlement approval hearing is scheduled for march 26,
2009. because the court certified a class consisting only of a narrow group of
direct purchasers, the agreement does not resolve any claims that other direct
purchasers may assert. in addition, on september9, 2008, we reached
a settlement agreement with the remaining individual indirect purchaser
plaintiffs pursuant to which nvidia paid $112,500 in exchange for a dismissal of
all claims and appeals related to the complaints raised by the individual
indirect purchaser plaintiffs. this settlement is not subject to the approval of
the court. pursuant to the settlement, the individual indirect purchaser
plaintiffs in the complaints have dismissed their claims and withdrawn their
appeal of the class certification ruling.because the court did not
certify a class of indirect purchasers, this settlement agreement resolves only
the claims of those indirect purchasers that were named inthe various
actions.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
rambus corporation
on july 10, 2008, rambus corporation, or rambus, filed suit against nvidia
corporation, asserting patent infringement of 17 patents claimed to be owned by
rambus. rambus seeks damages, enhanced damages and injunctive
relief.the lawsuit was filed in the northern district of california
in san jose, california.on july 11, 2008, nvidia filed suit against
rambus in the middle district of north carolina asserting numerous claims,
including antitrust and other claims.nvidia seeks damages, enhanced
damages and injunctive relief.rambus has since dropped two patents
from its lawsuit in the northern district of california.the two
cases have recently been consolidated into a single action in the northern
district of california.a case management conference in the case
pending in the northern district of california is scheduled for march 30,
2009.on november 6, 2008, rambus filed a complaint alleging a
violation of 19 u.s.c. section 1337 based on a claim of patent infringement
against nvidia and 14 other respondents with the u.s. international trade
commission, or itc.the complaint seeks an exclusion order barring
the importation of products that allegedly infringe nine rambus
patents.the itc has instituted the investigation.nvidia
intends to pursue its offensive and defensive cases vigorously.
product defect litigation and securities cases
in
september,october and november2008, several putative consumer class
action lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims arising from a
weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation
mcp and gpu products used in notebook systems.most of the lawsuits
were filed in federal court in the northern district of california, but three
were filed in state court in california, in federal court in new york, and in
federal court in texas.those three actions have since been removed
or transferred to the united states district court for the northern district of
california, san jose division, where all of the actions now are currently
pending.the various lawsuits are titled nakash v. nvidia corp., feinstein v. nvidia corp.,
inicom networks, inc. v.
nvidia corp. and dell, inc. and hewlett packard, olivos v. nvidia corp., dell, inc. and hewlett
packard, sielicki v.
nvidia corp. and dell, inc., cormier v. nvidia corp.,
national business officers
association, inc. v. nvidia corp., and west v. nvidia
corp.the first amended complaint was filed on october 27,
2008, which no longer asserted claims against dell, inc.the various
complaints assert claims for, among other things, breach of warranty, violations
of the consumer legal remedies act, business & professions code sections
17200 and 17500 and other consumer protection statutes under the laws of various
jurisdictions, unjust enrichment, and strict liability.
the district court has entered orders deeming all of the above casesrelated
under the relevant local rules.on december 11, 2008, nvidia filed a
motion to consolidate all of the aforementioned consumer class action
cases.the district court held a case management conference for the
above cases on february 23, 2009.on february 26, 2009, the district
court consolidated the cases, as well as two other cases pending against
hewlett-packard, under the caption the nvidia gpu litigation and ordered the
plaintiffs to file lead counsel motions by march 2, 2009.on march 2,
2009, several of the parties filed motions for appointment of lead counsel and
briefs addressing certain related issues.a hearing on appointment of
lead counsel is scheduled for march 23, 2009.the district court also
ordered that a consolidated amended complaint be filed on or before may 6,
2009.
in
september 2008, three putative securities class actions, or the actions, were
filed in the united states district court for the northern district of
california arising out of our announcements on july 2, 2008, that we would take
a charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated costs and expenses arising
from a weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous
generation mcp and gpu products and that we were revising financial guidance for
our second quarter of fiscal year 2009. the actions purport to be brought on
behalf of purchasers of nvidia stock and assert claims for violations of
sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. on
october 30, 2008, the actions were consolidated under the caption in re nvidia corporation securities
litigation, civil action no. 08-cv-04260-jw (hrl). lead plaintiffs and
lead plaintiffs' counsel were appointed on december 23, 2008. on february 6,
2009, co-lead plaintiff filed a writ of mandamus with the ninth circuit court of
appeals challenging the designation of co-lead plaintiffs' counsel. on february
19, 2009, co-lead plaintiff filed with the district court, a motion to stay the
district court proceedings pending resolution of the writ of mandamus by the
ninth circuit. on february 24, 2009, judge ware granted the stay. the writ is
still pending in the court of appeals.we
intend to take all appropriate action with respect to the above
cases.
intel
corporation
on february 17, 2009, intel corporation filed suit against nvidia corporation,
seeking declaratory and injunctive relief relating to a licensing agreement that
the parties signed in 2004.the lawsuit was filed in delaware
chancery court.intel seeks an order from the court declaring that
the license does not extend to certain future nvidia chipset products, and
enjoining nvidia from stating that it has licensing rights for these products.
the lawsuit seeks no damages from nvidia.if intel successfully
obtains such a court order, we could be unable to sell our mcp products for use
with intel processors and our competitive position would be
harmed.nvidias response to the intel complaint is currently
due on march 23, 2009.nvidia disputes intels positions and intends
to vigorously defend the case.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
13 - income taxes
the
income tax expense (benefit) applicable to income before income taxes consists
of the following:
yearended
january25,
january27,
january28,
(in
thousands)
current
income taxes:
federal
$
(31
)
$
(988
)
$
(17
)
state
(2,401
)
foreign
8,923
14,665
6,758
total
current
9,025
14,193
4,340
deferred
taxes:
federal
(21,348
)
90,178
41,721
state
foreign
(1,929
)
(1,014
)
total
deferred
(23,277
)
89,164
41,721
charge
in lieu of taxes attributable to employer stock option
plans
1,339
income
tax expense (benefit)
$
(12,913
)
$
103,696
$
46,350
income (loss)
before income taxes consists of the following:
yearended
january25,
january27,
january28,
(in
thousands)
domestic
$
(174,412
)
$
6,416
$
(19,617
)
foreign
131,458
894,925
514,097
$
(42,954
)
$
901,341
$
494,480
the
income tax expense (benefit) differs from the amount computed by applying the
federal statutory income tax rate of 35% to income (loss) before income taxes as
follows:
yearended
january25,
january27,
january28,
(in
thousands)
tax
expense computed at federal statutory rate
$
(15,034
)
$
315,470
$
173,068
state
income taxes, net of federal tax effect
(1,372
)
foreign
tax rate differential
18,875
(178,358
)
(97,390
)
research
tax credit
(22,766
)
(38,857
)
(35,359
)
in-process
research and development
-
-
4,690
stock-based
compensation
5,342
4,828
3,564
other
(287)
)
(851
)
income tax expense
(benefit)
$
(12,913
)
$
103,696
$
46,350
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the tax
effect of temporary differences that gives rise to significant portions of the
deferred tax assets and liabilities are presented below:
january25,
january27,
(in
thousands)
deferred
tax assets:
net
operating loss carryforwards
$
27,593
$
22,814
accruals
and reserves, not currently deductible for tax
purposes
26,015
20,769
property,
equipment and intangible assets
23,935
7,513
research
and other tax credit carryforwards
123,620
147,417
stock-based
compensation
55,680
36,413
gross
deferred tax assets
256,843
234,926
less:
valuation allowance
(92,541
)
(82,522
)
total deferred tax
assets
164,302
152,404
deferred
tax liabilities:
unremitted
earnings of foreign subsidiaries
(223,223
)
(228,227
)
net deferred tax
asset(liability)
$
(58,921
)
$
(75,823
)
income tax
expense (benefit) as a percentage of income (loss) before taxes, or our annual
effective tax rate, was (30.0%), 11.5% and 9.4% for the years ended january 25,
2009, january 27, 2008 and january 28, 2007, respectively. the difference in the
effective tax rates amongst the three years was primarily a result of changes in
our geographic mix of income subject to tax, with the additional impact of the
federal research tax credit recognized in fiscal year 2009 relative to the loss
before taxes in such fiscal year.
as of
january25, 2009, we had a valuation allowance of $92.5million. of
the total valuation allowance, $5.3 million relates to state tax attributes
acquired in certain acquisitions for which realization of the related deferred
tax assets was determined not likely to be realized due, in part, to potential
utilization limitations as a result of stock ownership changes, and $87.2
million relates to state and foreign deferred tax assets that management
determined not likely to be realized due, in part, to projections of future
taxable income. to the extent realization of the deferred tax assets related to
certain acquisitions becomes more-likely-than-not, recognition of these acquired
tax benefits would be reported as a reduction to income tax expense in
accordance with the recent accounting pronouncement, statement of financial
accounting standards no. 141(r), or sfas no. 141(r), business combinations, issued
by the fasb in december 2007.we would also recognize an income tax
benefit during the period that the realization of the deferred tax assets
related to state or foreign tax benefits of $87.2 million becomes
more-likely-than-not.
in
accordance with statement of financial accounting standards no.123(r), or
sfas no. 123(r), share based
payment, our deferred tax assets do not include the excess tax benefit
related to stock-based compensation that are a component of our federal and
state net operating loss and research tax credit carryforwards in the amount of
$588.7 million as of january 25, 2009. consistent with prior years, the excess
tax benefit reflected in our net operating loss and research tax credit
carryforwards will be accounted for as a credit to stockholders equity, if and
when realized.in determining if and when excess tax benefits have
been realized, we have elected to do a with-and-without approach with respect to
such excess tax benefits. we have also elected to ignore the indirect tax
effects of stock-based compensation deductions for financial and accounting
reporting purposes, and specifically to recognize the full effect of the
research tax credit in income from continuing operations.
as of
january25, 2009, we had a federal net operating loss carryforward of $1.16
billion, cumulative state net operating loss carryforwards of $791.6 million,
and a foreign net operating loss carryforward of $25.3 million. the federal net
operating loss carryforward will expire beginning in fiscal 2012, the state net
operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in fiscal 2010 in accordance
with the rules of each particular state, and the foreign net operating loss
carryforward may be carried forward indefinitely.as of
january25, 2009, we had federal research tax credit carryforwards of
$223.0 million that will begin to expire in fiscal 2010.we have
other federal tax credit carryforwards of $1.9 million that will begin to expire
in fiscal 2011. the research tax credit carryforwards attributable to states is
in the amount of $212.3 million, of which $204.8 million is attributable to the
state of california and may be carried over indefinitely, and $7.5 million is
attributable to various other states and will expire beginning in fiscal 2010
according to the rules of each particular state.we have other state
tax credit carryforwards of $7.0 million that will begin to expire in fiscal
2010.utilization of federal and state net operating losses and tax
credit carryforwards may be subject to limitations due to ownership changes and
other limitations provided by the internal revenue code and similar state
provisions.utilization of the foreign net operating loss may be
limited due to a change in business in connection with an ownership
change.if any such limitations apply, the federal, states, or
foreign net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, as applicable, may
expire or be denied before utilization.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
as of january 25, 2009,united statesfederal and state income taxes
have not been provided on approximately $823.6 million of undistributed earnings
of non-united statessubsidiaries as such earnings are considered to be
permanently reinvested.
the company has a tax holiday in effect for its business operations in india
which will terminate in march 2010.this tax holiday provides for a
lower rate of taxation on certain classes of income based on various thresholds
of investment and employment in such jurisdiction.for fiscal year
2009, the tax savings of this holiday was approximately $0.9 million with no
material per-share impact.
on
january 29, 2007, we adopted fasb interpretation no. 48, or fin 48, accounting for uncertainty in income
taxes.the cumulative effect of adoption of fin 48 did not
result in a material adjustment to our tax liability for unrecognized income tax
benefits.as of january 25, 2009, we had $95.3 million of
unrecognized tax benefits, all of which would affect our effective tax rate if
recognized.however, included in the unrecognized tax benefits that
would affect our effective tax rate if recognized of $95.3 million is $19.7
million related to state income tax that, if recognized, would be in the form of
a carryforward deferred tax asset that would likely attract a full valuation
allowance.the $95.3 million of unrecognized tax benefits as of january 25,
2009 consists of $37.4 million recorded in non-current income taxes payable and
$57.9 million reflected as a reduction to the related deferred tax
assets.
a reconciliation of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
january
25, 2009
january
27, 2008
(inthousands)
balance
at beginning of period
$
77,791
$
57,544
increases
in tax positions for prior years
6,297
3,900
decreases
in tax positions for prior years
(272
)
(433
)
increases
in tax positions for current year
13,622
21,716
settlements
(181
)
(2,445
)
lapse
in statute of limitations
(1,938
)
(2,491
)
balance
at end of period
$
95,319
$
77,791
we have
historically classified certain unrecognized tax benefits as income taxes
payable, which was included within the current liabilities section of our
consolidated balance sheet. as a result of our adoption of fin 48, we now
classify an unrecognized tax benefit as a current liability, or as a reduction
of the amount of a net operating loss carryforward or amount refundable, to the
extent that we anticipate payment or receipt of cash for income taxes within one
year.likewise, the amount is classified as a long-term liability if
we anticipate payment or receipt of cash for income taxes during a period beyond
a year.
our
policy to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as
a component of income tax expense did not change as a result of implementing fin
48.as of january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008, we had accrued $11.8
million and $11.2 million, respectively, for the payment of interest and
penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, which is not included as a
component of our unrecognized tax benefits.as of january 25, 2009,
non-current income taxes payable of $49.2 million consists of unrecognized tax
benefits of $37.4 million and the related interest and penalties of $11.8
million.
while we
believe that we have adequately provided for all tax positions, amounts asserted
by tax authorities could be greater or less than our accrued position.
accordingly, our provisions on federal, state and foreign tax-related matters to
be recorded in the future may change as revised estimates are made or the
underlying matters are settled or otherwise resolved. as of january 25, 2009, we
do not believe that our estimates, as otherwise provided for, on such tax
positions will significantly increase or decrease within the next twelve
months.
we are subject to taxation by a number of taxing authorities both in the united
states and throughout the world. as of january 25, 2009, the material tax
jurisdictions that are subject to examination include the united states, hong
kong, taiwan, china, india, and germany and include our fiscal years 2003
through 2009. as of january 25, 2009, the material tax jurisdictions for which
we are currently under examination include india for fiscal years 2003 through
2007 and germany for fiscal years 2004 through 2006.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
14 - stockholders equity
stock
repurchase program
during fiscal
year 2005, we announced that our board of directors, or board, had authorized a
stock repurchase program to repurchase shares of our common stock, subject to
certain specifications, up to an aggregate maximum amount of $300
million.during fiscal year 2007, the board further approved an
increase of $400 million to the original stock repurchase program. in fiscal
year 2008, we announced a stock repurchase programunder which we may
purchase up to an additional $1.0 billion of our common stock over a three year
period through may 2010. on august 12, 2008, we announced that our board further
authorized an additional increase of $1.0 billion to the stock repurchase
program. as a result of these increases, we have an ongoing authorization from
the board, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common
stock up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7 billion through may
2010.
the
repurchases will be made from time to time in the open market, in privately
negotiated transactions, or in structured stock repurchase programs, and may be
made in one or more larger repurchases, in compliance with the securities
exchange act of 1934, or the exchange act, rule 10b-18, subject to market
conditions, applicable legal requirements, and other factors. the program does
not obligate nvidia to acquire any particular amount of common stock and the
program may be suspended at any time at our discretion.as part of our
share repurchase program, we have entered into, and we may continue to enter
into, structured share repurchase transactions with financial institutions.
these agreements generally require that we make an up-front payment in exchange
for the right to receive a fixed number of shares of our common stock upon
execution of the agreement, and a potential incremental number of shares of our
common stock, within a pre-determined range, at the end of the term of the
agreement.
during the
three months ended january 25, 2009, we did not enter into any structured share
repurchase transactions or otherwise purchase any shares of our common stock.
during fiscal year 2009, we entered into structured share repurchase
transactions to repurchase 29.3 million shares for $423.6 million, which we
recorded on the trade date of the transactions.through fiscal year
2009, we have repurchased an aggregate of 90.9 million shares under our stock
repurchase program for a total cost of $1.46billion.as of
january 25, 2009, we are authorized, subject to certain specifications, to
repurchase shares of our common stock up to an additional amount of $1.24
billion through may 2010.
please refer
to note 2 of these notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k for further information
regarding stock-based compensation and stock options granted under equity
incentive programs.
convertible
preferred stock
as of
january25, 2009 and january27, 2008, there were no shares of
preferred stock outstanding.
common
stock
at the annual
meeting of stockholders held on june 19, 2008, our stockholders approved an
increase in our authorized number of shares of common stock to 2,000,000,000.
the par value of our common stock remained unchanged at $0.001 per
share.
please refer
to note 19 for further discussion regarding the cash tender offer for certain
employee stock options that our board of directors approved in february
2009.
note
15 - employee retirement plans
we have a
401(k) retirement plan, or the 401(k) plan, covering substantially all of our
united states employees. under the plan, participating employees may defer up to
100% of their pre-tax earnings, subject to the internal revenue service annual
contribution limits.some of our non-us subsidiaries have defined
benefit and defined contributions plans as required by local statutory
requirements.our costs under these plans have not been
material.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
16 - segment information
our chief
executive officer, who is considered to be our chief operating decision maker,
or codm, reviews financial information presented on anoperating segment
basis for purposes of making operating decisions and assessing financial
performance.
during
the first quarter of fiscal year 2008, we reorganized our operating segments. we
now report financial information for four operating segments to our codm: the
gpu business, which is comprised primarily of our geforce products that support
desktop and notebook pcs, plus memory products; the psb which is comprised of
our nvidia quadro professional workstation products and other professional
graphics products, including our nvidia teslahigh-performance computing
products; the mcp business which is comprised of nvidia nforce core logic and
motherboard gpu products; and our cpb, which is comprised of our cpb is
comprised of our tegra and goforce mobile brands and products that support
netbooks, personal navigation devices, or pnds, handheld personal media players,
or pmps, personal digital assistants, or pdas, cellular phones and other
handheld devices.cpb also includes license, royalty, other revenue
and associated costs related to video game consoles and other digital consumer
electronics devices.
in
addition to these operating segments, we have the all other category that
includes human resources, legal, finance, general administration and corporate
marketing expenses, which total $346.1 million, $266.2 million and $239.6
million for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, that we do not
allocate to our other operating segments as these expenses are not included in
the segment operating performance measures evaluated by our codm. all other
also includes the results of operations of other miscellaneous reporting
segments that are neither individually reportable, nor aggregated with another
operating segment. revenue in the all other category is primarily derived from
sales of components. certain prior period amounts have been revised to
conform to the presentation of our current fiscal year.
our codm does not review any
information regarding total assets on an operating segment basis. operating
segments do not record intersegment revenue, and, accordingly, there is none to
be reported.the accounting policies for segment reporting are the same as
for nvidia as a whole.
gpu
psb
mcp
cpb
all
other
consolidated
(in
thousands)
year
ended january25, 2009:
revenue
$
1,912,262
$
693,376
$
655,565
$
136,334
$
27,322
$
3,424,859
depreciation
and amortization expense
$
55,405
$
21,587
$
32,442
$
19,372
$
56,217
$
185,023
operating
income (loss)
$
122,111
$
322,514
$
(132,921
)
$
(24,293
)
$
(358,111
)
$
(70,700
)
year
ended january27, 2008:
revenue
$
2,518,281
$
588,358
$
710,353
$
251,137
$
29,731
$
4,097,860
depreciation
and amortization expense
$
38,272
$
9,596
$
28,409
$
21,482
$
37,715
$
135,474
operating
income (loss)
$
717,985
$
305,395
$
57,214
$
28,104
$
(272,352
)
$
836,346
year
ended january28, 2007:
revenue
$
1,712,370
$
454,735
$
661,483
$
233,223
$
6,960
$
3,068,771
depreciation
and amortization expense
$
27,851
$
7,381
$
20,751
$
18,073
$
33,776
$
107,832
operating
income (loss)
$
383,109
$
213,966
$
77,952
$
42,375
$
(263,950
)
$
453,452
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
revenue
by geographic region is allocated to individual countries based on the location
to which the products are initially billed even if our customers revenue is
attributable to end customers that are located in a different location. the
following tables summarize information pertaining to our revenue from customers
based on invoicing address in different geographic regions:
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
revenue:
(in
thousands)
china
$
1,087,739
$
1,256,209
$
659,711
taiwan
974,077
1,293,645
1,118,631
other
asia pacific
601,480
662,448
544,700
europe
321,117
438,321
302,080
united
states
309,540
341,670
332,609
other
americas
130,906
105,567
111,040
total
revenue
$
3,424,859
$
4,097,860
$
3,068,771
the following
table presents summarized information for long-lived assets by geographic
region. long lived assets consist of property and equipment and deposits and
other assets and exclude goodwill and intangible assets.
january25,
january27,
long-lived
assets:
(in
thousands)
united
states
$
500,162
$
298,765
taiwan
81,761
31,788
china
42,969
24,655
india
29,639
28,677
europe
6,865
7,052
other
asia pacific
2,500
1,510
other
americas
1,928
5,412
total
long-lived assets
$
665,824
$
397,859
revenue from
significant customers, those representing 10% or more of total revenue for the
respective dates, is summarized as follows:
year
ended
january25,
january27,
january28,
revenue:
customer
a
%
%
%
customer
b
%
%
%
accounts
receivable from significant customers, those representing 10% or more of total
accounts receivable for the respective periods, is summarized as
follows:
january25,
january27,
accounts
receivable:
customer
a
%
%
customer
b
%
%
customer
c
%
%
customer
d
%
%
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
17  fair value of cash equivalents and marketable securities
we measure our cash equivalents and marketable securities at fair value. the
fair values of our financial assets and liabilities are determined using quoted
market prices of identical assets or quoted market prices of similar
assetsfrom active markets. level1 valuations are obtained from
real-time quotes for transactions in active exchange markets involving identical
assets. level2 valuations are obtained from quoted market prices in active
markets involving similar assets. level 3 valuations are based on unobservable
inputs to the valuation methodology and include our own data about assumptions
market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability based on the
best information available under the circumstances.
financial
assets and liabilities measured at fair value are summarized below:
fair value measurement at
reporting date using
quotedpricesin
active markets for identical assets
significant
other observable inputs
high
level of judgment
january
25, 2009
(level
1)
(level
2)
(level
3)
(in
thousands)
other
debt securities issued by u.s. government agencies
(4)
$
318,121
$
-
$
318,121
$
-
corporate
debt securities (3)
251,174
-
251,174
-
mortgage-backed
securities issued by government-sponsored entities
(1)
161,199
-
161,199
-
money
market funds (5)
139,046
14,646
-
124,400
commercial
paper (2)
56,997
-
56,997
-
debt
securities issued by united states treasury (1)
55,275
-
55,275
-
asset-backed
securities (1)
38,858
-
38,858
-
total
assets
$
1,020,670
$
14,646
$
881,624
$
124,400
(1)included
in marketable securities on the consolidated balance sheet.
(2)
included in cash and cash equivalents on the consolidated balance
sheet.
(3)includes
$38,091 in cash and cash equivalents and $213,083 in marketable securities on
the consolidated balance sheet.
(4)includes
$73,233 in cash and cash equivalents and $244,888 in marketable securities on
the consolidated balance sheet.
(5)includes
$14,646 in cash and cash equivalents and $124,400 in marketable securities on
the consolidated balance sheet.
for our money market funds that were held by the international reserve fund at
january 25, 2009, we assessed the fair value of the money market funds by
considering the underlying securities held by the international reserve fund. as
the international reserve fund has halted redemption requests and is currently
believed to be holding all of their securities until maturity, we valued the
underlying securities held by the international reserve fund at their maturity
value using an income approach. certain of the debt securities held by the
international reserve fund were issued by companies that have filed for
bankruptcy as of january 25, 2009 and, as such, our valuation of those
securities was zero. the net result was that, as of january 25, 2009, we
estimated the fair value of the international reserve funds investments to be
95.7% of their last-known value prior to january 25, 2009. based on this
assessment, we recorded an other than temporary impairment charge of $5.6
million during fiscal year 2009. due to the inherent subjectivity and the
significant judgment involved in the valuation of our holdings of international
reserve fund, we have classified these securities under the level 3 fair value
hierarchy.
as of january 25, 2009, our money market investment in the international reserve
fund, which was valued at $124.4 million, net of other than temporary impairment
charges, was classified as marketable securities in our consolidated balance
sheet due to the halting of redemption requests in september 2008 by the
international reserve fund.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
subsequent to
year-end, on january 30, 2009, we received $84.4 million from the international
reserve fund. this was our portion of a payout of approximately 65% of the total
assets of the fund. each shareholders percentage of this distribution was
determined by dividing the shareholders total unfunded redeemed shares by the
aggregate unfunded redeemed shares of the fund, which was then used to calculate
the shareholders pro rata portion of this distribution. we expect to receive
the proceeds of our remaining investment in the international reserve fund,
excluding the $5.6 million that we have recorded as an other than temporary
impairment, by no later than october 2009, when all of the underlying securities
held by the international reserve fund are scheduled to have matured. however,
redemptions from the international reserve fund are currently subject to pending
litigation, which could cause further delay in receipt of our
funds.
reconciliation
of financial assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis using
significant unobservable inputs, or level 3 inputs:
year
ended
january
25, 2009
balance,
beginning of period
$
-
transfer
into level 3
130,000
other
than temporary impairment
(5,600
)
balance,
end of period
$
124,400
total financial assets at
fair value classified within level 3 were 3.7% of total assets on our
consolidated balance sheet as of january 25, 2009.
note 18
- quarterly summary (unaudited)
the
following table sets forth our unaudited consolidated financial, for the last
eight fiscal quarters ended january25, 2009.
fiscal
year 2009
quarters
ended
january
25, 2009 (a,b)
october
26, 2008 (c, d)
july
27, 2008 (e)
april
27, 2008
(in
thousands, except per share data)
statement
of operations data:
revenue
$
481,140
$
897,655
$
892,676
$
1,153,388
cost
of revenue
$
339,474
$
529,812
$
742,759
$
638,545
gross
profit
$
141,666
$
367,843
$
149,917
$
514,843
net
income (loss)
$
(147,665
)
$
61,748
$
(120,929
)
$
176,805
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.27
)
$
0.11
$
(0.22
)
$
0.32
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.27
)
$
0.11
$
(0.22
)
$
0.30
fiscal
year 2008
quarters
ended
january
27, 2008 (f)
october
28, 2007
july
29, 2007
april
29, 2007
(in
thousands, except per share data)
statement
of operations data:
revenue
$
1,202,730
$
1,115,597
$
935,253
$
844,280
cost
of revenue
$
653,133
$
600,044
$
511,261
$
464,142
gross
profit
$
549,597
$
515,553
$
423,992
$
380,138
net
income
$
256,993
$
235,661
$
172,732
$
132,259
basic
net income per share
$
0.46
$
0.42
$
0.32
$
0.24
diluted
net income per share
$
0.42
$
0.38
$
0.29
$
0.22
(a)
included $18.9 million for a non-recurring charge related to a termination of
development contract related to a new campus construction project we have put on
hold.
(b)
included $8.0 million benefit from an insurance provider as reimbursement for
some claims against us towards the cost arising from a weak die/packaging
material set.
(c)
included $4.5 million charge towards non-recurring charge related to a royalty
dispute.
(d)
included $8.3 million towards restructuring charges.
(e)
included $196.0 million warranty charge against cost of revenue arising from a
weak die/packaging material set.
(f)
included a charge of $4.0 million related to the write-off of acquired research
and development expense from our acquisitions of mental images in fiscal year
2008.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
19 - subsequent event
tender
offer
on february
11, 2009, we announcedthat our board of directors approved a cash tender
offer for certain employee stock options. the tender offer commencedon
february 11, 2009 and expired at 12:00 midnight (pacific time) on march 11,
2009. the tender offer applied to outstanding stock options held by employees
with an exercise price equal to or greater than $17.50 per share. none of the
non-employee members of our board of directors or our officers who file reports
under section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, including our
former chief financial officer, marvin d. burkett, were eligible to participate
in the offer.all eligible options with exercise prices less than $28.00
per share, but not less than $17.50 per share were eligible to receive a cash
payment of $3.00 per option in exchange for the cancellation of the eligible
option. all eligible options with exercise prices greater than $28.00 per share
were eligible to receive a cash payment of $2.00 per option in exchange for the
cancellation of the eligible option.
we use
equity to promote employee retention and provide an incentive vehicle valued by
employees that is also aligned to stockholder interest. however, our stock price
has declined significantly over the past year, and all of our eligible options
are out-of-the-money (i.e., have exercise prices above our stock
price).therefore, we provided an incentive to employees with an
opportunity to obtain cash payment for their eligible options. also, the tender
offeris expected toincrease the number of shares available for
issuance under our 2007 equity incentive plan to the extent eligible options
were tendered in this tender offer. the tender offer is also expected to reduce
the potential dilution to our stockholders that is represented by outstanding
stock options, which become additional outstanding shares of our common stock
upon exercise.
as of january
25, 2009, there were approximately 33.1 million options eligible to participate
in the tender offer. if all these options were tendered and accepted in the
offer, the aggregate cash purchase price for these options would be
approximately $92.0 million.as a result of the tender offer, wemay
incur a non-recurring charge of up to approximately $150.0 million if all of the
unvested eligible options are tendered. this charge would be reflected in
ourfinancial results for the first fiscal quarter of fiscal year 2010 and
represents stock-based compensation expense, consisting of the remaining
unamortized stock-based compensation expense associated with the unvested
portion of the eligible options tendered in the offer, stock-based compensation
expense resulting from amounts paid in excess of the fair value of the
underlying options, if any, plus associated payroll taxes and professional
fees.
we are
currently tallying information on the number of options tendered under the offer
to determine the actual aggregate cash to be paid in exchange for the
cancellation of the eligible options and the non-recurring charge to be incurred
pertaining to the unvested eligible options that have been
tendered.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
schedule
ii - valuation and qualifying accounts
description
balanceat
beginning
of
period
additions
deductions
balance
at
end
of period
(in
thousands)
year
ended january25, 2009
deferred
tax valuation allowance
$
82,522
$
10,019
(4)
$
-
$
92,541
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
$
(1)
$
(2)
$
1,062
year
ended january27, 2008
deferred
tax valuation allowance
$
68,563
$
13,959
(4)
$
-
$
82,522
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
1,271
$
(1)
$
(808)
(2)
$
year
ended january28, 2007
deferred
tax valuation allowance
$
233,016
$
13,867
(4)
$
(178,320)
(5)
$
68,563
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
$
(1),(3)
$
(3)
(2)
$
1,271
(1)allowances for doubtful
accounts are charged to expenses.
(2)represents
uncollectible accounts written off against the allowance for doubtful
accounts.
(3)additions to allowance
for doubtful accounts includes $0.5 million related to our acquisitions of uli
electronics, inc., hybrid graphics ltd. and portalplayer, inc.
(4)represents change in
valuation allowance primarily related to state deferred tax assets that
management has determined not likely to be realized due, in part, to projections
of future state taxable income.
(5)represents
derecognition of the valuation allowance related to the derecognition of
deferred tax assets for the excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation
not yet realized as of january 28, 2007.
exhibit index
incorporated
by reference
exhibit
no.
exhibit
description
schedule/form
file
number
exhibit
filing
date
2.1
agreement
and plan of merger by and among nvidia corporation, partridge acquisition,
inc. and portalplayer, inc. dated 11/6/06
8-k
0-23985
2.1
11/9/2006
3.1
amended
and restated certificate of incorporation
s-8
333-74905
4.1
3/23/1999
3.2
certificate
of amendment of amended and restated certificate of
incorporation
10-q
0-23985
3.1
8/21/2008
3.3
bylaws
of nvidia corporation, amended and restated as of february 12,
8-k
0-23985
3.1
2/19/2009
4.1
reference
is made to exhibits 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3
4.2
specimen
stock certificate
s-1/a
333-47495
4.2
4/24/1998
10.1
form
of indemnity agreement between nvidia corporation and each of its
directors and officers
8-k
0-23985
10.1
3/7/2006
10.2
+
equity incentive plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.2
3/13/2006
10.3
+
equity incentive plan iso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.5
11/22/2004
10.4
+
equity incentive plan nso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.6
11/22/2004
10.5
+
certificate
of stock option grant
10-q
0-23985
10.7
11/22/2004
10.6
+
non-employee directors stock option plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/3/2006
10.7
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (annual grant - board service),
as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.1
11/22/2004
10.8
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (committee grant - committee
service), as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.2
11/22/2004
10.9
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (initial grant)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
11/22/2004
10.10
+
employee stock purchase plan, as amended and restated
10-q
0-23985
10.2
5/22/2008
10.11
+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan, as amended
sc
to-1
005-56649
(d)(1)(a)
11/29/2006
10.12
+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan nso
sc
to-1
005-56649
99.1
(d)(1)(b)
11/29/2006
10.13
+
portalplayer,
inc. 1999 stock option plan and form of agreements
thereunder
s-8
333-140021
99.1
1/16/2007
10.14
+
portalplayer,
inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan
s-8
333-140021
99.2
1/16/2007
10.15
+
equity incentive plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
6/27/2007
10.16
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant - board
service)
10-q
0-23985
10.2
8/22/2007
10.17
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant -
committee service)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
8/22/2007
10.18
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (initial
grant)
10-q
0-23985
10.4
8/22/2007
exhibit
index
(continued)
incorporated
by reference
exhibit
no.
exhibit
description
schedule/form
file
number
exhibit
filing
date
10.19
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option
10-q
0-23985
10.5
8/22/2007
10.20
+
equity incentive plan - incentive stock option
10-q
0-23985
10.6
8/22/2007
10.21
+
equity incentive plan  restricted stock unit grant notice and restricted
stock unit purchase agreement
8-k
0-23985
10.1
2/11/2009
10.22
+
fiscal
year 2008 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/5/2007
10.23
+
fiscal
year 2009 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/21/2008
10.24
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building a
s-3/a
333-33560
10.1
4/20/2000
10.25
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building b
s-3/a
333-33560
10.2
4/20/2000
10.26
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c
s-3/a
333-33560
10.3
4/20/2000
10.27
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building d
s-3/a
333-33560
10.4
4/20/2000
10.28
amended
and restated agreement of purchase and sale by and between harvest-granite
san tomas llc and harvest 2400, llc dated january 31, 2008
10-q
0-23985
10.3
5/22/2008
10.29
+
offer
letter, dated january 28, 2009, with david white
8-k
0-23985
10.1
2/27/2009
21.1
*
list
of registrants subsidiaries
23.1
*
consent
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
24.1
*
power
of attorney (included in signature page)
31.1
*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
31.2
*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.1#
*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.2#
*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
*filed
herewith
+management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
#in
accordance with item601(b)(32)(ii)of regulation s-k and sec release
nos. 33-8238 and 34-47986, final rule: managements reports on internal control
over financial reporting and certification of disclosure in exchange act
periodic reports, the certifications furnished in exhibits 32.1 and 32.2 hereto
are deemed to accompany this form10-k and will not be deemed filed for
purpose of section18 of the exchange act. such certifications will not be
deemed to be incorporated by reference into any filing under the securities act
or the exchange act, except to the extent that the registrant specifically
incorporates it by reference.
copies of
above exhibits not contained herein are available to any stockholder upon
written request to: investor relations: nvidia corporation, 2701 san tomas
expressway, santa clara, ca95050.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on
its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on march 13,
2009.
nvidia
corporation
by:
/s/
jen-hsun huang
jen-hsun
huang
president
and chief executive officer
power
of attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each person whose signature appears
below constitutes and appoints jen-hsun huang and david l. white, and each or
any one of them, his true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power
of substitution and resubstitution, for him and in his name, place and stead, in
any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments (including posting
effective amendments) to this report, and to file the same, with all exhibits
thereto, and other documents in connection therewith, with the securities and
exchange commission, granting unto said attorneys-in-facts and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing
requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully to all
intents and purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or their
or his substitutes or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue
hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report
has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and
in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/
jen-hsun huang
president,
chief executive officer and director
(principal
executive officer)
march
13, 2009
jen-hsun
huang
/s/
david l. white
chief
financial
officer
(principal
financial and accounting officer)
march
13, 2009
david
l. white
/s/
tench coxe
director
march
13, 2009
tench
coxe
/s/
mark stevens
director
march
13, 2009
mark
stevens
/s/
james c. gaither
director
march
13, 2009
james
c. gaither
/s/
harvey c. jones
director
march
13, 2009
harvey
c. jones
/s/
mark l. perry
director
march
13, 2009
mark
l. perry
/s/
william j. miller
director
march
13, 2009
william
j. miller
/s/
a. brooke seawell
director
march
13,
a. brooke
seawell
exhibit
index
incorporated
by reference
exhibit
no.
exhibit
description
schedule/form
file
number
exhibit
filing
date
2.1
agreement
and plan of merger by and among nvidia corporation, partridge acquisition,
inc. and portalplayer, inc. dated 11/6/06
8-k
0-23985
2.1
11/9/2006
3.1
amended
and restated certificate of incorporation
s-8
333-74905
4.1
3/23/1999
3.2
certificate
of amendment of amended and restated certificate of
incorporation
10-q
0-23985
3.1
8/21/2008
3.3
bylaws
of nvidia corporation, amended and restated as of february 12,
8-k
0-23985
3.1
2/19/2009
4.1
reference
is made to exhibits 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3
4.2
specimen
stock certificate
s-1/a
333-47495
4.2
4/24/1998
10.1
form
of indemnity agreement between nvidia corporation and each of its
directors and officers
8-k
0-23985
10.1
3/7/2006
10.2
+
equity incentive plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.2
3/13/2006
10.3
+
equity incentive plan iso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.5
11/22/2004
10.4
+
equity incentive plan nso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.6
11/22/2004
10.5
+
certificate
of stock option grant
10-q
0-23985
10.7
11/22/2004
10.6
+
non-employee directors stock option plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/3/2006
10.7
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (annual grant - board service),
as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.1
11/22/2004
10.8
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (committee grant - committee
service), as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.2
11/22/2004
10.9
+
non-employee directors stock option plan (initial grant)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
11/22/2004
10.10
+
employee stock purchase plan, as amended and restated
10-q
0-23985
10.2
5/22/2008
10.11
+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan, as amended
sc
to-1
005-56649
(d)(1)(a)
11/29/2006
10.12
+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan nso
sc
to-1
005-56649
99.1
(d)(1)(b)
11/29/2006
10.13
+
portalplayer,
inc. 1999 stock option plan and form of agreements
thereunder
s-8
333-140021
99.1
1/16/2007
10.14
+
portalplayer,
inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan
s-8
333-140021
99.2
1/16/2007
10.15
+
equity incentive plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
6/27/2007
10.16
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant - board
service)
10-q
0-23985
10.2
8/22/2007
10.17
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant -
committee service)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
8/22/2007
10.18
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (initial
grant)
10-q
0-23985
10.4
8/22/2007
exhibit
index
(continued)
incorporated
by reference
exhibit
no.
exhibit
description
schedule/form
file
number
exhibit
filing
date
10.19
+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option
10-q
0-23985
10.5
8/22/2007
10.20
+
equity incentive plan - incentive stock option
10-q
0-23985
10.6
8/22/2007
10.21
+
equity incentive plan  restricted stock unit grant notice and restricted
stock unit purchase agreement
8-k
0-23985
10.1
2/11/2009
10.22
+
fiscal
year 2008 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/5/2007
10.23
+
fiscal
year 2009 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/21/2008
10.24
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building a
s-3/a
333-33560
10.1
4/20/2000
10.25
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building b
s-3/a
333-33560
10.2
4/20/2000
10.26
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c
s-3/a
333-33560
10.3
4/20/2000
10.27
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building d
s-3/a
333-33560
10.4
4/20/2000
10.28
amended
and restated agreement of purchase and sale by and between harvest-granite
san tomas llc and harvest 2400, llc dated january 31, 2008
10-q
0-23985
10.3
5/22/2008
10.29
+
offer
letter, dated january 28, 2009, with david white
8-k
0-23985
10.1
2/27/2009
21.1
*
list
of registrants subsidiaries
23.1
*
consent
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
24.1
*
power
of attorney (included in signature page)
31.1
*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
31.2
*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.1#
*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.2#
*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
*filed
herewith
+management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
#in
accordance with item601(b)(32)(ii)of regulation s-k and sec release
nos. 33-8238 and 34-47986, final rule: managements reports on internal control
over financial reporting and certification of disclosure in exchange act
periodic reports, the certifications furnished in exhibits 32.1 and 32.2 hereto
are deemed to accompany this form10-k and will not be deemed filed for
purpose of section18 of the exchange act. such certifications will not be
deemed to be incorporated by reference into any filing under the securities act
or the exchange act, except to the extent that the registrant specifically
incorporates it by reference.
copies of
above exhibits not contained herein are available to any stockholder upon
written request to: investor relations: nvidia corporation, 2701 san tomas
expressway, santa clara, ca95050.
