10-k
fy2010form10k.htm
fiscal year 2010 form 10-k
fy2010form10k.htm
united
states
securities
and exchange commission
washington,
d.c.20549
________________
form
10-k
[x]
annual
report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
for the fiscal year ended
january 31, 2010
or
[_]
transition
report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
commission
file number: 0-23985
nvidia
corporation
(exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)
delaware
94-3177549
(state
or other jurisdiction of
(i.r.s.
employer
incorporation
or organization)
identification
no.)
san tomas expressway
santa
clara, california95050
(408)
486-2000
(address,
including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of principal
executive offices)
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act:
title
of each class
name
of each exchange on which registered
common
stock, $0.001 par value per share
the
nasdaq global select market
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act:
none
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in
rule 405 of the securities act.
yes x no o
indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to
section 13 or section 15(d) of the act.
yes o no x
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be
filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required
to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days.
yes x no o
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on
its corporate web site, if any, every interactive data file required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t (232.405 of this
chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to submit and post such files).
yes x no o
indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item 405 of
regulation s-k ( 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not
be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in part iii of this form 10-k
or any amendment to this form 10-k.o
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see
definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller
reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. (check one):
large
accelerated filer x
accelerated
filer o
non-accelerated
filer o (do
not check if a smaller reporting company)
smaller
reporting company o
indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule
12b-2 of the act).
yes o no x
the
aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the
registrant as of july 26, 2009 was approximately $6.7 billion (based on the
closing sales price of the registrants common stock as reported by the nasdaq
global select market, on july 24, 2009). this calculation excludes approximately
26,801,768shares held by directors and executive officers of the
registrant. this calculation does not exclude shares held by such organizations
whose ownership exceeds 5% of the registrants outstanding common stock that
have represented to the registrant that they are registered investment advisers
or investment companies registered under section8 of the investment
company act of 1940.
the
number of shares of common stock outstanding as of march 10, 2010 was 566.5
million.
documents
incorporated by reference
portions
of the registrants proxy statement for its 2010 annual meeting of stockholders
to be filed with the securities and exchange commission by april 6, 2010 are
incorporated by reference.
nvidia
corporation
table
of contents
page
part
i
item
1.
business
item
1a.
risk
factors
item
1b.
unresolved staff
comments
item
2.
properties
item
3.
legal
proceedings
item
4.
submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
part
ii
item
5.
market for registrants common
equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
item
6.
selected financial
data
item
7.
managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item
7a.
quantitative and qualitative
disclosures about market risk
item
8.
financial statements and
supplementary data
item
9.
changes in and disagreements
with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item
9a.
controls and
procedures
item
9b.
other
information
part
iii
item
10.
directors, executive officers
and corporate governance
item
11.
executive
compensation
item
12.
security ownership of certain
beneficial owners and management and related stockholder
matters
item
13.
certain relationships and
related transactions, and director independence
item
14.
principal accounting fees and
services
part
iv
item
15.
exhibits, financial statement
schedules
signatures
part i
item
1. business
forward-looking
statements
this annual report on form10-k
contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of section27a of
the securities act of 1933, as amended, and section21e of the securities
exchange act of 1934, as amended, which are subject to the safe harbor created
by those sections. forward-looking statements are based on our managements
beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available to our
management. in some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms
such as may, will, should, could, goal, would, expect, plan,
anticipate, believe, estimate, project, predict, potential and
similar expressions intended to identify forward-looking statements. these
statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors,
which may cause our actual results, performance, time frames or achievements to
be materially different from any future results, performance, time frames or
achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. we discuss
many of these risks, uncertainties and other factors in this annual report on
form10-k in greater detail under the heading risk factors. given these
risks, uncertainties and other factors, you should not place undue reliance on
these forward-looking statements. also, these forward-looking statements
represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this filing. you
should read this annual report on form10-k completely and with the
understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from
what we expect. we hereby qualify our forward-looking statements by these
cautionary statements. except as required by law, we assume no obligation to
update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons
actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these
forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the
future.
all references
to nvidia, we, us, our or the company mean nvidia corporation and its
subsidiaries, except where it is made clear that the term means only the parent
company.
nvidia, geforce, sli, hybrid sli,
goforce, quadro,nvidia quadro, nvidia nforce,tesla, tegra, cuda,
nvidia apx, physx, ageia, mental images, and the nvidia logo are our trademarks
and/or registered trademarks in the united states and other countries that are
used in this document. we may also refer to trademarks of other corporations and
organizations in this document.
our
company
nvidia corporation helped awaken the
world to the power of computer graphics when it invented the graphics processor
unit, or gpu, in 1999.expertise in programmable gpus has led to
breakthroughs in parallel processing which make supercomputing inexpensive and
widely accessible.we serve the entertainment and consumer market
with our geforce graphics products, the professional design and visualization
market with our quadro graphics products, the high-performance computing market
with our tesla computing solutions products, and the mobile computing market
with our tegra system-on-a-chip products. during the last several fiscal years,
we have operated and reported four major product-line operating segments: the
gpu business, the professional solutions business, or psb, the media and
communications processor, or mcp, business, and the consumer products business,
or cpb. however, effective with the first quarter of fiscal year 2011, we will
no longer separate our mcp and gpu operating segments as such segmentation will
no longer be reflective of the way we manage those businesses.
our gpu business is comprised primarily
of our geforce products that support desktop and notebook personal computers, or
pcs, plus memory products. our psb is comprised of our quadro professional
workstation products and other professional graphics products, including our
nvidia tesla high-performance computing products. our mcp business, as we have
reported it through fiscal year 2010, has been comprised primarily of our ion
motherboard gpus, or mgpu products. our cpb is comprised of our tegra mobile
products that support tablets and smartbooks, smartphones, personal media
players, or pmps, internet television, automotive navigation, and other similar
devices. cpb also includes license, royalty, other revenue and associated costs
related to video game consoles and other digital consumer electronics
devices.original equipment manufacturers, or oems, original design
manufacturers, or odms, add-in-card manufacturers, system builders and consumer
electronics companies worldwide utilize our processors as a core component of
their entertainment, business and professional solutions.
we were incorporated in california in
april 1993 and reincorporated in delaware in april 1998. our headquarter
facilities are in santa clara, california. our internet address is www.nvidia.com.the
contents of our website are not a part of this form 10-k.
gpu business
our gpu business is comprised
primarily of our geforce products that support desktop and notebook pcs, plus
memory products. our gpu business is focused on microsoft windows and apple pc
platforms.geforce gpus power pcs made by or distributed by most pc
oems in the world for desktop pcs, notebook pcs, and pcs loaded with
windowsmediacenter and other media extenders such as the apple
tv.gpus enhance the user experience for playing video games, editing
photos, viewing and editing videos and high-definition, or hd,
movies.
we believe we are in an era
where visual computing is becoming increasingly important to consumers and other
end users of our products.our strategy is to promote our geforce brand as
one of the most important processors through technology leadership, increasing
programmability, and great content experience.in fiscal year 2010,
our strategy was to extend our architectural and technology advantage with our
geforce gpus.
during fiscal year
2010,we introduced our next generation cuda gpu architecture, codenamed
fermi.we expect the fermi architecture to be the foundation for
computational gpus, and to enable breakthroughs in both graphics and parallel
computing. we also launched a development environment for massively parallel
computing. using this tool, which is named nvidia parallel nsight, and is
integrated into microsoft visual studio we expect that developers will be able
to use microsoft visual studio and c++ to write applications that leverage
fermi's gpu architecture. it is also designed to accelerate performance on a
wider array of applications including ray tracing, physics simulation, finite
element analysis, high-precision scientific computing, sparse linear algebra,
sorting, and search algorithms.
during
fiscal year 2010, we also delivered our first 40nm gpus to customers. because of
limited 40nm wafer foundry capacity, in addition to supplier challenges related
to 40nm process manufacturing yields, we were forced to allocate our available
40nm product supply among our customers.
in
addition, we launched optimus technology, a combination of software and
hardware innovations for notebooks, which turns on and off the gpu based on
application needs without any user intervention thus providing the advanced
performance of discrete graphics while at the same time still delivering
prolonged battery life.our oem customers have currently announced
the availability of eight notebook models with 50 systems to be scheduled for
availability by summer 2010.we believe optimus has the potential to
expand the overall market share for discrete gpus by increasing the gpu attach
rate in the notebook segment.
professional solutions
business
our psb is comprised
of our quadro professional workstation products and other professional graphics
products, including our tesla high-performance computing products. our quadro
brand products are designed to deliver the highest possible level of graphics
performance and application compatibility for the professional
industry.quadro products are recognized by many as the standard for
professional graphics solutions needed to solve many of the worlds most complex
visual computing challenges in the manufacturing, entertainment, medical,
science, and aerospace industries. quadro products are fully certified by
several software developers for professional workstation applications and are
designed to deliver the graphics performance and precision required by
professional applications.
we
believe that recent years have experienced an increasing level of global
adoption of the computer-aided design approach of product
creation.we have achieved a leading position in the professional
graphics category by providing innovative gpu technology, software, and tools
that integrate the capabilities of our gpu with a broad array of visualization
products.
during
fiscal year 2010, we launched realityserver, a combination of gpu hardware and
software with the ability to stream interactive, photorealistic 3d applications
to any web- connected pc, laptop, netbook or smart phone. we also launched
during the year two significant enhancements to our quadro product
line-up:quadro plex svs, a scalable visual computing platform for
professionals who interact with 3d models and analyze large volumes of data, and
the optix ray tracing engine, part of a suite of application acceleration
engines for software developers. this suite also includes engines for
managing 3d data and scenes, scaling performance across multiple gpus and
real-time modeling of hyper-realistic physical and environmental
effects.
in the
area of high performance computing, we also announced during fiscal year 2010
that amber, one of the popular molecular dynamics codes used by researchers in
academia and pharmaceutical companies to research new drugs, had been
accelerated by our cuda architecture for massively parallel
processing.amber, accelerated by cuda,now runs up to 50
times faster on a gpu than on a central processing unit, or cpu.
hewlett
packard company and super micro computer, inc. began carrying our tesla
computing solution products during fiscal year 2010, joining a global list of
oems, including cray inc., dell inc., hewlett-packard lenovo, silicon graphics
international and sun microsystems.  we recently collaborated with a
leading chinese geophysical services provider to unveil the launch of a new
tesla-based hardware and seismic software suite that accelerates the performance
of complex seismic data computation for oil and gas companies in china. we also
collaborated with the investment banking division of a leading european
financial institution to replace their cpu cores with a smaller cluster
consisting of cpu servers and two tesla gpu-based s1070 systems, which require
significantly less power.factoring the acceleration in processing
times achieved using tesla gpus, the division is using almost 200 times less
electricity than before.
with cuda, we are able to
speed up general purpose compute-intensive applications like we do for 3d
graphics processing.five new consumer applications were launched
that are accelerated by the cuda architecture on our gpus  super loiloscope
mars, for video editing, arcsoft simhd, for dvd image enhancement, nero move it
and cyberlink mediashow espresso, for video format conversion, and motion dsp
vreveal, for real-time video quality enhancement.developers are able
to speed-up algorithms in areas ranging from nano molecular dynamics to image
processing, medical image reconstruction and derivatives modeling for financial
risk analysis.over 300 universities around the world now teach
parallel programming with cuda and many pc oems now offer high performance
computing solutions with tesla for use by customers around the world, including
motorola inc., chevron corporation, general electric health care and general
mills inc.. researchers use cuda to accelerate their time-to-discovery, and
popular off-the-shelf software packages are now cuda accelerated.
mcp business
our mcp business, as
we have reported it through fiscal year 2010, is comprised primarily of our ion
mgpu products. our ion family of products addresses the integrated
core logic market.core logic is the computers central nervous
system, controlling and directing high speed data between or cpu, the gpu,
storage, and networks.high quality, long-term reliability, and top
performance are key customer demands of core logic suppliers.
our ion mgpu
products are focused on transforming mainstream intel pcs into a premium
experience typically found in higher priced laptops and desktops. our strategy
is to combine the ion mgpu found in new desktop and notebook pcs with the intel
celeron, core 2 duo or atom cpus. these combinations create a platform that
enables a premium pc experience in a lower cost and smaller form factor, thus
enabling netbooks and all-in-one pcs to play rich media content and popular
games inhd.
at computex
2009, our ion platform was awarded the best choice award.we
announced 21 ion-related design wins at computex 2009, and have announced more
design wins since then. additionally, along with adobe systems incorporated, or
adobe, we announced gpu acceleration for the flash player, bringing internet
video to a new class of low-power pcs and internet devices.
during fiscal year 2010, we began redirecting our development strategy in
our mcp business in response to our on-going dispute with intel corporation. in
february 2009, intel filed suit against us, related to a chipset license
agreement that we entered into with intel in 2004. in march 2009, we asserted
counterclaims against intel pursuant to which we seek an order declaring that
intel breached the chipset license agreement as well as the implied covenant of
good faith and fair dealing underlying the license agreements, and seeking,
among other things, termination of intels cross license to our technology.
notwithstanding our belief that the chipset license agreement extends to a
component of the new intel processor architecture referred to as direct media
interface, or dmi, we currently have no intention of building a dmi-based
chipset while this dispute remains unresolved. as a result, we began redirecting
our mcp development resources to other programs.please refer to note 13
of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in partiv,
item15 of this form10-k for further information regarding this
litigation
consumer
products business
our cpb is comprised of
our tegra mobile products that support smartphones, smartbooks, tablets,
personal media players, or pmps, internet television, automotive navigation, and
other similar devices. cpb also includes license, royalty, other revenue and
associated costs related to video game consoles and other digital consumer
electronics devices.
our mobile strategy is to
create a system-on-a-chip that enables entertainment and web experiences that
end users currently enjoy on a pc.nvidia tegra mobile products implement
design techniques, both inside the chips and at the system level, which result
in high performance and long battery life. these technologies enhance visual
display capabilities, improve connectivity, and minimize chip and system-level
power consumption.
during
fiscal year 2010, we demonstrated the tegra 600 series, our first generation
system-on-a-chip that enables an always-on, always-connected hd smartbook that
offers playback of advanced multimedia content such as 720p hd video, while at
the same time consuming minimal power and allowing users to go days between
battery charges. also during fiscal year 2010, our tegra product was included in
microsofts zune hd and the samsung m1, both of which were being sold in the
marketplace.
during
the recent consumer electronics show in january 2010, we announced our
next-generation of tegra processing technology.tegra is the
processor for the mobile web, specifically designed for the high-resolution
needs of tablets.tegra combines browsing, streaming 1080p video and
flash 10.1 acceleration with a 3d user interface and days of battery
life.we have multiple next-generation tegra design wins in
tablets, smartbooks and smartphones, with the first of these expected to ship
during the second quarter of fiscal year 2011.additionally, we have
announced that volkswagen and audi will use next-generation tegra starting in
fiscal year 2012.in addition, we announced 3d vision surround for geforce, a
high-definition 3d stereo solution for the home at the recent consumer
electronics show in january 2010. 3d vision is a combination of wireless
glasses, a high-power infrared emitter and software that transforms pc games
into full stereoscopic 3d experiences.over 420 games now
support nvidia 3d vision.
our
strategy
we design our products to enable
our pc oems, odms, system builders, motherboard and add-in board manufacturers,
and cellular phone and consumer electronics oems to build products that deliver
state-of-the-art features, performance, compatibility and power efficiency while
maintaining competitive pricing and profitability. we believe that by developing
3d graphics, hd, and video and media communications solutions that provide
superior performance and address the key requirements of each of the product
categories we serve, we will accelerate the adoption of hd digital media
platforms and devices throughout these segments. we combine scalable
architectural technology with mass market economies-of-scale to deliver a
complete family of products that span from professional workstations, to
consumer pcs to tablets, smartbooks and smartphones.
our objective is to be the leading
supplier of programmable, high-performance gpus and ultra-low power mobile
system-on-a-chip products. our current focus is on the desktop pc, professional
workstation, notebook pc, high-performance computing, and application processor
product lines, and we plan to expand into other product lines. our strategy to
achieve this objective includes the following key elements:
build
award-winning, architecturally-compatible 3d graphics, hd video, media
communications and ultra-low power product families for the pc, handheld and
digital entertainment platforms.our strategy is
to achieve market segment leadership in these platforms by providing
award-winning performance at every price point. by developing 3d graphics, hd
video and media communications solutions that provide superior performance and
address the key requirements of these platforms, we believe that we will
accelerate the adoption of 3d graphics and rich digital media.
target leading oems,
odms and system builders.our strategy is to
enable our leading pc, handheld and consumer electronics oems, odms and major
system builder customers to differentiate their products in a highly competitive
marketplace by using our products. we believe that design wins with these
industry leaders provide market validation of our products, increase brand
awareness and enhance our ability to penetrate additional leading customer
accounts. in addition, we believe that close relationships with oems, odms and
major system builders will allow us to better anticipate and address customer
needs with future generations of our products.
sustain technology and
product leadership in 3d graphics and hd video, and media communications and
ultra-low power.we are focused on using our
advanced engineering capabilities to accelerate the quality and performance of
3d graphics, hd video, media communications and ultra-low power processing in
pcs and handheld devices. a fundamental aspect of our strategy is to actively
recruit the best 3d graphics and hd video, networking and communications
engineers in the industry, and we believe that we have assembled an
exceptionally experienced and talented engineering team. our research and
development strategy is to focus on concurrently developing multiple generations
of gpus, including gpus for high-performance computing, and mobile and consumer
products using independent design teams. as we have in the past, we intend to
use this strategy to achieve new levels of graphics, networking and
communications features and performance and ultra-low power designs, enabling
our customers to achieve superior performance in their products.
increase market
share.we believe that substantial market share
will be important to achieving success. we intend to achieve a leading share of
the market in areas in which we don't have a leading market share, and maintain
a leading share of the market in areas in which we do have the lead, by devoting
substantial resources to building families of products for a wide range of
applications that offer significant improvement in performance over existing
products.
use our expertise in digital
multimedia.we believe the synergy created by the
combination of 3d graphics, hd video and the internet will fundamentally change
the way people work, learn, communicate and play. we believe that our expertise
in hd graphics and system architecture positions us to help drive this
transformation. we are using our expertise in the processing and transmission of
high-bandwidth digital media to develop products designed to address the
requirements of high-bandwidth concurrent multimedia.
use our intellectual property
and resources to enter into license and development contracts. from time
to time, we expect to enter into license arrangements that will require
significant customization of our intellectual property components. for
license arrangements that require significant customization of our intellectual
property components, we generally recognize this license revenue using the
percentage-of-completion method of accounting over the period that services are
performed. for example, we have entered into agreements to jointly develop
custom gpus for gaming consoles and have licensed software development
tools.
revolutionize computing with
cuda and tesla.tesla is a family of gpu computing products
that delivers processing capabilities for high-performance computing
applications, and marks our entry into the high-performance computing industry.
nvidia cuda is a general purpose parallel computing architecture that leverages
the parallel compute engine in nvidia gpus to solve many complex computational
problems in a fraction of the time required on a cpu. our cuda parallel
processing architecture can accelerate compute-intensive applications by
significant multiples over that of a cpu alone. we are working with developers
around the world who have adopted and written application programs for the cuda
architecture using various high-level programming languages, which can then be
run at great execution speeds on a cuda enabled gpu. with cuda, we are able to
speed up general purpose compute-intensive applications like we do for 3d
graphics processing.developers are able to speed-up algorithms in
areas ranging from nano molecular dynamics to image processing, medical image
reconstruction and derivatives modeling for financial risk
analysis.we are also working with universities around the world who
now teach parallel programming with cuda and we are also working with many pc
oems who now offer high performance computing solutions with tesla for use by
their customers around the world. researchers also use cuda to accelerate their
time-to-discovery, and popular off-the-shelf software packages are now cuda
accelerated.
sales
and marketing
our worldwide sales and marketing
strategy is a key part of our objective to become the leading supplier of
programmable, high-performance gpus and ultra-low power mobile system-on-a-chip
products. our sales and marketing teams work closely with each industrys
respective oems, odms, system builders, motherboard manufacturers, add-in board
manufacturers and industry trendsetters, collectively referred to as our
channel, to define product features, performance, price and timing of new
products. members of our sales team have a high level of technical expertise and
product and industry knowledge to support the competitive and complex design win
process. we also employ a highly skilled team of application engineers to assist
our channel in designing, testing and qualifying system designs that incorporate
our products. we believe that the depth and quality of our design support are
keys to improving our channels time-to-market, maintaining a high level of
customer satisfaction within our channel and fostering relationships that
encourage customers to use the next generation of our products.
in the segments we serve that
purchase our gpus, the sales process involves achieving key design wins with
leading oems and major system builders and supporting the product design into
high volume production with key odms, motherboard manufacturers and add-in board
manufacturers. these design wins in turn influence the retail and system builder
channel that is serviced by add-in board and motherboard manufacturers. our
distribution strategy is to work with a number of leading independent contract
equipment manufacturers, or cems, odms, motherboard manufacturers, add-in board
manufacturers and distributors, each of which have relationships with a broad
range of major oems and/or strong brand name recognition in the retail channel.
in the cpb segment we serve, the sales process primarily involves achieving key
design wins directly with the leading handheld oems and supporting the product
design into high-volume production. currently, we sell a significant portion of
our processors directly to distributors, cems, odms, motherboard manufacturers
and add-in board manufacturers, which then sell boards and systems with our
products to leading oems, retail outlets and a large number of system
builders.
although as a result of our
channel strategy, a small number of our customers represent the majority of our
revenue, their end customers include a large number of oems and system builders
throughout the world.sales to our largest customer, quanta,
accounted for 12% of our total revenue for fiscal year 2010.
to encourage software title
developers and publishers to develop games optimized for platforms utilizing our
products, we seek to establish and maintain strong relationships in the software
development community. engineering and marketing personnel interact with and
visit key software developers to promote and discuss our products, as well as to
ascertain product requirements and solve technical problems. our developer
program makes certain that our products are available to developers prior to
volume availability in order to encourage the development of software titles
that are optimized for our products.
backlog
our sales are primarily made
pursuant to standard purchase orders. the quantity of products purchased by our
customers as well as our shipment schedules are subject to revisions that
reflect changes in both the customers requirements and in manufacturing
availability. the semiconductor industry is characterized by short lead time
orders and quick delivery schedules. in light of industry practice and
experience, we believe that only a small portion of our backlog is
non-cancelable and that the dollar amount associated with the non-cancelable
portion is not significant.
seasonality
our industry is largely focused on the
consumer products market. historically, we have seen stronger revenue in the
second half of ourfiscal year than in the first half of ourfiscal
year, primarily due to back-to-school and holiday demand. revenue in the second
half of fiscal year 2010 grew by 31% when compared to revenue from the first
half of fiscal year 2010.while we anticipate that this historical
seasonal trend will resume, there can be no assurance of such
trend.for example, this seasonal trend did not occur in fiscal year
2009 where revenue in the second half of fiscal year 2009 declined by 33% when
compared to revenue from the first half of fiscal year 2009 due to the worldwide
recessionary economic environment at the time.
manufacturing
fabless manufacturing
strategy
we do not directly manufacture
semiconductor wafers used for our products. instead, we utilize what is known as
a fabless manufacturing strategy for all of our product-line operating segments
whereby we employ world-class suppliers for all phases of the manufacturing
process, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging. this
strategy uses the expertise of industry-leading suppliers that are certified by
the international organization for standardization, or iso, in such areas as
fabrication, assembly, quality control and assurance, reliability and testing.
in addition, this strategy allows us to avoid many of the significant costs and
risks associated with owning and operating manufacturing operations. our
suppliers are also responsible for procurement of most of the raw materials used
in the production of our products. as a result, we can focus our resources on
product design, additional quality assurance, marketing and customer
support.
we utilize industry-leading
suppliers, such as taiwan semiconductor manufacturing corporation, or tsmc and
united microelectronics corporation, or umc, to produce our semiconductor
wafers. we then utilize independent subcontractors, such as advanced
semiconductor engineering, or ase, jsi logistics ltd., or jsi, king yuan
electronics co., ltd, or kyec, siliconware precision industries company ltd., or
spil, and stats chippac incorporated, or chippac, to perform assembly, testing
and packaging of most of our products.
we typically receive
semiconductor products from our subcontractors, perform incoming quality
assurance and then ship the semiconductors to cems, distributors, motherboard
and add-in board manufacturer customers from our third-party warehouse in hong
kong. generally, these manufacturers assemble and test the boards based on our
design kit and test specifications, and then ship the products to retailers,
system builders or oems as motherboard and add-in board solutions.
inventory
and working capital
our management focuses
considerable attention on managing our inventories and other
working-capital-related items. we manage inventories by communicating with our
customers and then using our industry experience to forecast demand on a
product-by-product basis. we then place manufacturing orders for our products
that are based on forecasted demand. the quantity of products actually purchased
by our customers as well as shipment schedules are subject to revisions that
reflect changes in both the customers requirements and in manufacturing
availability. we generally maintain substantial inventories of our products
because the semiconductor industry is characterized by short lead time orders
and quick delivery schedules.
our existing cash and marketable
securities balances increased by 38% at the end of fiscal year 2010 when
compared with the end of fiscal year 2009. we believe that these balances and
our anticipated cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our
operating, acquisition and capital requirements for at least the next twelve
months.
research
and development
we believe that the continued
introduction of new and enhanced products designed to deliver leading 3d
graphics, hd video, audio, ultra-low power consumption, and system-on-chip
architectures is essential to our future success. our research and development
strategy is to focus on concurrently developing multiple generations of gpus,
including gpus for high-performance computing, and mobile and consumer products
using independent design teams. our research and development efforts are
performed within specialized groups consisting of software engineering, hardware
engineering, very large scale integration design engineering, process
engineering, architecture and algorithms. these groups act as a pipeline
designed to allow the efficient simultaneous development of multiple generations
of products.
a critical component of our
product development effort is our partnerships with leaders in the computer
aided design, or cad, industry. we invest significant resources in the
development of relationships with industry leaders, often assisting these
companies in the product definition of their new products. we believe that
forming these relationships and utilizing next-generation development tools to
design, simulate and verify our products will help us remain at the forefront of
the 3d graphics market and develop products that utilize leading-edge technology
on a rapid basis. we believe this approach assists us in meeting the new design
schedules of pc oem and other manufacturers.
as of january 31, 2010, we had
3,940 full-time employees engaged in research and development. during fiscal
years 2010, 2009 and 2008, we incurred research and development expense of
$908.9 million, $855.9 million and $691.6 million, respectively.
competition
the market for our products is
intensely competitive and is characterized by rapid technological change,
evolving industry standards and declining average selling prices. we believe
that the principal competitive factors in this market are performance, breadth
of product offerings, access to customers and distribution channels, software
support, conformity to industry standard application programming interfaces, or
apis, manufacturing capabilities, processor pricing, and total system costs. we
believe that our ability to remain competitive will depend on how well we are
able to anticipate the features and functions that customers will demand and
whether we are able to deliver consistent volumes of our products at acceptable
levels of quality and at competitive prices. we expect competition to increase
from both existing competitors and new market entrants with products that may be
less costly than ours, or may provide better performance or additional features
not provided by our products. in addition, it is possible that new competitors
or alliances among competitors could emerge and acquire significant market
share. a
significant source of competition comes from companies that provide or intend to
provide gpus and mobile and consumer products.some of our
competitors may have greater marketing, financial, distribution and
manufacturing resources than we do and may be more able to adapt to customer or
technological changes.
our
current competitors include the following:
suppliers
of discrete mcps that incorporate a combination of networking, audio,
communications and input/output, or i/o, functionality as part of their
existing solutions, such as amd, broadcom corporation, or broadcom,
silicon integrated systems, inc.,or sis,via technologies,
inc.,or via,and intel;
suppliers
of gpus, including mcps that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as part
of their existing solutions, such as amd, intel, matrox electronics
systems ltd.,sis, and via;
and
suppliers
of system-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas,
cellular phones, handheld devices or embedded devices such as amd,
broadcom, freescale semiconductor inc., fujitsu limited, imagination
technologies ltd., arm holdings plc, marvell technology group ltd, or
marvell, nec corporation, qualcomm incorporated, renesas technology,
samsung, seiko-epson, st microelectronics, texas instruments incorporated,
and toshiba america, inc.;
we expect
substantial competition from both intels and amds strategy of selling platform
solutions, such as the success intel achieved with its centrino platform
solution. amd has also announced a platform solution. additionally, intel
and amd have each announced its intention to integrate a central processing
unit, or cpu, and a gpu on the same chip or same package, as evidenced by amds
announcement of its fusion processor project and intels announcement of its
multichip packaged solution codenamed arrandale. if amd and intel continue to
pursue platform solutions, we may not be able to successfully compete and our
business would be negatively impacted.
if and to the extent we offer
products in new markets, we may face competition from some of our existing
competitors as well as from companies with which we currently do not compete.
for example, in the case of our cpb, our tegra products primarily compete in
architecture used in tablets, smartbooks, smartphones, and other handheld
consumer devices.
our gpu and mcp products are
currently used with both intel and amd processors.in february
2009, intel filed suit against us, related to a patent license agreement that we
signed with intel in 2004. intel seeks an order from the court declaring that
the license does not extend to a new intel processor architecture and enjoining
us from stating that we have licensing rights for this
architecture.if intel successfully obtains such a court order, we
could be unable to sell our mcp products for use with these intel processors and
our competitive position would be harmed.in addition, in order to
continue to sell mcp products for use with these intel processors we could be
required to negotiate a new license agreement with intel and we may not be able
to do so on reasonable terms, if at all.
patents
and proprietary rights
we rely primarily on a
combination of patents, trademarks, trade secrets, employee and third-party
nondisclosure agreements and licensing arrangements to protect our intellectual
property in the united states and internationally. our currently issued patents
have expiration dates from march 25, 2010 to june 18, 2029.we have
numerous patents issued, allowed and pending in the united states and in foreign
jurisdictions. our patents and pending patent applications primarily relate to
our products and the technology used in connection with our products. we also
rely on international treaties, organizations and foreign laws to protect our
intellectual property. the laws of certain foreign countries in which our
products are or may be manufactured or sold, including various countries in
asia, may not protect our products or intellectual property rights to the same
extent as the laws of the united states. this makes the possibility of piracy of
our technology and products more likely. we continuously assess whether and
where to seek formal protection for particular innovations and technologies
based on such factors as:
the
location in which our products are
manufactured;
our
strategic technology or product directions in different
countries;
the
degree to which intellectual property laws exist and are meaningfully
enforced in different jurisdictions;
and
the
commercial significance of our operations and our competitors operations
in particular countries and
regions.
our pending patent
applications and any future applications may not be approved. in addition, any
issued patents may not provide us with competitive advantages or may be
challenged by third parties. the enforcement of patents by others may harm our
ability to conduct our business. others may independently develop substantially
equivalent intellectual property or otherwise gain access to our trade secrets
or intellectual property. our failure to effectively protect our intellectual
property could harm our business. we have licensed technology from third parties
for incorporation in some of our products and for defensive reasons, and expect
to continue to enter into such license agreements. these licenses may result in
royalty payments to third parties, the cross licensing of technology by us or
payment of other consideration. if these arrangements are not concluded on
commercially reasonable terms, our business could suffer.
employees
as of january 31, 2010 we
had 5,706 employees, 3,940 of whom were engaged in research and development and
1,766 of whom were engaged in sales, marketing, operations and administrative
positions. we believe our relationships with our employees are
good.
financial
information by business segment and geographic data
our chief executive
officer, who is considered to be our chief operating decision maker, or codm,
reviews financial information presented on an operating segment basis for
purposes of making operating decisions and assessing financial
performance. during the last several fiscal years, we have operated
and reported four major product-line operating segments to our codm: the gpu
business, the psb, the mcp business, and the cpb. however, effective with the
first quarter of fiscal year 2011, we will no longer separate our mcp and gpu
operating segments as such segmentation will no longer be reflective of the way
we manage those businesses. our gpu business is comprised primarily of our
geforce products that support desktop and notebook personal computers, or pcs,
plus memory products. our psb is comprised of our quadro professional
workstation products and other professional graphics products, including our
nvidia tesla high-performance computing products. our mcp business, as we have
reported it through fiscal year 2010, has been comprised primarily of our ion
motherboard gpus, or mgpu products. our cpb is comprised of our tegra mobile
brand and products that support tablets and smartbooks, smartphones, personal
media players, or pmps, internet television, automotive navigation, and other
similar devices. cpb also includes license, royalty, other revenue and
associated costs related to video game consoles and other digital consumer
electronics devices.in addition to these operating segments, we have
the all other category that includes human resources, legal, finance, general
administration, corporate marketing expenses, charges related to our stock
option purchase, restructuring charges and certain vendor price credits not
allocated to specific operating segments all of which totaled $386.1 million,
$346.1 million and $266.2 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively, that we do not allocate to our other operating segments as these
expenses are not included in the segment operating performance measures
evaluated by our codm. all other also includes the results of operations of
other miscellaneous reporting segments that are neither individually reportable,
nor aggregated with another operating segment. revenue in the all other
category is primarily derived from sales of components. certain prior
period amounts have been revised to conform to the presentation of our current
fiscal year.
our codm does
not review any information regarding total assets on an operating segment basis.
operating segments do not record intersegment revenue, and, accordingly, there
is none to be reported. the accounting policies for segment reporting are
the same as for nvidia as a whole. the information included in note 17 of
the notes to the consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15
of this form10-k, including financial information by business segment and
revenue and long-lived assets by geographic region, is hereby incorporated by
reference.
executive
officers of the registrant
the
following sets forth certain information regarding our executive officers, their
ages and their positions as of february 26,2010:
name
age
position
jen-hsun
huang
president,
chief executive officer and director
david
l. white
executive
vice president and chief financial officer
ajay
k. puri
executive
vice president, worldwide sales
david
m. shannon
executive
vice president, general counsel and secretary
debora
shoquist
executive
vice president, operations
jen-hsun huang
co-founded nvidia in april 1993 and has served as its president, chief
executive officer and a member of the board of directors since its inception.
from 1985 to 1993, mr. huang was employed at lsi logic corporation, a computer
chip manufacturer, where he held a variety of positions, most recently as
director of coreware, the business unit responsible for lsis system-on-a-chip
strategy. from 1983 to 1985, mr. huang was a microprocessor designer for
advanced micro devices, inc., a semiconductor company. mr. huang holds a
b.s.e.e. degree from oregonstateuniversity and an m.s.e.e. degree
from stanforduniversity.
david l. white joined
nvidia in february 2009 as executive vice president and chief financial officer.
from august 2004 to february 2009, mr. white served as the executive vice
president of finance and chief financial officer of sanmina-sci corporation, a
global provider of customized, integrated electronics manufacturing services to
original equipment manufacturers in the communications, enterprise computing and
medical industries and various other end markets. from 2003 to 2004, mr. white
was senior vice president and chief financial officer of asyst technologies,
inc., a provider of integrated hardware and software automation solutions that
enhance semiconductor and flat-panel display manufacturing productivity. mr.
white served as president and chief executive officer of candescent technologies
corporation, a developer of field emission display technology for
next-generation thin flat-panel displays, and held various other positions, from
1995 to 2002. mr. white holds a b.s. degree from
brighamyounguniversity and an m.b.a. from the university of
washington.
ajay k. puri joined
nvidia in december 2005 as senior vice president, worldwide sales and became
executive vice president, worldwide sales in january 2009. prior to nvidia, he
held positions in sales, marketing, and general management over a 22-year career
at sun microsystems, inc. mr. puri previously held marketing, management
consulting, and product development positions at hewlett-packard company, booz
allen hamilton inc., and texas instruments incorporated. mr. puri holds an
m.b.a. degree from harvarduniversity, an m.s.e.e. degree from the
california institute of technology and a b.s.e.e. degree from the university of
minnesota.
david m.
shannonjoined nvidia in august 2002 as vice president and general
counsel. mr. shannon became secretary of nvidia in april 2005, a senior vice
president in december 2005 and an executive vice president in january 2009. from
1993 to 2002, mr.shannon held various counsel positions at intel,
including the most recent position of vice president and assistant general
counsel. mr.shannon also practiced for eight years in the law firm of
gibson dunn and crutcher, focusing on complex commercial and high-technology
related litigation. mr.shannon holds b.a. and j.d. degrees from
pepperdineuniversity.
debora shoquist joined
nvidia in september 2007 as senior vice president of operations and became
executive vice president of operations in january 2009.from 2004 to
2007, ms.shoquist served as senior vice president of operations at jds
uniphase corporation, a provider of communications test and measurement
solutions and optical products for the telecommunications industry. from 2002 to
2004, she served as senior vice president and general manager of the
electro-optics business at coherent, inc., a manufacturer of commercial and
scientific laser equipment. her experience includes her role at quantum
corporation as the president of the personal computer hard disk drive division.
her experience also includes senior roles at hewlett-packard corporation. she
holds a b.s degree in electrical engineering from
kansasstateuniversity and a b.s. degree in biology from santa
clarauniversity.
available
information
our annual report on form 10-k,
quarterly reports on form 10-q, current reports on form 8-k and, if applicable,
amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to section 13(a) of the
securities exchange act of 1934, or the exchange act, are available free of
charge on or through our internet web site, http://www.nvidia.com, as soon as
reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or
furnish it to, the securities and exchange commission, or the sec. our web site
and the information on it or connected to it is not a part of this form
10-k.
item 1a. risk factors
in evaluating nvidia and our
business, the following factors should be considered in addition to the other
information in this annual report on form 10-k.before you buy our
common stock, you should know that making such an investment involves some risks
including, but not limited to, the risks described below. additionally, any one
of the following risks could seriously harm our business, financial condition
and results of operations, which could cause our stock price to decline.
additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we
currently deem immaterial may also impair our business operations.
risks
related to our business, industry and partners
we
depend on foundries to manufacture our products and these third parties may not
be able to satisfy our manufacturing requirements, which would harm our
business.
wedo
not manufacture the silicon wafers used for our products and do not own or
operate a wafer fabrication facility. instead, we are dependent on
industry-leading foundries, such as taiwan semiconductor manufacturing
corporation, or tsmc,to manufacture our semiconductor wafers using their
fabrication equipment and techniques. a substantial portion of our wafers are
supplied by tsmc. the foundries, which have limited capacity, also manufacture
products for other semiconductor companies, including some of our
competitors.since we do not have long-term commitment contracts with
any of these foundries, they do not have an obligation to provide us with any
minimum quantity of product at any time or at any set price, except as may be
provided in a specific purchase order.most of our products are
only manufactured by one foundry at a time.in times of high demand,
the foundries could choose to prioritize their capacity for other companies,
reduce or eliminate deliveries to us, or increase the prices that they charge
us.if we are unable to meet customer demand due to reduced or
eliminated deliveries or have to increase the prices of our products, we could
lose sales to customers, which would negatively impact our revenue and our
reputation.for example, revenue during the fourth quarter of fiscal
year 2010 was somewhat limited by supply constraints related to 40nm products.
these supply constraints were driven by limited 40nm wafer foundry capacity as
well as challenges related to 40nm process manufacturing yields.as a
result, we have been forced to allocate our available 40nm product supply among
our customers.we expect such supply constraints could have a further
limiting impact on our revenue for the first quarter of fiscal year
2011.
because
the lead-time needed to establish a strategic relationship with a new
manufacturing partner and achieve initial production could be over a year, we do
not have an alternative source of supply for our products. in addition, the time
and effort to qualify a new foundry would result in additional expense,
diversion of resources, and could result in lost sales, any of which would
negatively impact our financial results. we believe that long-term market
acceptance for our products will depend on reliable relationships with the
third-party manufacturers we use to ensure adequate product supply and
competitive pricing to respond to customer demand.
if our
third-party foundries are not able to transition to new manufacturing process
technologies or develop, obtain or successfully implement high quality,
leading-edge process technologies our operating results and gross margin could
be adversely affected.
we use
the most advanced manufacturing process technology appropriate for our products
that is available from our third-party foundries. as a result, we continuously
evaluate the benefits of migrating our products to smaller geometry process
technologies in order to improve performance and reduce costs. we believe this
strategy will help us remain competitive.our current product
families are manufactured using 0.15 micron, 0.14 micron, 0.13 micron, 0.11
micron, 90 nanometer, 65 nanometer, 55 nanometer and 40 nanometer process
technologies.manufacturing process technologies are subject to
rapid change and require significant expenditures for research and development,
which could negatively impact our operating expenses and gross
margin.
we
have experienced difficulty in migrating to new manufacturing processes in the
past and, consequently, have suffered reduced yields, delays in product
deliveries and increased expense levels. we may face similar difficulties,
delays and expenses as we continue to transition our new products to smaller
geometry processes. moreover, we are dependent on our third-party manufacturers
to invest sufficient funds in new manufacturing processes in order to have ample
capacity for all of their customers and to develop the processes in a timely
manner. our product cycles may also depend on our third-party manufacturers
migrating to smaller geometry processes successfully and in time for us to meet
our customer demands.some of our competitors own their manufacturing
facilities and may be able to move to a new state of the art manufacturing
process more quickly or more successfully than our manufacturing
partners. if our suppliers fall behind our competitors in
manufacturing processes, the development and customer demand for our products
and the use of our products could be negatively impacted.if we are
forced to use larger geometric processes in manufacturing a product than our
competition, our gross margin may be reduced.the inability by us or
our third-party manufacturers to effectively and efficiently transition to new
manufacturing process technologies may adversely affect our operating results
and our gross margin.
we cannot
be certain that our third-party foundries will be able to develop, obtain or
successfully implement high quality, leading-edge process technologies needed to
manufacturer our products profitably or on a timely basis or that our
competitors (including those that own their own manufacturing facilities) will
not develop such high quality, leading-edge process technologies earlier. if our
third party-foundries experience manufacturing inefficiencies, we may fail to
achieve acceptable yields or experience product delivery delays. if our
third-party foundries fall behind our competitors (including those that own
their own manufacturing facilities), the development and customer demand for our
products and the use of our products could be negatively
impacted.additionally, we cannot be certain that our third-party
foundries will manufacturer our products at a price that is competitive to what
our competitors pay.if our third-party foundries do not charge us a
competitive price, our operating results and gross margin will be negatively
impacted.
failure
to achieve expected manufacturing yields for our products could negatively
impact our financial results and damage our reputation.
manufacturing
yields for our products are a function of product design, which is developed
largely by us, and process technology, which typically is proprietary to the
manufacturer. low yields may result from either product design or process
technology failure.we do not know a yield problem exists until our
design is manufactured.when a yield issue is identified, the product
is analyzed and tested to determine the cause. as a result, yield problems may
not be identified until well into the production process. resolution of yield
problems requires cooperation by, and communication between, us and the
manufacturer. because of our potentially limited access to wafer foundry
capacity, decreases in manufacturing yields could result in an increase in our
costs and force us to allocate our available product supply among our customers.
lower than expected yields could potentially harm customer relationships, our
reputation and our financial results.
global
economic conditions may adversely affect our business and financial
results.
our
operations and performance depend significantly on worldwide economic
conditions. uncertainty about current global economic conditions poses a
continuing risk to our business as consumers and businesses have postponed
spending in response to tighter credit, negative financial news and/or declines
in income or asset values, which have reduced the demand for our products. other
factors that could depress demand for our products in the future include
conditions in the residential real estate and mortgage markets, expectations for
inflation, labor and healthcare costs, access to credit, consumer confidence,
and other macroeconomic factors affecting consumer and business spending
behavior. these and other economic factors have reduced demand for our products
and could further harm our business, financial condition and operating
results.
the
financial turmoil that affected the banking system and financial markets and the
increased possibility that financial institutions may consolidate or go out of
business resulted in a tightening in the credit markets, a low level of
liquidity in many financial markets, and extreme volatility in fixed income,
credit, currency and equity markets. there could be a number of follow-on
effects from the credit crisis on our business, including insolvency of key
suppliers resulting in product delays; inability of customers, including channel
partners, to obtain credit to finance purchases of our products and/or customer,
including channel partner, insolvencies; and failure of financial institutions,
which may negatively impact our treasury operations. other income and expense
could also vary materially from expectations depending on gains or losses
realized on the sale or exchange of financial instruments; impairment charges
related to debt securities as well as equity and other investments; interest
rates; and cash, cash equivalent and marketable securities balances. volatility
in the financial markets and overall economic uncertainty increases the risk
that the actual amounts realized in the future on our financial instruments
could differ significantly from the fair values currently assigned to
them.
our
business is cyclical in nature and has experienced severe downturns that have,
and may in the future, materially adversely affect our business and financial
results.
our
business is directly affected by market conditions in the highly cyclical
semiconductor industry. the semiconductor industry has been adversely affected
by many factors, including the recent global downturn, ongoing efforts by our
customers to reduce their spending, diminished product demand, increased
inventory levels, lower average selling prices, uncertainty regarding long-term
growth rates and underlying financial health and increased competition. these
factors, could, among other things, limit our ability to maintain or increase
our sales or recognize revenue and in turn adversely affect our business,
operating results and financial condition.if our actions to reduce
our operating expenses to sufficiently offset these factors during this downturn
are unsuccessful, our operating results will suffer.
our
failure to estimate customer demand properly could adversely affect our
financial results.
we
manufacture our products based on forecasts of customer demand in order to have
shorter shipment lead times and quicker delivery schedules for our
customers.as a result, we may build inventories for anticipated
periods of growth which do not occur or may build inventory anticipating demand
for a product that does not materialize. in forecasting demand, we make multiple
assumptions any of which may prove to be incorrect. situations that may result
in excess or obsolete inventory include:
changes
in business and economic conditions, including downturns in the
semiconductor industry and/or overall
economy;
changes
in consumer confidence caused by changes in market conditions, including
changes in the credit market, expectations for inflation, and energy
prices;
if
there were a sudden and significant decrease in demand for our
products;
if
there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly
changing technology and customer
requirements;
if
we fail to estimate customer demand properly for our older products as our
newer products are introduced; or
if
our competition were to take unexpected competitive pricing
actions.
any
inability to sell products to which we have devoted resources could harm our
business. in addition, cancellation or deferral of customer purchase orders
could result in our holding excess inventory, which could adversely affect our
gross margin and restrict our ability to fund operations. additionally, because
we often sell a substantial portion of our products in the last month of each
quarter, we may not be able to reduce our inventory purchase commitments in a
timely manner in response to customer cancellations or deferrals. we could be
subject to excess or obsolete inventories and be required to take corresponding
inventory write-downs and/or a reduction in average selling prices if growth
slows or does not materialize, or if we incorrectly forecast product demand,
which could negatively impact our financial results.
conversely,
if we underestimate our customers demand for our products, our third party
manufacturing partners may not have adequate lead-time or capacity to increase
production for us meaning that we may not be able to obtain sufficient inventory
to fill our customers orders on a timely basis. even if we are able to increase
production levels to meet customer demand, we may not be able to do so in a cost
effective or timely manner. inability to fulfill our customers orders on a
timely basis, or at all, could damage our customer relationships, result in lost
revenue, cause a loss in market share, impact our customer relationships or
damage our reputation, any of which could adversely impact our
business.
because
our gross margin for any period depends on a number of factors, our failure to
forecast changes in any of these factors could adversely affect our gross
margin.
we are
focused on improving our gross margin. our gross margin for any period depends
on a number of factors, including:
the
mix of our products sold;
average
selling prices;
introduction
of new products;
product
transitions;
sales
discounts;
unexpected
pricing actions by our competitors;
the
cost of product components; and
the
yield of wafers produced by the foundries that manufacture our
products.
if we do
not correctly forecast the impact of any of the relevant factors on our
business, there may not be any actions we can take or we may not be able to take
any possible actions in time to counteract any negative impact on our gross
margin.in addition, if we are unable to meet our gross margin
target for any period or the target set by analysts, the trading price of our
common stock may decline.
our
revenue may fluctuate while our operating expenses are relatively fixed, which
makes our results difficult to predict and could cause our results to fall short
of expectations.
demand
for many of our revenue components fluctuates and is difficult to predict, and
our operating expenses are relatively fixed and largely independent of revenue.
therefore, it is difficult for us to accurately forecast revenue and profits or
losses in any particular period.our operating expenses, which are
comprised of research and development expenses, sales, general and
administrative expenses and restructuring chargesrepresented 38%, 36% and
25% of our total revenue for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
since we often recognize a substantial portion of our revenue in the last
month of each quarter, we may not be able to adjust our operating expenses in a
timely manner in response to any unanticipated revenue shortfalls in any
quarter.further, some of our operating expenses, like stock-based
compensation expense can only be adjusted over a longer period of time and
cannot be reduced during a quarter. if we are unable to reduce operating
expenses quickly in response to any revenue shortfalls, our financial results
will be negatively impacted.
any one
or more of the risks discussed in this annual report on form 10-k or other
factors could prevent us from achieving our expected future revenue or net
income. accordingly, we believe that period-to-period comparisons of our results
of operations should not be relied upon as an indication of future performance.
similarly, the results of any quarterly or full fiscal year period are not
necessarily indicative of results to be expected for a subsequent quarter or a
full fiscal year. as a result, it is possible that in some quarters our
operating results could be below the expectations of securities analysts or
investors, which could cause the trading price of our common stock to decline.
we believe that our quarterly and annual results of operations may continue to
be affected by a variety of factors that could harm our revenue, gross profit
and results of operations.
if
we are unable to sell our mcp products for use with certain intel processors, we
may not be able to successfully compete and our business would be negatively
impacted.
our mcp
products are currently used with both intel and amd
processors.our revenue from mcp products represented 26% of
our total revenue for fiscal year 2010.in february 2009, intel filed
suit against us related to a patent license agreement that we signed with intel
in 2004. intel seeks an order from the court declaring that the license does not
extend to a new intel processor architecture and enjoining us from stating that
we have licensing rights for this architecture.if intel successfully
obtains such a court order, we could be unable to sell our mcp products for use
with these intel processors and our competitive position and financial results
would be adversely impacted.in addition, in order to continue to
sell mcp products for use with these intel processors we could be required to
negotiate a new license agreement with intel and we may not be able to do so on
reasonable terms, if at all.
in
march 2009, we asserted counterclaims against intel pursuant to which we seek an
order declaring that we have the right to sell certain chipset products with
intels processors under the chipset license agreement, and enjoining intel from
interfering with our licensing rights.we are also seeking a finding
that intel has materially breached its obligations under the chipset license
agreement, and are requesting various remedies for that breach, including
termination of intels cross licensing rights.notwithstanding our
belief that the chipset license agreement extends to a component of the new
intel processor architecture referred to as direct media interface, or dmi, we
currently have no intentions of building a dmi-based chipset while this dispute
remains unresolved.
if
we are unable to compete in the markets for our products, our financial results
could be adversely impacted.
the
market for our products is characterized by rapid technological change, new
product introductions, evolving industry standards and declining average selling
prices.we believe that the principal competitive factors in this
market are performance, breadth of product offerings, access to customers and
distribution channels, software support, conformity to industry standard
application programming interface, or apis, manufacturing capabilities, price of
processors, and total system costs. we believe that our ability to remain
competitive will depend on how well we are able to anticipate the features and
functions that customers will demand and whether we are able to deliver
consistent volumes of our products at acceptable levels of quality and at
competitive prices. we expect competition to increase from both existing
competitors and new market entrants with products that may be less costly than
ours, or may provide better performance or additional features not provided by
our products. in addition, it is possible that new competitors or alliances
among competitors could emerge and acquire significant market share. we
believe other factors impacting our ability to compete are:
product
performance;
product
bundling by competitors with multiple product
lines;
breadth
and frequency of product offerings;
access
to customers and distribution
channels;
backward-forward
software support;
conformity
to industry standard application programming interfaces;
and
manufacturing
capabilities.
a significant
source of competition is from companies that provide or intend to provide gpus
and mobile and consumer products.some of our competitors may have
greater marketing, financial, distribution and manufacturing resources than we
do and may be more able to adapt to customer or technological
changes.
our
current competitors include the following:
suppliers
of gpus, including mcps that incorporate 3d graphics functionality as part
of their existing solutions, such as amd, intel, matrox electronics
systems ltd.,sis, and via;
and
suppliers
of system-on-a-chip products that support netbooks, pnds, pmps, pdas,
cellular phones, handheld devices or embedded devices such as amd,
broadcom, freescale semiconductor inc., fujitsu limited, imagination
technologies ltd., arm holdings plc, marvell technology group ltd, or
marvell, nec corporation, qualcomm incorporated, renesas technology,
samsung, seiko-epson, st microelectronics, texas instruments incorporated,
and toshiba america, inc.;
if
and to the extent we offer products in new markets, we may face competition from
some of our existing competitors as well as from companies with which we
currently do not compete. for example, in the case of our cpb, our tegra
products primarily compete in tablets, smartbooks, smartphones and other
handheld consumer devices.we cannot accurately predict if we will
compete successfully in any of the new markets we may enter. if we are unable to
compete in our current or new markets, demand for our products could decrease
which could cause our revenue to decline and our financial results to
suffer.
we
are dependent on the personal computer market and its rate of growth in the
future may have a negative impact on our business.
we derive
and expect to continue to derive the majority of our revenuefrom the sale
or license of products for use in the desktop personal computer, or pc, and
notebook pc markets, including professional workstations. a reduction in sales
of pcs, or a reduction in the growth rate of pc sales, may reduce demand for our
products. these changes in demand could be large and sudden. during fiscal year
2010, sales of our desktop gpu products increased by approximately 1% compared
to fiscal year 2009.the increase in the sale of desktop gpu products
was primarily driven by unit volume growth in the high-end and mainstream
segments as market demand appeared to begin to recover from recessionary
conditions that began in the prior year. however, sales of our notebook gpu
products decreased by approximately 31% compared to fiscal year 2009.this
decline was driven primarily by a combination of the decline in unit demand and
in average selling prices, or asps, due to increased competition in the
marketplace. since pc manufacturers often build inventories during periods
of anticipated growth, they may be left with excess inventories if growth slows
or if they incorrectly forecast product transitions. in these cases, pc
manufacturers may abruptly suspend substantially all purchases of additional
inventory from suppliers like us until their excess inventory has been absorbed,
which would have a negative impact on our financial results.
as
intel and amd continue to pursue platform solutions, we may not be able to
successfully compete and our business would be negatively impacted.
we
expect substantial competition from both intels and amds strategy of selling
platform solutions, such as the success intel achieved with its centrino
platform solution. amd has also announced a platform
solution.additionally, intel and amd have each announced its
intention to integrate a central processing unit, or cpu, and a gpu on the same
chip or same package, as evidenced by amds announcement of its fusion processor
project and intels announcement of its multichip packaged solution codenamed
arrandale.if amd and intel continue to pursue platform solutions, we
may not be able to successfully compete and our business would be negatively
impacted.
our
business results could be adversely affected if the identification and
development of new products or entry into or development of a new market is
delayed or unsuccessful.
in order
to maintain or improve our financial results, we will need to continue to
identify and develop new products as well as identify and enter new
markets.as our gpus and other processors develop and competition
increases, we anticipate that product life cycles at the high end will remain
short and average selling prices will decline. in particular, average selling
prices and gross margins for our gpus and other processors could decline as each
product matures and as unit volume increases. as a result, we will need to
introduce new products and enhancements to existing products to maintain or
improve overall average selling prices, our gross margin and our financial
results.we believe the success of our new product introductions will
depend on many factors outlined elsewhere in these risk factors as well as the
following:
market
demand for new products and enhancements to existing
products;
timely
completion and introduction of new product designs and new opportunities
for existing products;
seamless
transitions from an older product to a new
product;
differentiation
of our new products from those of our
competitors;
delays
in volume shipments of our
products;
market
acceptance of our products instead of our customers' products;
and
availability
of adequate quantity and configurations of various types of memory
products.
in
the past, we have experienced delays in the development and adoption of new
products and have been unable to successfully manage product transitions from
older to newer products resulting in obsolete inventory.
to be
successful, we must also enter new markets or develop new uses for our future or
existing products. we cannot accurately predict if our current or existing
products or technologies will be successful in the new opportunities or markets
that we identify for them or that we will compete successfully in any new
markets we may enter. for example, we have developed products and other
technology in order for certain general-purpose computing operationsto be
performed on a gpu rather than a cpu.this general purpose computing,
which is often referred to as gp computing, was a new use for the gpu which had
been entirely used for graphics rendering.during fiscal year 2008,
we introduced our nvidia tesla family of products, which was our entry into the
high-performance computing industry, a new market for us.during
fiscal year 2010, we introduced our next generation cuda gpu architecture,
codenamed fermi, which we expect to be the foundation for computational gpus
andenable breakthroughs in both graphics and parallel
computing. some of our competitors, including intel, are now developing
their own solutions for the discrete graphics and computing markets. our failure
to successfully develop, introduce or achieve market acceptance for new gpus,
other products or other technologies or to enter into new markets or identify
new uses for existing or future products, could result in rapidly declining
average selling prices, reduced demand for our products or loss of market share
any of which could cause our revenue, gross margin and overall financial results
to suffer.
if
we are unable to achieve design wins, our products may not be adopted by our
target markets or customers either of which could negatively impact our
financial results.
the
success of our business depends to a significant extent on our ability to
develop new competitive products for our target markets and customers. we
believe achieving design wins, which entails having our existing and future
products chosen for hardware components or subassemblies designed by oems, odms,
add-in board and motherboard manufacturers, is an integral part of our future
success. our oem, odm, and add-in board and motherboard manufacturers customers
typically introduce new system configurations as often as twice per year,
typically based on spring and fall design cycles or in connection with trade
shows. accordingly, when our customers are making their design decisions, our
existing products must have competitive performance levels or we must timely
introduce new products in order to be included in our customers new system
configurations. this requires that we:
anticipate
the features and functionality that customers and consumers will
demand;
incorporate
those features and functionalities into products that meet the exacting
design requirements
ofourcustomers;
price
our products competitively; and
introduce
products to the market within our customers limited design
cycles.
if oems,
odms, and add-in board and motherboard manufacturers do not include our products
in their systems, they will typically not use our products in their systems
until at least the next design configuration. therefore, we endeavor to develop
close relationships with our oems and odms, in an attempt to better anticipate
and address customer needs in new products so that we will achieve design
wins.
our
ability to achieve design wins also depends in part on our ability to identify
and be compliant with evolving industry standards. unanticipated changes in
industry standards could render our products incompatible with products
developed by major hardware manufacturers and software developers like amd,
inteland microsoft corporation, or microsoft.if our products
are not in compliance with prevailing industry standards, we may not be designed
into our customers product designs.however, to be compliant with
changes to industry standards, we may have to invest significant time and
resources to redesign our products which could negatively impact our gross
margin or operating results. if we are unable to achieve new design wins for
existing or new customers, we may lose market share and our operating results
would be negatively impacted.
if
our products do not continue to be adopted by our target markets or if the
demand for new and innovative products in our target markets decreases, our
business and operating results would suffer.
our
success depends in part upon continued broad adoption of our processors for 3d
graphics and multimedia in desktop pc, notebook pc, workstation,
high-performance computing, netbooks, smartbooks, tablets, smartphones, and
video game console applications. the market for processors has been
characterized by unpredictable and sometimes rapid shifts in the popularity of
products, often caused by the publication of competitive industry benchmark
results, changes in pricing of dynamic random-access memory devices and other
changes in the total system cost of add-in boards, as well as by severe price
competition and by frequent new technology and product introductions. broad
market acceptance is difficult to achieve and such market acceptance, if
achieved, is difficult to sustain due to intense competition and frequent new
technology and product introductions. our gpu and mcp businesses together
comprised approximately 79%, 75% and 79% of our revenue for fiscal years 2010,
2009 and 2008, respectively.as such, our financial results would
suffer if for any reason our current or future gpus or mcps do not continue to
achieve widespread adoption by the pc market. if we are unable to complete the
timely development of new products or if we were unable to successfully and
cost-effectively manufacture and deliver products that meet the requirements of
the desktop pc, notebook pc, workstation, high-performance computing, netbook,
smartbooks, tablets, smartphones, and video game console markets, we may
experience a decrease in revenue which could negatively impact our operating
results.
additionally,
there can be no assurance that the industry will continue to demand new products
with improved standards, features or performance. if our customers, oems, odms,
add-in-card and motherboard manufacturers, system builders and consumer
electronics companies, do not continue to design products that require more
advanced or efficient processors and/or the market does not continue to demand
new products with increased performance, features, functionality or standards,
sales of our products could decline and the markets for our products could
shrink. decreased sales of our products for these markets could negatively
impact our revenue and our financial results.
if
our products contain significant defects our financial results could be
negatively impacted, our reputation could be damaged and we could lose market
share.
our
products are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to any
number of issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use within
a system. if any of our products or technologies contains a defect,
compatibility issue or other error, we may have to invest additional research
and development efforts to find and correct the issue.such efforts
could divert our engineers attention from the development of new products and
technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce our gross margin.
in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or related software
drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result in failure to
achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be required to
reimburse customers, including our customers costs to repair or replace
products in the field. a product recall or a significant number of product
returns could be expensive, damage our reputation, could result in the shifting
of business to our competitors and could result in litigation against us. costs
associated with correcting defects, errors, bugs or other issues could be
significant and could materially harm our financial results. for
example, during fiscal year 2010, we recorded an additional net warranty charge
of $95.8 million against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty,
repair, return, replacement and other costs arising from a weak die/packaging
material set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products
used in notebook systems. this charge included an additional accrual of $164.4
million for related estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance
carriers of $68.6 million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal
year 2010. during fiscal year 2009, we recorded a net warranty charge of $189.3
million charge against cost of revenue for the purpose of supporting the product
repair costs of our affected customers around the world.this charge
included an accrual of $196.0 million for related estimated costs, offset by
reimbursements from insurance carriers of $6.7 million that we recorded against
cost of revenue during fiscal year 2009. in september, october and november
2008, several putative class action lawsuits were filed against us, asserting
various claims related to the impacted mcp and gpu products.please
refer to the risk entitled we
are subject to litigation arising from alleged defects in our previous
generation mcp and gpu products, which if determined adversely to us, could harm
our business for the risk associated with this litigation.
we
may have to invest more resources in research and development than anticipated,
which could increase our operating expenses and negatively impact our operating
results.
if new
competitors, technological advances by existing competitors, our entry into new
markets, or other competitive factors require us to invest significantly greater
resources than anticipated in our research and development efforts, our
operating expenses would increase.our engineering and technical
resources include 3,940 full-time employees as of january 31, 2010 and 3,772
employees as of january 25, 2009, respectively.research and
development expenditures were $908.9 million, $855.9 million and $691.6 million,
for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. research and
development expenses included stock-based compensation expense of $151.8
million, $98.0 million and $76.6 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively.if we are required to invest significantly greater
resources than anticipated in research and development efforts without a
corresponding increase in revenue, our operating results could decline. research
and development expenses are likely to fluctuate from time to time to the extent
we make periodic incremental investments in research and development and these
investments may be independent of our level of revenue which could negatively
impact our financial results. in order to remain competitive, we anticipate that
we will continue to devote substantial resources to research and development,
and we expect these expenses to increase in absolute dollars in the foreseeable
future due to the increased complexity and the greater number of products under
development.
we
are dependent on third parties for assembly, testing and packaging of our
products, which reduces our control over the delivery schedule, product quantity
or product quality.
our
products are assembled, tested and packaged by independent subcontractors, such
as advanced semiconductor engineering, inc., amkor technology, jsi logistics,
ltd., king yuan electronics co., siliconware precision industries co. ltd., and
chippac. as a result, we do not directly control our product delivery schedules,
product quantity, or product quality.all of these subcontractors
assemble, test and package products for other companies, including some of our
competitors.since we do not have long-term agreements with our
subcontractors, when demand for subcontractors to assemble, test or package
products is high, our subcontractors may decide to prioritize the orders of
other customers over our orders.since the time required to qualify a
different subcontractor to assemble, test or package our products can be
lengthy, if we have to find a replacement subcontractor we could experience
significant delays in shipments of our products, product shortages, a decrease
in the quality of our products, or an increase in product cost. any product
shortages or quality assurance problems could increase the costs of manufacture,
assembly or testing of our products, which could cause our gross margin and
revenue to decline.
we
rely on third-party vendors to supply software development tools to us for the
development of our new products and we may be unable to obtain the tools
necessary to develop or enhance new or existing products.
we
rely on third-party software development tools to assist us in the design,
simulation and verification of new products or product enhancements. to bring
new products or product enhancements to market in a timely manner, or at all, we
need software development tools that are sophisticated enough or technologically
advanced enough to complete our design, simulations and
verifications.in the past, we have experienced delays in the
introduction of products as a result of the inability of then available software
development tools to fully simulate the complex features and functionalities of
our products. in the future, the design requirements necessary to meet consumer
demands for more features and greater functionality from our products may exceed
the capabilities of available software development
tools.unavailability of software development tools may result in our
missing design cycles or losing design wins, either of which could result in a
loss of market share or negatively impact our operating results.
because
of the importance of software development tools to the development and
enhancement of our products, a critical component of our product development
efforts is our partnerships with leaders in the computer-aided design industry,
including cadence design systems, inc. and synopsys, inc. we have invested
significant resources to develop relationships with these industry leaders and
have often assisted them in the definition of their new products. we believe
that forming these relationships and utilizing next-generation development tools
to design, simulate and verify our products will help us remain at the forefront
of the 3d graphics, communications and networking segments and develop products
that utilize leading-edge technology on a rapid basis. if these relationships
are not successful, we may be unable to develop new products or product
enhancements in a timely manner, which could result in a loss of market share, a
decrease in revenue or negatively impact our operating results.
we
sell our products to a small number of customers and our business could suffer
if we loseany of these customers.
we
have a limited number of customers and our sales are highly
concentrated.we recorded approximately 12% of total revenue
from one customer, approximately 11% of total revenue from one customer and
approximately 10% of our total revenue from another customer for fiscal year
2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.although a small number of our
other customers represent the majority of our revenue, their end customers
include a large number of oems, and system integrators throughout the world who,
in many cases, specify the graphics supplier. our sales process involves
achieving key design wins with leading pc, oems and major system builders and
supporting the product design into high volume production with key contract
equipment manufacturers, or cems, odms, add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers. these design wins in turn influence the retail and system builder
channel that is serviced by cems, odms, add-in board and motherboard
manufacturers. our distribution strategy is to work with a small number of
leading independent cems, odms, add-in board and motherboard manufacturers, and
distributors, each of which has relationships with a broad range of system
builders and leading pc oems. if we were to lose sales to our pc oems, cems,
odms, add-in board manufacturers and motherboard manufacturers and were unable
to replace the lost sales with sales to different customers, if they were to
significantly reduce the number of products they order from us, or if we were
unable to collect accounts receivable from them, our revenue may not reach or
exceed the expected level in any period, which could harm our financial
condition and our results of operations.
anydifficulties in collecting accounts receivable, including from foreign
customers, could harm our operating results and financial
condition.
our
accounts receivable are highly concentrated and make us vulnerable to adverse
changes in our customers businesses, and to downturns in the industry and the
worldwide economy.we recorded approximately 20% of our accounts
receivable balance from two customers at january 31, 2010 and approximately 38%
of our accounts receivable balance from three customers at january 25,
2009.
difficulties
in collecting accounts receivable could materially and adversely affect our
financial condition and results of operations. these difficulties are heightened
during periods when economic conditions worsen. we continue to work directly
with more foreign customers and it may be difficult to collect accounts
receivable from them. we maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for
estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required
payments. this allowance consists of an amount identified for specific customers
and an amount based on overall estimated exposure. if the financial condition of
our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment in their ability
to make payments, additional allowances may be required, we may be required to
defer revenue recognition on sales to affected customers, and we may be required
to pay higher credit insurance premiums, any of which could adversely affect our
operating results. in the future, we may have to record additional reserves or
write-offs and/or defer revenue on certain sales transactions which could
negatively impact our financial results.
we
obtain credit insurance over the purchasing credit extended to certain
customers. as a result of the tightening of the credit markets, we may not be
able to acquire credit insurance on the credit we extend to these customers or
in amounts that we deem sufficient. while we have procedures to monitor and
limit exposure to credit risk on our accounts receivable, there can be no
assurance such procedures will effectively limit our credit risk or avoid
losses, which could harm our financial condition or operating
results.
we
are subject to risks associated with international operations which may harm our
business.
we
conduct our business worldwide.our semiconductor wafers are
manufactured, assembled, tested and packaged by third-parties located outside of
the united states and other americas.we generated 84%, 87% and 89%
of our revenue for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively, from sales to
customers outside the united states and other americas.as of january
31, 2010, we had offices in fifteen countries outside of the united
states.the manufacture, assembly, test and packaging of our products
outside of the united states, operation of offices outside of the united states,
and sales to customers internationally subjects us to a number of risks,
including:
international
economic and political conditions, such as political tensions between
countries in which we do business;
unexpected
changes in, or impositions of, legislative or regulatory requirements;
complying
with a variety of foreign laws;
differing
legal standards with respect to protection of intellectual property and
employment practices;
cultural
differences in the conduct of
business;
inadequate
local infrastructure that could result in business
disruptions;
exporting
or importing issues related to export or import restrictions, tariffs,
quotas and other trade barriers and
restrictions;
financial
risks such as longer payment cycles, difficulty in collecting accounts
receivable and fluctuations in currency exchange
rates;
imposition
of additional taxes and
penalties;and
other
factors beyond our control such as terrorism, civil unrest, war and
diseases such as severe acute respiratory syndrome and the avian flu.
if sales
to any of our customers outside of the united states and other americas are
delayed or cancelled because of any of the above factors, our revenue may be
negatively impacted.
our
international operations in australia, china, finland, france, germany, hong
kong, india, japan, korea, russia, singapore, sweden, switzerland, taiwan, and
the united kingdom are subject to many of the above listed risks. difficulties
with our international operations, including finding appropriate staffing and
office space, may divert managements attention and other resources any of which
could negatively impact our operating results.
the
economic conditions in our primary overseas markets, particularly in asia, may
negatively impact the demand for our products abroad. all of our international
sales to date have been denominated in united statesdollars. accordingly,
an increase in the value of the united statesdollar relative to foreign
currencies could make our products less competitive in international markets or
require us to assume the risk of denominating certain sales in foreign
currencies. we anticipate that these factors will impact our business to a
greater degree as we further expand our international business
activities.
conditions
outside the control of our independent subcontractors and manufacturers may
impact their business operations and thereby adversely interrupt our
manufacturing and sales processes.
the
economic, market, social, and political situations in countries where certain
independent subcontractors and manufacturers are located are unpredictable, can
be volatile, and can have a significant impact on our business because we may be
unable to obtain or distribute product in a timely manner. market and political
conditions, including currency fluctuation, terrorism, political strife, war,
labor disruption, and other factors, including natural or man-made disasters,
adverse changes in tax laws, tariff, import or export quotas, power and water
shortages, or interruption in air transportation, in areas where our independent
subcontractors and manufacturers are located could also have a severe negative
impact on our operating capabilities. for example, because we rely heavily on
tsmc to produce a significant portion of our silicon wafers, earthquakes,
typhoons or other natural disasters in taiwan and asia could limit our wafer
supply and thereby harm our business, financial condition, and operational
results.
we
are dependent on key employees and the loss of any of these employees could
negatively impact our business.
our
future success and ability to compete is substantially dependent on our ability
to identify, hire, train and retain highly qualified key
personnel.the market for key employees in the technology industry
can be competitive.none of our key employees is bound by an
employment agreement, meaning our relationships with all of our key employees
are at will. the loss of the services of any of our other key employees
without an adequate replacement or our inability to hire new employees as needed
could delay our product development efforts, harm our ability to sell our
products or otherwise negatively impact our business.
in
addition, we rely on stock-based awards as one means for recruiting, motivating
and retaining highly skilled talent.if the value of such stock
awards does not appreciate as measured by the performance of the price of our
common stock or if our share-based compensation otherwise ceases to be viewed as
a valuable benefit, our ability to attract, retain, and motivate employees could
be weakened, which could harm our results of
operations.
we
may not be able to realize the potential financial or strategic benefits of
business acquisitions or strategic investments, which could hurt our ability to
grow our business, develop new products or sell our products.
we have
acquired and invested in other businesses that offered products, services and
technologies that we believe will help expand or enhance our existing products
and business. we may enter into future acquisitions of, or investments in,
businesses, in order to complement or expand our current businesses or enter
into a new business market. negotiations associated with an acquisition or
strategic investment could divert managements attention and other company
resources. any of the following risks associated with past or future
acquisitions or investments could impair our ability to grow our business,
develop new products, our ability to sell our products, and ultimately could
have a negative impact on our growth or our financial results:
difficulty
in combining the technology, products, operations or workforce of the
acquired business with our
business;
difficulty
in operating in a new or multiple new
locations;
disruption
of our ongoing businesses or the ongoing business of the company we invest
in or acquire;
difficulty
in realizing the potential financial or strategic benefits of the
transaction;
difficulty
in maintaining uniform standards, controls, procedures and
policies;
disruption
of or delays in ongoing research and development
efforts;
diversion
of capital and other resources;
assumption
of liabilities;
diversion
of resources and unanticipated expenses resulting fromlitigation
arising frompotential or actual business acquisitions or
investments;
difficulties
in entering into new markets in which we have limited or no experience and
where competitors in such markets have stronger positions;
and
impairment
of relationships with employees and customers, or the loss of any of our
key employees or customers our targets key employees or customers, as a
result of our acquisition or
investment.
in
addition, the consideration for any future acquisition could be paid in cash,
shares of our common stock, the issuance of convertible debt securities or a
combination of cash, convertible debt and common stock. if we make an investment
in cash or use cash to pay for all or a portion of an acquisition, our cash
reserves would be reduced which could negatively impact the growth of our
business or our ability to develop new products. however, if we pay the
consideration with shares of common stock, or convertible debentures, the
holdings of our existing stockholders would be diluted. the significant decline
in the trading price of our common stock would make the dilution to our
stockholders more extreme and could negatively impact our ability to pay the
consideration with shares of common stock or convertible debentures. we cannot
forecast the number, timing or size of future strategic investments or
acquisitions, or the effect that any such investments or acquisitions might have
on our operations or financial results.
we are exposed to credit risk, fluctuations in the market values of our
portfolio investments and in interest rates.
all
of our cash equivalents and marketable securities are treated as
available-for-sale securities. investments in both fixed rate instruments and
floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree of interest rate risk.
fixed rate securities may have their market value adversely impacted due to a
rise in interest rates, while floating rate securities may produce less income
than expected if interest rates fall. due in part to these factors, our future
investment income may fall short of expectations due to changes in interest
rates or if the decline in fair value of our publicly traded debt or equity
investments is judged to be other-than-temporary. we may suffer losses in
principal if we are forced to sell securities that decline in securities market
value due to changes in interest rates. future declines in the market values of
our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities could have a material
adverse effect on our financial condition and operating
results.
at
january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009, we had $1.73 billion and $1.26 billion,
respectively, in cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities.given the global nature of our business, we have invested
both domestically and internationally.all of our investments are
denominated in united states dollars. we invest in a variety of financial
instruments, consisting principally of cash and cash equivalents, asset-backed
securities, commercial paper, mortgage-backed securities issued by
government-sponsored enterprises, equity securities, money market funds and debt
securities of corporations, municipalities and the united statesgovernment
and its agencies. as of january 31, 2010, we did not have any investments in
auction-rate preferred securities.as of january 31, 2010, our
investments in government agencies and government sponsored enterprises
represented approximately 62% of our total cash equivalents and marketable
securities, while the financial sector accounted for approximately 22% of our
total cash equivalents and marketable securities.
the financial turmoil that affected the
banking system and financial markets and the increased possibility that
financial institutions might consolidate or go out of business resulted in a
tightening in the credit markets, a low level of liquidity in many financial
markets, and extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency and equity
markets. there could be a number of follow-on effects from the credit crisis on
our business, including insolvency of key suppliers resulting in product delays;
inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain credit to finance
purchases of our products and/or customer, including channel partner,
insolvencies; and failure of financial institutions, which may negatively impact
our treasury operations. other income and expense could also vary materially
from expectations depending on gains or losses realized on the sale or exchange
of financial instruments; impairment charges related to debt securities as well
as equity and other investments; interest rates; and cash, cash equivalent and
marketable securities balances. volatility in the financial markets and economic
uncertainty increases the risk that the actual amounts realized in the future on
our financial instruments could differ significantly from the fair values
currently assigned to them. as of january 31, 2010, our investments in
government agencies and government sponsored enterprises represented
approximately 62% of our total investment portfolio, while the financial sector
accounted for approximately 22% of our total investment portfolio.of
the financial sector investments, over half are guaranteed by the u.s.
government.substantially all of our investments are with a/a2 or
better rated securities.if the fair value of our investments in
these sectors was to decline by 2%-5%, fair market values for these investments
would decrease by approximately $27-$67 million.
risks
related to regulatory, legal, our common stock and other matters
we
are subject to litigation arising from alleged defects in our previous
generation mcp and gpu products, which if determined adversely to us, could harm
our business.
during
fiscal year 2010, we recorded an additional net warranty charge of $95.8 million
against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return,
replacement and other costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in
certain versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in
notebook systems. this charge included an additional accrual of $164.4 million
for related estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of
$68.6 million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal year
2010.during fiscal year 2009, we recorded a net warranty
charge of $189.3 million against cost of revenue for the purpose of supporting
the product repair costs of our affected customers around the world. this charge
included an accrual of $196.0 million for related estimated costs, offset by
reimbursements from insurance carriers of $6.7 million that we recorded against
cost of revenue during fiscal year 2009. although the number of units that we
estimate will be impacted by this issue remains consistent with our initial
estimates in july 2008, the overall cost of remediation and repair of impacted
systems has been higher than originally anticipated.the weak
die/packaging material combination is not used in any of our products that are
currently in production.
the
previous generation mcp and gpu products that are impacted were included in a
number of notebook products that were shipped and sold in significant
quantities. certain notebook configurations of these mcp and gpu products are
failing in the field at higher than normal rates.while we have not
been able to determine with certainty a root cause for these failures, testing
suggests a weak material set of die/package combination, system thermal
management designs, and customer use patterns are contributing
factors.we have worked with our customers to develop and have made
available for download a software driver to cause the system fan to begin
operation at the powering up of the system and reduce the thermal stress on
these chips. we have also recommended to our customers that they consider
changing the thermal management of the products in their notebook system
designs. we intend to fully support our customers in their repair and
replacement of these impacted products that fail, and their other efforts to
mitigate the consequences of these failures.
we
continue to seek access toour insurance coverage regarding reimbursement
to us for some or all of the costs we have incurred and may incur in the future
relating to the weak material set.we received $70.5 million and $8.0
million in reimbursements from insurance providers during fiscal years 2010 and
2009, respectively.however, there can be no assurance that we
will recover any additional reimbursement. we continue to not see any abnormal
failure rates in any systems using nvidia products other than certain notebook
configurations. however, we are continuing to test and otherwise investigate
other products. there can be no assurance that we will not discover defects in
other products.
inseptember,
october and november2008, several putative class action lawsuits were
filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted mcp and gpu
products.such lawsuits could result in the diversion of managements
time and attention away from business operations, which could harm our business.
in addition, the costs of defense and any damages resulting from this
litigation, a ruling against us, or a settlement of the litigation could
adversely affect our cash flow and financial results.
we
are a party to other litigation, including patent litigation, which, if
determined adversely to us, could adversely affect our cash flow and financial
results.
we are a
party to other litigation as both a defendant and as a plaintiff.for
example, we are engaged in litigation with intel corporation, rambus corporation
and with various parties related to our acquisition of 3dfx in 2001. please
refer to note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for
further detail on these lawsuits. there can be no assurance that any litigation
to which we are a party will be resolved in our favor. any claim that is
successfully decided against us may cause us to pay substantial damages,
including punitive damages, and other related fees. regardless of whether
lawsuits are resolved in our favor or if we are the plaintiff or the defendant
in the litigation, any lawsuits to which we are a party will likely be expensive
and time consuming to defend or resolve. such lawsuits could also harm our
relationships with existing customers and result in the diversion of
managements time and attention away from business operations, which could harm
our business. costs of defense and any damages resulting from litigation, a
ruling against us, or a settlement of the litigation could adversely affect our
cash flow and financial results.
changes
in u.s. tax legislation regarding our foreign earnings could materially impact
our business.
currently,
a majority of our revenue is generated from customers located outside the united
states, and a significant portion of our assets, including employees, are
located outside the united states.united states income taxes and
foreign withholding taxes have not been provided on undistributed earnings for
certain non-united states subsidiaries, because such earnings are intended to be
indefinitely reinvested in the operations of those subsidiaries. in may 2009,
president obamas administration provided details of previously announced
international tax proposals that if enacted into law would have substantially
reduced our ability to defer u.s. taxes on such indefinitely reinvested non-us
earnings including repealing the deferral of u.s. taxation of foreign earnings,
eliminating utilization of or substantially reducing our ability to claim
foreign tax credits, and eliminating various tax deductions until foreign
earnings are repatriated to the united states.in october 2009, the
obama administration announced it no longer intended to pursue such proposals
outside of a broader initiative to overhaul the corporate tax system, expected
in 2010.however, in february 2010, the obama administration released
its fiscal year 2011 budget with proposed modifications to international tax
laws that would again substantially reduce our ability to defer u.s. taxes on
indefinitely reinvested non-u.s. earnings, eliminate or substantially reduce our
ability to claim foreign tax credits, and eliminate certain tax deductions until
foreign earnings are repatriated to the united states. if any of these or
similar proposals are constituted into legislation in the current or future
year(s), they could have a negative impact on our financial position and results
of operations.
litigation
to defend against alleged infringement of intellectual property rights or to
enforce our intellectual property rights and the outcome of such litigation
could result in substantial costs to us.
we
expect that as the number of issued hardware and software patents increases and
as competition intensifies, the volume of intellectual property infringement
claims and lawsuits may increase. we may in the future become involved in
lawsuits or other legal proceedings alleging patent infringement or other
intellectual property rights violations by us or by our customers that we have
agreed to indemnify them for certain claims of infringement.
an
unfavorable ruling in any such intellectual property related litigation could
include significant damages, invalidation of a patent or family of patents,
indemnification of customers, payment of lost profits, or, when it has been
sought, injunctive relief.
in
addition, in the future, we may need to commence litigation or other legal
proceedings in order to:
assert
claims of infringement of our intellectual
property;
enforce
our patents;
protect
our trade secrets or know-how; or
determine
the enforceability, scope and validity of the propriety rights of
others.
if we
have to initiate litigation in order to protect our intellectual property, our
operating expenses may increase which could negatively impact our operating
results. our failure to effectively protect our intellectual property could harm
our business.
if
infringement claims are made against us or ourproducts are found to
infringe a third parties patent or intellectual property, we or one of our
indemnified customers may have to seek a license to the third parties patent or
other intellectual property rights. however, we may not be able to obtain
licenses at all or on terms acceptable to us particularly from our competitors.
if we or one of our indemnified customers is unable to obtain a license from a
third party for technology that we use or that is used in one of our products,
we could be subject to substantial liabilities or have to suspend or discontinue
the manufacture and sale of one or more of our products.we may also
have to make royalty or other payments, or cross license our technology. if
these arrangements are not concluded on commercially reasonable terms, our
business could be negatively impacted. furthermore, the indemnification of a
customer may increase our operating expenses which could negatively impact our
operating results.
our
ability to compete will be harmed if we are unable to adequately protect our
intellectual property.
we
rely primarily on a combination of patents, trademarks, trade secrets, employee
and third-party nondisclosure agreements, and licensing arrangements to protect
our intellectual property in the united states and internationally. we have
numerous patents issued, allowed and pending in the united states and in foreign
jurisdictions. our patents and pending patent applications primarily relate to
our products and the technology used in connection with our products. we also
rely on international treaties, organizations and foreign laws to protect our
intellectual property. the laws of certain foreign countries in which our
products are or may be manufactured or sold, including various countries in
asia, may not protect our products or intellectual property rights to the same
extent as the laws of the united states. this makes the possibility of piracy of
our technology and products more likely. we continuously assess whether and
where to seek formal protection for particular innovations and technologies
based on such factors as:
the
commercial significance of our operations and our competitors operations
in particular countries and
regions;
the
location in which our products are
manufactured;
our
strategic technology or product directions in different countries;
and
the
degree to which intellectual property laws exist and are meaningfully
enforced in different
jurisdictions.
our
pending patent applications and any future applications may not be approved. in
addition, any issued patents may not provide us with competitive advantages or
may be challenged by third parties. the enforcement of patents by others may
harm our ability to conduct our business. others may independently develop
substantially equivalent intellectual property or otherwise gain access to our
trade secrets or intellectual property. our failure to effectively protect our
intellectual property could harm our business.
government
investigations and inquiries from regulatory agencies could lead to enforcement
actions, fines or other penalties and could result in litigation against
us.
in the
past, we have been subject to government investigations and inquiries from
regulatory agencies such as the department of justice and the sec.we
may be subject to government investigations and receive additional inquiries
from regulatory agencies in the future, which may lead to enforcement actions,
fines or other penalties.
in
addition, litigation has often been brought against a company in connection with
the announcement of a government investigation or inquiry from a regulatory
agency.such lawsuits could result in the diversion of managements
time and attention away from business operations, which could harm our business.
in addition, the costs of defense and any damages resulting from litigation, a
ruling against us, or a settlement of the litigation could adversely affect our
cash flow and financial results.
we
are subject to the risks of owning real property.
during
fiscal year 2009, we purchased real property in santa clara, california that
includes approximately 25 acres of land and ten commercial
buildings.we also own real property in china and
india.we have limited experience in the ownership and management of
real property and are subject to the risks of owning real property,
including:
the
possibility of environmental contamination and the costs associated with
mitigating any environmental
problems;
adverse
changes in the value of these properties, due to interest rate changes,
changes in the market in which the property is located, or other
factors;
the
risk of loss if we decide to sell and are not able to recover all
capitalized costs;
increased
cash commitments for the possible construction of a
campus;
the
possible need for structural improvements in order to comply with zoning,
seismic and other legal or regulatory
requirements;
increased
operating expenses for the buildings or the property or
both;
possible
disputes with third parties, such as neighboring owners or others, related
to the buildings or theproperty or both;
and
the
risk of financial loss in excess of amounts covered by insurance, or
uninsured risks, such as the loss causedby damage to the
buildings as a result of earthquakes, floods and or other natural
disasters.
expensing
employee equity compensation adversely affects our operating results and could
also adversely affect our competitive position.
since
inception, we have used equity through our equity incentive plans and our
employee stock purchase program as a fundamental component of our compensation
packages. we believe that these programs directly motivate our employees and,
through the use of vesting, encourage our employees to remain with
us.
we record
compensation expense for stock options, restricted stock units and our employee
stock purchase plan using the fair value of those awards in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in united states of america, or u.s.
gaap. stock-based compensation expense was $107.1 million, $162.7 million,
$133.4 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively, related to
on-going vesting of equity awards, which negatively impacted our operating
results.additionally, in march 2009, we completed a cash tender
offerto purchase certain employee stock options. a total of 28.5
million options were tendered under the offer for an aggregate cash purchase
price of $78.1 million, in exchange for the cancellation of the eligible
options.as a result of the tender offer, we incurred a charge of
$140.2 million consisting of the remaining unamortized stock based compensation
expense associated with the unvested portion of the options tendered in the
offer, stock-based compensation expense resulting from amounts paid in excess of
the fair value of the underlying options, plus associated payroll taxes and
professional fees.we believe that expensing employee equity
compensation will continue to negatively impact our operating
results.
to
the extent that expensing employee equity compensation makes it more expensive
to grant stock options and restricted stock units or to continue to have an
employee stock purchase program, we may decide to incur increased cash
compensation costs. in addition, actions that we may take to reduce stock-based
compensation expense that may be more severe than any actions our competitors
may implement and may make it difficult to attract retain and motivate
employees, which could adversely affect our competitive position as well as our
business and operating results.
we
may be required to record a charge to earnings if our goodwill or amortizable
intangible assets become impaired, which could negatively impact our operating
results.
under
u.s. gaap, we review our amortizable intangible assets and goodwill for
impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value
may not be recoverable. goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually. the
carrying value of our goodwill or amortizable assets from acquisitions may not
be recoverable due to factors such as a decline in stock price and market
capitalization, reduced estimates of future cash flows and slower growth rates
in our industry or in any of our business units. estimates of future cash flows
are based on an updated long-term financial outlook of our operations. however,
actual performance in the near-term or long-term could be materially different
from these forecasts, which could impact future estimates. for example, if one
of our business units does not meet its near-term and longer-term forecasts, the
goodwill assigned to the business unit could be impaired. we may be required to
record a charge to earnings in our financial statements during a period in which
an impairment of our goodwill or amortizable intangible assets is determined to
exist, which may negatively impact our results of operations.
our
stock price continues to be volatile and investors may suffer
losses.
our
stock has at times experienced substantial price volatility as a result of
variations between our actual and anticipated financial results, announcements
by us and our competitors, or uncertainty about current global economic
conditions. the stock market as a whole also has experienced extreme price and
volume fluctuations that have affected the market price of many technology
companies in ways that may have been unrelated to these companies operating
performance.
in
the past, securities class action litigation has often been brought against a
company following periods of volatility in the market price of its securities.
for example, following our announcement in july 2008 that we would take a charge
against cost of revenue to cover anticipated costs and expenses arising from a
weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation
mcp and gpu products and that we were revising financial guidance for our second
fiscal quarter of 2009, the trading price of our common stock
declined.in september, october and november 2008, several putative
class action lawsuits were filed against us relating to this
announcement.please refer to note 13 of the notes to consolidated
financial statements for further information regarding these lawsuits.due
to changes in the potential volatility of our stock price, we may be the target
of securities litigation in the future. such lawsuits could result in the
diversion of managements time and attention away from business operations,
which could harm our business. in addition, the costs of defense and any damages
resulting from litigation, a ruling against us, or a settlement of the
litigation could adversely affect our cash flow and financial results.
our
operating results may be adversely affected if we are subject to unexpected tax
liabilities.
we are
subject to taxation by a number of taxing authorities both in the united states
and throughout the world. tax rates vary among the jurisdictions in which we
operate. significant judgment is required in determining our provision for our
income taxes as there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate
tax determination is uncertain. although we believe our tax estimates are
reasonable, any of the below could cause our effective tax rate to be materially
different than that which is reflected in historical income tax provisions and
accruals:
the
jurisdictions in which profits are determined to be earned and
taxed;
adjustments
to estimated taxes upon finalization of various tax
returns;
changes
in available tax credits;
changes
in share-based compensation
expense;
changes
in tax laws, the interpretation of tax laws either in the united states or
abroad or the issuance of new interpretative accounting guidance related
to uncertain transactions and calculations where the tax treatment was
previously uncertain; and
the
resolution of issues arising from tax audits with various tax
authorities.
should
additional taxes be assessed as a result of any of the above, our operating
results could be adversely affected. in addition, our future effective tax rate
could be adversely affected by changes in the mix of earnings in countries with
differing statutory tax rates, changes in tax laws or changes in the
interpretation of tax laws.
our
failure to comply with any applicable environmental regulations could result in
a range of consequences, including fines, suspension of production, excess
inventory, sales limitations, and criminal and civil liabilities.
we
are subject to various state, federal and international laws and regulations
governing the environment, including restricting the presence of certain
substances in electronic products and making producers of those products
financially responsible for the collection, treatment, recycling and disposal of
those products. for example, we are subject to the european union directive on
restriction of hazardous substances directive, or rohs directive, that restricts
the use of a number of substances, including lead, and other hazardous
substances in electrical and electronic equipment in the market in the european
union.we could face significant costs and liabilities in
connection with the european union directive on waste electrical and electronic
equipment, or weee. the weee directs members of the european union to enact
laws, regulations, and administrative provisions to ensure that producers of
electric and electronic equipment are financially responsible for the
collection, recycling, treatment and environmentally responsible disposal of
certain products sold into the market after august 15, 2005.
it is
possible that unanticipated supply shortages, delays or excess non-compliant
inventory may occur as a result ofthe rohs directive, weee, and other
domestic or international environmental regulations. failure to comply with any
applicable environmental regulations could result in a range of consequences
including costs, fines, suspension of production, excess inventory, sales
limitations, criminal and civil liabilities and could impact our ability to
conduct business in the countries or states that have adopted these types of
regulations.
while
we believe that we have adequate internal control over financial reporting, if
we or our independent registered public accounting firm determines that we do
not, our reputation may be adversely affected and our stock price may
decline.
section404
of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 requires our management to report on, and our
independent registered public accounting firm to audit, the effectiveness of our
internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting. we have an
ongoing program to perform the system and process evaluation and testing
necessary to comply with these requirements. however, the manner in which
companies and their independent public accounting firms apply these requirements
and test companies internal controls remains subject to some judgment. to date,
we have incurred, and we expect to continue to incur, increased expense and to
devote additional management resources to section404 compliance. despite
our efforts, if we identify a material weakness in our internal controls, there
can be no assurance that we will be able to remediate that material weakness in
a timely manner, or that we will be able to maintain all of the controls
necessary to determine that our internal control over financial reporting is
effective. in the event that our chief executive officer, chief financial
officer or our independent registered public accounting firm determine that our
internal control over financial reporting is not effective as defined under
section404, investor perceptions of us may be adversely affected and could
cause a decline in the market price of our stock.
changes in financial accounting
standards or interpretations of existing standards could affect our reported
results of operations.
we
prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with
u.s.gaap.these principles are constantly subject to review and
interpretation by the sec and various bodies formed to interpret and create
appropriate accounting principles. a change in these principles can have a
significant effect on our reported results and may even retroactively affect
previously reported transactions.
provisions
in our certificate of incorporation, our bylaws and our agreement with microsoft
could delay or prevent a change in control.
our
certificate of incorporation and bylaws contain provisions that could make it
more difficult for a third party to acquire a majority of our outstanding voting
stock. these provisions include the following:
the
ability of our board to create and issue preferred stock without prior
stockholder approval;
the
prohibition of stockholder action by written
consent;
a
classified board; and
advance
notice requirements for director nominations and stockholder
proposals.
on march 5, 2000, we entered into an agreement with microsoft in which we agreed
to develop and sell graphics chips and to license certain technology to
microsoft and its licensees for use in the xbox. under the agreement, if an
individual or corporation makes an offer to purchase shares equal to or greater
than 30% of the outstanding shares of our common stock, microsoft may have first
and last rights of refusal to purchase the stock. the microsoft provision and
the other factors listed above could also delay or prevent a change in control
of nvidia.
item 1b. unresolved staff comments
none.
item 2. properties
our headquarters
complex is located in santa clara, california. during fiscal year 2009, we
purchased property that includes approximately 25 acres of land and ten
commercial buildings in santa clara, california for approximately $194.8
million.our original plans for the purchased property included
constructing a new campus on the site. we are currently re-evaluating those
plans. additionally, our corporate campus is comprised of eight other leased
buildings with six used primarily as office buildings, one used primarily as
warehouse space, and the other remaining used primarily as lab space. we also
entered into a lease for data center space in santa clara in fiscal year
2009.
outside of santa
clara, we lease space in marina del rey, san jose and san francisco, california;
austin, texas; beaverton and portland, oregon; bedford, massachusetts; bellevue
and bothell, washington; madison, alabama; durham, north carolina; greenville,
south carolina; salt lake city, utah; st. louis, missouri; and fort collins and
boulder, colorado. these facilities are used as design centers and/or sales and
administrative offices.
outside of the
united states, we lease space in hsin chu city, taiwan; tokyo, japan; seoul,
korea; beijing, china;shatin, new territories, hong kong; mumbai,
india; paris, france; moscow, russia; berlin and munich, germany; helsinki,
finland; theale and london, united kingdom; melbourne, australia; singapore;
uppsala, sweden; and zurich, switzerland. these facilities are used primarily to
support our customers and operations and as sales and administrative
offices.we also lease spaces in wurselen, germany; shenzhen, china;
neihu, taiwan; and bangalore and pune, india, which are used primarily as design
centers.additionally, we own buildings in hyderabad, india and
shanghai, china which are being used primarily as research and development
centers.
we believe that we
currently have sufficient facilities to conduct our operations for the next
twelve months, although we expect to lease additional facilities throughout the
world as our business requires. for additional information regarding obligations
under leases, see note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements
in partiv, item15 of this form10-k under the subheading lease
obligations, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
item 3. legal proceedings
3dfx
on
december 15, 2000, nvidia and one of our indirect subsidiaries entered into an
asset purchase agreement, or apa, to purchase certain graphics chip assets from
3dfx.the transaction closed on april 18, 2001.that
acquisition, and 3dfxs october 2002 bankruptcy filing, led to four lawsuits
against nvidia: two brought by 3dfxs former landlords, one by 3dfxs bankruptcy
trustee and the fourth by a committee of 3dfxs equity security holders in the
bankruptcy estate.
landlord
lawsuits.
in may
2002, we were served with a california state court complaint filed by the
landlord of 3dfxs san jose, california commercial real estate lease, carlyle
fortran trust, or carlyle. in december 2002, we were served with a california
state court complaint filed by the landlord of 3dfxs austin, texas commercial
real estate lease, carramerica realty corporation, or carramerica. the landlords
both asserted claims for, among other things, interference with contract,
successor liability and fraudulent transfer. the landlords sought to recover
damages in the aggregate amount of approximately $15 million, representing
amounts then owed on the 3dfx leases.the cases were later removed to
the united states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california when
3dfx filed its bankruptcy petition and consolidated for pretrial purposes with
an action brought by the bankruptcy trustee.
in 2005,
the u.s. district court for the northern district of california withdrew the
reference to the bankruptcy court for the landlords actions, and on november
10, 2005, granted our motion to dismiss both landlords
complaints.the landlords filed amended complaints in early february
2006, and nvidia again filed motions to dismiss those claims. on september 29,
2006, the district court dismissed the carramerica action in its entirety and
without leave to amend.on december 15, 2006, the district court also
dismissed the carlyle action in its entirety.both landlords filed
timely notices of appeal from those orders.
on july
17, 2008, the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit held oral
argument on the landlords appeals. on november 25, 2008, the court of
appeals issued its opinion affirming the dismissal of carlyles complaint in its
entirety.the court of appeals also affirmed the dismissal of most of
carramericas complaint, but reversed the district courts dismissal of
carramericas claims for interference with contractual relations and
fraud.on december 8, 2008, carlyle filed a request for rehearing
en banc, which
carramerica joined. that same day, carlyle also filed a motion for clarification
of the courts opinion.on january 22, 2009, the court of appeals
denied the request for rehearing en banc, but clarified its
opinion affirming dismissal of the claims by stating that carramerica had
standing to pursue claims for interference with contractual relations, fraud,
conspiracy and tort of another, and remanding carlyles case with instructions
that the district court evaluate whether the trustee had abandoned any claims,
which carlyle might have standing to pursue. on april 2, 2009, carlyle filed a
petitionfor a writ of certiorariin the united states supreme court,
seeking review of thecourt of appeals decision. we filed an
opposition to that petition on june 8, 2009.on october 5, 2009, the
us supreme court denied carlyles petition.
the
district court held a status conference in the carramerica and carlyle cases on
march 9, 2009.that same day, 3dfxs bankruptcy trustee filed in the
bankruptcy court a notice of trustees intention to compromise controversy with
carlyle fortran trust.according to that notice, the trustee would
abandon any claims it has against us for intentional interference with contract,
negligent interference with prospective economic advantage, aiding and abetting
breach of fiduciary duty, declaratory relief, unfair business practices and tort
of another, in exchange for which carlyle will withdraw irrevocably its proof of
claim against the 3dfx bankruptcy estate and waive any further right of
distribution from the estate.in light of the trustees notice, the
district court ordered the parties to seek a hearing on the notice on or before
april 24, 2009, ordered carlyle and carramerica to file amended complaints by
may 10, 2009, and set a further case management conference for may 18,
2009.the parties subsequently filed a stipulation requesting that
the district court vacate the may 18, 2009 case management conference date and
other deadlines until after bankruptcy court rendered its
decision.at a hearing on may 13, 2009, the bankruptcy court ruled
that the trustee had not abandoned any claims against us, and denied the
trustee's notice of intention to compromise controversy with carlyle fortran
trust without prejudice.carlyle filed a motion in the district
court for leave to file an interlocutory appeal from the order denying the
notice, which was denied on november 12, 2009.on january 13,
2010, the district court, of its own accord, reconsidered and reversed its
decision denying carlyles motion for leave to file an interlocutory appeal, and
has set the interlocutory appeal for hearing on april 26, 2010.
on july
7, 2009, the parties attended a case management conference in the district court
for both the carramerica and the carlyle cases.on july 8, 2009, the
district court issued an order requiring that carramerica file an amended
complaint on or before august 10, 2009. carramerica filed its amended complaint
on august 10, 2009, alleging claims for interference with contractual relations,
fraud, conspiracy, and tort of another. thereafter, we filed motions directed at
dismissing that fourth amended complaint, and carramerica responded by filing a
fifth amended complaint.nvidia moved to dismiss the fifth amended
complaint, but the district court denied that motion by order dated january 27,
2010.in that same order, however, the court invited the parties to
move for summary judgment and set the motions for hearing on may 3,
2010.nvidia intends to prepare and file such a motion.we
continue to believe that there is no merit to carlyle or carramericas remaining
claims.
trustee
lawsuit.
in march
2003, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to represent 3dfxs
bankruptcy estate served his complaint on nvidia.the trustees
complaint asserts claims for, among other things, successor liability and
fraudulent transfer and seeks additional payments from us.the
trustees fraudulent transfer theory alleged that nvidia had failed to pay
reasonably equivalent value for 3dfxs assets, and sought recovery of the
difference between the $70 million paid and the alleged fair value, which the
trustee estimated to exceed $50 million.the trustees successor
liability theory alleged nvidia was effectively 3dfxs legal successor and was
therefore responsible for all of 3dfxs unpaid liabilities.this
action was consolidated for pretrial purposes with the landlord cases, as noted
above.
on
october 13, 2005, the bankruptcy court heard the trustees motion for summary
adjudication, and on december 23, 2005, denied that motion in all material
respects and held that nvidia may not dispute that the value of the 3dfx
transaction was less than $108 million. the bankruptcy court denied the
trustees request to find that the value of the 3dfx assets conveyed to nvidia
was at least $108 million.
in early
november 2005, after several months of mediation, nvidia and the official
committee of unsecured creditors, or the creditors committee, agreed to a plan
of liquidation of 3dfx, which included a conditional settlement of the trustees
claims against us. this conditional settlement was subject to a confirmation
process through a vote of creditors and the review and approval of the
bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement called for a payment by nvidia of
approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx estate. under the settlement, $5.6
million related to various administrative expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0
million related to the satisfaction of debts and liabilities owed to the general
unsecured creditors of 3dfx. accordingly, during the three month period ended
october 30, 2005, we recorded $5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and
$25.0 million as additional purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee
advised that he intended to object to the settlement. the conditional settlement
never progressed substantially through the confirmation process.
on
december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court scheduled a trial for one portion of the
trustees case against nvidia. on january 2, 2007, nvidia terminated the
settlement agreement on grounds that the bankruptcy court had failed to proceed
toward confirmation of the creditors committees plan. a non-jury trial began
on march 21, 2007 on valuation issues in the trustees constructive fraudulent
transfer claims against nvidia. specifically, the bankruptcy court tried four
questions: (1) what did 3dfx transfer to nvidia in the apa?; (2) of what was
transferred, what qualifies as property subject to the bankruptcy courts
avoidance powers under the uniform fraudulent transfer act and relevant
bankruptcy code provisions?; (3) what is the fair market value of the property
identified in answer to question (2)?; and (4) was the $70 million that nvidia
paid reasonably equivalent to the fair market value of that property? the
parties completed post-trial briefing on may 25, 2007.
on april
30, 2008, the bankruptcy court issued its memorandum decision after trial, in
which it provided a detailed summary of the trial proceedings and the parties
contentions and evidence and concluded that the creditors of 3dfx were not
injured by the transaction.this decision did not entirely dispose
of the trustees action, however, as the trustees claims for successor
liability and intentional fraudulent conveyance were still
pending.on june 19, 2008, nvidia filed a motion for summary judgment
to convert the memorandum decision after trial to a final
judgment.that motion was granted in its entirety and judgment was
entered in nvidias favor on september 11, 2008.the trustee filed a
notice of appeal from that judgment on september 22, 2008, and on september 25,
2008, nvidia exercised its election to have the appeal heard by the united
states district court, where the appeal is pending.the
district courtshearing on the trustees appeal was
heldon june 10, 2009 and the appeal remains under
submission.
while the
conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed through the
confirmation process, the trustees case still remains pending on
appeal.accordingly, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6
million  $5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as
additional purchase price for 3dfx  that we recorded during the three months
ended october 30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees
case.
the
equity-committee lawsuit.
on
december 8, 2005, the trustee filed a form 8-k on behalf of 3dfx, disclosing the
terms of the conditional settlement agreement between nvidia and the creditors
committee. thereafter, certain 3dfx shareholders filed a petition with the
bankruptcy court to appoint an official committee to represent the claimed
interests of 3dfx shareholders. the court granted that petition and appointed an
equity securities holders committee, or the equity committee. the equity
committee thereafter sought and obtained an order granting it standing to bring
suit against nvidia, for the benefit of the bankruptcy estate, to compel nvidia
to pay the stock consideration then unpaid from the apa, and filed its own
competing plan of reorganization/liquidation. the equity committees plan
assumes that 3dfx can raise additional equity capital that would be used to
retire all of 3dfxs debts, and thus to trigger nvidias obligation to pay six
million shares of stock consideration specified in the apa. nvidia contends,
among other things, that such a commitment is not sufficient and that its
obligation to pay the stock consideration had long before been extinguished. on
may 1, 2006, the equity committee filed its lawsuit for declaratory relief to
compel nvidia to pay the stock consideration. in addition, the equity committee
filed a motion seeking bankruptcy court approval of investor protections for
harbinger capital partners master fund i, ltd., an equity investment fund that
conditionally agreed to pay no more than $51.5 million for preferred stock in
3dfx. the hearing on that motion was held on january 18, 2007, and the
bankruptcy court approved the proposed protections.
after the
bankruptcy court denied our motion to dismiss on september 6, 2006, the equity
committee again amended its complaint, and nvidia moved to dismiss that amended
complaint as well. on december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court granted the motion
as to one of the equity committees claims, and denied it as to the others.
however, the bankruptcy court also ruled that nvidia would only be required to
answer the first three causes of action by which the equity committee seeks
determinations that (1) the apa was not terminated before 3dfx filed for
bankruptcy protection, (2) the 3dfx bankruptcy estate still holds some rights in
the apa, and (3) the apa is capable of being assumed by the bankruptcy
estate.
because
of the trial of the trustees fraudulent transfer claims against nvidia, the
equity committees lawsuit did not progress substantially in 2007.on
july 31, 2008, the equity committee filed a motion for summary judgment on its
first three causes of action.on september 15, 2008, nvidia filed a
cross-motion for summary judgment.on october 24, 2008, the court
held a hearing on the parties cross-motions for summary judgment.on
january 6, 2009, the bankruptcy court issued a memorandum decision granting
nvidias motion and denying the equity committees motion, and entered an order
to that effect on january 30, 2009. on february 27, 2009, the bankruptcy court
entered judgment in favor of nvidia. the equity committee has waived its right
to appeal by stipulation entered on february 18, 2009, and the judgment is now
final.
rambus
corporation
on
july 10, 2008, rambus corporation, or rambus, filed suit against nvidia
corporation, asserting patent infringement of 17 patents claimed to be owned by
rambus.rambus seeks damages, enhanced damages and injunctive
relief.the lawsuit was filed in the northern district of california
in san jose, california.on july 11, 2008, nvidia filed suit against
rambus in the middle district of north carolina asserting numerous claims,
including antitrust and other claims.nvidia seeks damages, enhanced
damages and injunctive relief.rambus has since dropped two patents
from its lawsuit in the northern district of california.the two
cases have been consolidated into a single proceeding in the northern district
of california.on april 13, 2009, the court issued an order staying
motion practice and allowing only document discovery to proceed.on
january 27, 2010, the court entered an order setting a case management
conference for march 12, 2010.
on
november 6, 2008, rambus filed a complaint alleging a violation of 19 u.s.c.
section 1337 based on a claim of patent infringement of nine rambus patents
against nvidia and 14 other respondents with the u.s. international trade
commission, or itc.rambus has subsequently withdrawn four of the
nine patents at issue.the complaint seeks an exclusion order barring
the importation of products that allegedly infringe the now five rambus
patents.the itc has instituted the investigation and a hearing was
held on october 13-20, 2009.the administrative law judge issued an
initial determination on january 22, 2009, which found the asserted claims of
two patents in one patent familyinfringed but invalid, and the
asserted claims of three patents in a separate patent family, valid, infringed
and enforceable.this decision will be reviewed by the
itc.the target date by which the itc will issue its final
determination is may 24, 2010.
rambus
has alsobeen subject to other proceedings in the european union.
nvidia is not a party to those proceedings. however, as a result of
thoseproceedings, for a period of five years from the date of the european
union resolution,rambus must now offer a license to memory controller
manufacturers, sellers and or companies that integrate memory controllers into
other products.the licenseterms areset forthin a
license made available on rambus' website.nvidia can choose to
accept those licenseterms at any time.
nvidia
intends to pursue its offensive and defensive cases vigorously in both
actions.
product
defect litigation and securities cases
in
september, october and november 2008, several putative consumer class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims arising from a weak
die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp
and gpu products used in notebook systems.most of the lawsuits were
filed in federal court in the northern district of california, but three were
filed in state court in california, in federal court in new york, and in federal
court in texas.those three actions have since been removed or
transferred to the united states district court for the northern district of
california, san jose division, where all of the actions now are currently
pending.the various lawsuits are titled nakash v. nvidia corp.,
feinstein v. nvidia corp., inicom networks, inc. v. nvidia corp. and dell, inc.
and hewlett packard, olivos v. nvidia corp., dell, inc. and hewlett packard,
sielicki v. nvidia corp. and dell, inc., cormier v. nvidia corp., national
business officers association, inc. v. nvidia corp., and west v. nvidia
corp.the first amended complaint was filed on october 27, 2008,
which no longer asserted claims against dell, inc.the various
complaints assert claims for, among other things, breach of warranty, violations
of the consumer legal remedies act, business & professions code sections
17200 and 17500 and other consumer protection statutes under the laws of various
jurisdictions, unjust enrichment, and strict liability.
the
district court has entered orders deeming all of the above cases related under
the relevant local rules.on december 11, 2008, nvidia filed a motion
to consolidate all of the aforementioned consumer class action
cases.on february 26, 2009, the district court consolidated the
cases, as well as two other cases pending against hewlett-packard, under the
caption the nvidia gpu litigation and ordered the plaintiffs to file lead
counsel motions by march 2, 2009.on march 2, 2009, several of the
parties filed motions for appointment of lead counsel and briefs addressing
certain related issues.on april 10, 2009, the district court
appointed milberg llp lead counsel.on may 6, 2009, the plaintiffs
filed an amended consolidated complaint, alleging claims for violations of
california business and professions code section 17200, breach of implied
warranty under california civil code section 1792, breach of the implied
warranty of merchantability under the laws of 27 other states, breach of
warranty under the magnuson-moss warranty act, unjust enrichment, violations of
the new jersey consumer fraud act, strict liability and negligence, and
violation of californias consumer legal remedies act.on may 14,
2009, the district court entered a case schedule order, which set
aseptember 28, 2009 hearing date for an anticipated motion to dismiss, a
december 7, 2009 hearing date for anticipated class certification motion, and a
july 12, 2010 fact discovery deadline.the district court
subsequently entered an order resetting the hearing date for an anticipated
motion to dismiss for october 19, 2009, based on a stipulation of the
parties.the court heard arguments on nvidias motion to dismiss on
october 19, 2009, and took the matter under submission.
on
november 19, 2009, the court issued an order dismissing with prejudice
plaintiffs causes of action for breach of the implied warranty under the laws of
27 other states and unjust enrichment, dismissing with leave to amend
plaintiffs causes of action for breach of implied warranty under california
civil code section 1792 and breach of warranty under the magnuson-moss warranty
act, and denying nvidias motion to dismiss as to the other causes of
action.the court gave plaintiffs until december 14, 2009 to file an
amended complaint.on december 14, 2009, plaintiffs filed a second
amended consolidated complaint, asserting claims for violations of california
business and professions code section 17200, breach of implied warranty under
california civil code section 1792, breach of warranty under the magnuson-moss
warranty act, violations of the new jersey consumer fraud act, strict liability
and negligence, and violation of californias consumer legal remedies
act.the second amended complaint seeks unspecified
damages.on january 19, 2010, we filed a motion to dismiss the breach
of implied warranty under california civil code section 1792, breach of warranty
under the magnuson-moss warranty act, and californias consumer legal remedies
act claims in the second amended consolidated complaint.a hearing on
this motion is currently scheduled for june 14, 2010.
in
september 2008, three putative securities class actions, or the actions, were
filed in the united states district court for the northern district of
california arising out of our announcements on july 2, 2008, that we would take
a charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated costs and expenses arising
from a weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous
generation mcp and gpu products and that we were revising financial guidance for
our second quarter of fiscal year 2009. the actions purport to be brought on
behalf of purchasers of nvidia stock and assert claims for violations of
sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. on
october 30, 2008, the actions were consolidated under the caption in re nvidia
corporation securities litigation, civil action no. 08-cv-04260-jw (hrl). lead
plaintiffs and lead plaintiffs counsel were appointed on december 23, 2008. on
february 6, 2009, co-lead plaintiff filed a writ of mandamus with the ninth
circuit court of appeals challenging the designation of co-lead plaintiffs
counsel. on february 19, 2009, co-lead plaintiff filed with the district court,
a motion to stay the district court proceedings pending resolution of the writ
of mandamus by the ninth circuit. on february 24, 2009, judge ware granted the
stay. on november 5, 2009, the court of appeals issued an opinion reversing the
district courts appointment of one of the lead plaintiffs counsel, and
remanding the matter for further proceedings.
on
december 8, 2009, the district court appointed milberg llp and kahn swick &
foti, llc as co-lead counsel.on january 22, 2010, plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended class action complaint for violations of the federal
securities laws ("consolidated complaint"), asserting claims for violations of
section 10(b) of the securities exchange act, rule 10b-5, and section 20(a) of
the securities exchange act.the consolidated complaint seeks
unspecified compensatory damages.we filed a motion to dismiss the
consolidated complaint. a hearing on this motion is currently scheduled for june
14, 2010.
intel
corporation
on
february 17, 2009, intel corporation filed suit against nvidia corporation,
seeking declaratory and injunctive relief relating to a licensing agreement that
the parties signed in 2004.the lawsuit was filed in delaware
chancery court.intel seeks an order from the court declaring that
the license does not extend to certain nvidia chipset products, and enjoining
nvidia from stating that it has licensing rights for these products. the lawsuit
seeks no damages from nvidia.if intel successfully obtains such a
court order, we could be unable to sell our mcp products for use with certain
intel processors and our competitive position would be harmed.
on march
23, 2009, we filed our answer to intel's complaint and also asserted
counterclaims for declaratory relief, injunctive relief, breach of contract, and
breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.our
counterclaims seek an order declaring that nvidia has the right to sell certain
chipset products with intel's processors under the 2004 licensing agreement, and
enjoining intel from interfering with nvidia's licensing rights.in
addition, the counterclaims seek a finding that intel has materially breached
its obligations under the 2004 licensing agreement, and requests various
remedies for that breach, including termination of intel's cross licensing
rights.on april 16, 2009, intel filed its answer to our
counterclaims.
discovery
is proceeding and trial is scheduled to commence before vice chancellor strine
on august 23, 2010.nvidia disputes intels claims and intends
to vigorously defend these claims, as well as pursue its
counterclaims.
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
no
matters were submitted to a vote of our security holders during the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2010.
part ii
item 5. market for registrants common equity, related
stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
our common stock is traded on the
nasdaqglobal selectmarket under the symbol nvda. public trading of
our common stock began on january 22, 1999. prior to that, there was no public
market for our common stock. as of march 10, 2010, we had approximately 442
registered stockholders, not including those shares held in street or nominee
name. the following table sets forth for the periods indicated the high and low
sales price for our common stock as quoted on the nasdaqglobal
selectmarket:
high
low
fiscal
year ending january 30, 2011
first
quarter (through march 10, 2010)
$
17.84
$
15.90
fiscal
year ended january 31, 2010
fourth
quarter
$
18.96
$
11.56
third
quarter
$
16.58
$
12.58
second
quarter
$
13.04
$
8.33
first
quarter
$
12.08
$
7.21
fiscal
year ended january 25, 2009
fourth
quarter
$
9.45
$
5.75
third
quarter
$
14.12
$
5.97
second
quarter
$
25.35
$
10.70
first
quarter
$
27.59
$
17.31
dividend
policy
we have never paid and do not
expect to pay cash dividends for the foreseeable future.
issuer
purchases of equity securities
our board
of directors has authorized us, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase
shares of our common stock up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7 billion
through may 2010.the repurchases will be made from time to time in the
open market, in privately negotiated transactions, or in structured stock
repurchase programs, and may be made in one or more larger repurchases, in
compliance with the securities exchange act of 1934 rule 10b-18, subject to
market conditions, applicable legal requirements, and other factors. the program
does not obligate nvidia to acquire any particular amount of common stock and
the program may be suspended at any time at our discretion.as part of our
share repurchase program, we have entered into, and we may continue to enter
into, structured share repurchase transactions with financial institutions.
these agreements generally require that we make an up-front payment in exchange
for the right to receive a fixed number of shares of our common stock upon
execution of the agreement, and a potential incremental number of shares of our
common stock, within a pre-determined range, at the end of the term of the
agreement.
we did
not enter into any structured share repurchase transactions or otherwise
purchase any shares of our common stock during fiscal year
2010.through january 31, 2010, we have repurchased an aggregate of
90.9 million shares under our stock repurchase program for a total cost of
$1.46billion.as of january 31, 2010, we are authorized,
subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common stock up
to an additional amount of $1.24 billion through may 2010.
additionally,
during fiscal year 2010, we granted approximately 7.7 million stock options and
7.7 million restricted stock units, or rsus, under the 2007 equity incentive
plan. please refer to note 3 of the notes to the consolidated financial
statements in partiv, item15 of this form10-k for further
information regarding stock-based compensation related to our march 2009 stock
option purchase and related to equity awards granted under our equity incentive
programs.
stock
performance graphs
the following graph compares the
cumulative total stockholder return for our common stock, the s & p 500
index and the s & p 500 semiconductors index for the five years ended
january 31, 2010. the graph assumes that $100 was invested on january30,
2005 in our common stock or on january 31, 2005 in each of the s & p 500
index and the s & p semiconductors index. total return assumes reinvestment
of dividends in each of the indices indicated. we have never paid cash dividends
on our common stock. our results are calculated on fiscal year-end basis and
each of the s & p 500 index and the s & p semiconductors index are
calculated on month-end basis. total return is based on historical results and
is not intended to indicate future performance.
1/30/2005
1/29/2006
1/28/2007
1/27/2008
1/25/2009
1/31/2010
nvidia
corporation
$
100.00
$
202.14
$
275.09
$
327.14
$
101.09
$
201.79
s
& p 500
$
100.00
$
110.38
$
126.40
$
123.48
$
75.78
$
100.89
s
& p semiconductors
$
100.00
$
115.62
$
108.87
$
101.45
$
60.82
$
95.47
*$100
invested on 1/30/05 in stock or 1/31/05 in index, including reinvestment of
dividends. indexes calculated on month-end basis.
the
following graph compares the cumulative total stockholder return for our common
stock, the s & p 500 index and the s & p 500 semiconductors index for
the period commencing with our initial public offering through the year ended
january 31, 2010. the graph assumes that $100 was invested at our initial public
offering on january 21, 1999 in our common stock or on december 31, 1998 in each
of the s & p 500 index and the s & p semiconductors index. total return
assumes reinvestment of dividends in each of the indices indicated. we have
never paid cash dividends on our common stock. our results are calculated on
fiscal year-end basis and each of the s & p 500 index and the s & p
semiconductors index are calculated on month-end basis. total return is based on
historical results and is not intended to indicate future
performance.
1/21/1999
1/31/1999
1/30/2000
1/28/2001
1/27/2002
1/24/2003
1/25/2004
1/30/2005
1/29/2006
1/28/2007
1/27/2008
1/25/2009
1/31/2010
nvidia
corporation
$
100.00
$
158.33
$
311.46
$
846.88
$
2,182.33
$
339.00
$
769.67
$
762.67
$
1,541.67
$
2,098.00
$2,495.00
$771.00
$1,539.00
s&p
$
100.00
$
104.18
$
114.96
$
113.93
$
95.53
$
73.54
$
98.97
$
105.13
$
116.05
$
132.89
$ 129.82
$79.67
$106.07
s&p
semiconductors
$
100.00
$
119.64
$
180.33
$
145.17
$
112.96
$
50.00
$
99.52
$
74.79
$
86.48
$
81.43
$75.88
$45.49
$71.41
*$100
invested on 1/21/99 in stock or 12/31/98 in index, including reinvestment of
dividends. indexes calculated on month-end basis.
item 6. selected financial data
the
following selected financial data should be read in conjunction with our
financial statements and the notes thereto, and with item 7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. the
consolidated statements of operations data for the years ended january 31, 2010,
january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008 and the consolidated balance sheet data as
of january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009 have been derived from and should be
read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the
notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k. the
consolidated statement of operations data for the years ended january 28, 2007
and january 29, 2006 and the consolidated balance sheet data for the years ended
january 27, 2008, january 28, 2007 and january 29, 2006 are derived from audited
consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto which are not included
in this annual report on form 10-k.we operate on a 52 or 53-week
year, ending on the last sunday in january.fiscal year 2010 was a
53-week year, while fiscal years 2009, 2008, 2007, and 2006 were 52-week
years.
year
ended
january
31,
january
25,
january
27,
january
28,
january
29,
(b,c)
(d)
(e)
(e,
f)
(g)
(in
thousands, except per share data)
consolidated
statement of operations data:
revenue
$
3,326,445
$
3,424,859
$
4,097,860
$
3,068,771
$
2,375,687
income
(loss) from operations
$
(98,945
)
$
(70,700
)
$
836,346
$
453,452
$
336,664
net
income (loss)
$
(67,987
)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
$
448,834
$
301,176
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.12
)
$
(0.05
)
$
1.45
$
0.85
$
0.59
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.12
)
$
(0.05
)
$
1.31
$
0.76
$
0.55
shares
used in basic per share computation (a)
549,574
548,126
550,108
528,606
509,070
shares
used in diluted per share computation (a)
549,574
548,126
606,732
587,256
548,556
january
31,
january
25,
january
27,
january
28,
january
29,
consolidated
balance sheet data:
cash,
cash equivalents and marketable securities
$
1,728,227
$
1,255,390
$
1,809,478
$
1,117,850
$
950,174
total
assets
$
3,585,918
$
3,350,727
$
3,747,671
$
2,675,263
$
1,954,687
capital
lease obligations, less current portion
$
24,450
$
25,634
$
-
$
-
$
-
total
stockholders equity
$
2,665,140
$
2,394,652
$
2,617,912
$
2,006,919
$
1,495,992
cash
dividends declared per common share
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
-
$
-
(a)
reflects a three-for-two stock-split effective september 10, 2007 and a
two-for-one stock-split effective april 6, 2006.
(b)
fiscal year 2010 includes impact of charge for a tender offer to purchase an
aggregate of 28.5 million outstanding stock options for a total cash payment of
$78.1 million. as a result of the tender offer the company incurred a charge of
$140.2 million, consisting of the remaining unamortized stock-based compensation
expenses associated with the unvested portion of the options tendered in the
offer, stock-based compensation expense resulting from amounts paid in excess of
the fair value of the underlying options, plus associated payroll taxes and
professional fees.
(c)fiscal
year 2010 includes an additional net warranty charge of $95.9 million against
cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return,
replacement and other costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in
certain versions of our previous generation products used in notebook systems.
this charge included an additional accrual of $164.4 million for related
estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of $70.5 that
we recorded.$68.6 million and $1.9 million of the reimbursement was
allocated to cost of revenue and legal expense, respectively.
(d)
fiscal year 2009 includes $196.0 million for a warranty charge against cost of
revenue arising from a weak die/packaging material set; a benefit of $8.0
million received from an insurance provider as reimbursement for some of the
claims towards the warranty cost arising from a weak die/packaging material set;
$18.9 million for a non-recurring charge resulting from the termination of a
development contract related to a new campus construction project we have put on
hold and $8.0 million forrestructuring charges.
(e)
fiscal years 2008 and 2007 include a charge of $4.0 million and $13.4 million
towards in-process research and development expense related to our purchase of
mental images inc. and portalplayer inc., respectively, that had not yet reached
technological feasibility and have no alternative future use.
(f)
fiscal year 2007 included a charge of $17.5 million associated with a
confidential patent licensing arrangement.
(g)
fiscal year 2006 included a charge of $14.2 million related to settlement costs
associated with two litigation matters, 3dfx and american video graphics, lp, or
avg.
item 7. managements discussion and analysis of financial condition
and results of operations
the following discussion
and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read
in conjunction with item 1a. risk factors, item 6. selected financial data,
our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto, as well as
other cautionary statements and risks described elsewhere in this annual report
on form 10-k, before deciding to purchase, hold or sell shares of our common
stock.
overview
our
company
nvidia corporation helped
awaken the world to the power of computer graphics when it invented the graphics
processor unit, or gpu, in 1999.expertise in programmable gpus has
led to breakthroughs in parallel processing which make supercomputing
inexpensive and widely accessible.we serve the entertainment and
consumer market with our geforce graphics products, the professional design and
visualization market with our quadro graphics products, the high-performance
computing market with our tesla computing solutions products, and the mobile
computing market with our tegra system-on-a-chip products. during the last
several fiscal years, we have operated and reported four major product-line
operating segments: the gpu business, the professional solutions business, or
psb, the media and communications processor, or mcp, business, and the consumer
products business, or cpb. however, effective with the first quarter of fiscal
year 2011, we will no longer separate our mcp and gpu operating segments as such
segmentation will no longer be reflective of the way we manage those
businesses.
our gpu business is
comprised primarily of our geforce products that support desktop and notebook
personal computers, or pcs, in addition to memory products. our psb is comprised
of our nvidia quadro professional workstation products and other professional
graphics products, including our nvidia tesla high-performance computing
products. our mcp business, as we have reported it through fiscal year 2010, has
been comprised primarily of ion mgpu products. our ion family of
products addresses the integrated core logic market.our cpb is
comprised of our tegra mobile products that support tablets and smartbooks,
smartphones, personal media players, or pmps, internet television, automotive
navigation, and other similar devices. cpb also includes license, royalty, other
revenue and associated costs related to video game consoles and other digital
consumer electronics devices.original equipment manufacturers,
original design manufacturers, add-in-card manufacturers, system builders and
consumer electronics companies worldwide utilize our processors as a core
component of their entertainment, business and professional
solutions.
we were incorporated in
california in april 1993 and reincorporated in delaware in april 1998. our
headquarter facilities are in santa clara, california. our internet address is
www.nvidia.com.the
contents of our website are not a part of this form 10-k.
recent
developments, future objectives and challenges
gpu
business
during fiscal year 2010,we
introduced our next generation cuda gpu architecture, codenamed
fermi.we expect the fermi architecture to be the foundation for
computational gpus, and to enable breakthroughs in both graphics and parallel
computing.
during
fiscal year 2010, we also delivered our first 40nm gpus to customers. because of
limited 40nm wafer foundry capacity, plus supplier challenges related to 40nm
process manufacturing yields, we have been forced to allocate our available 40nm
product supply among our customers. we are currently working with our foundry
partners to address these challenges.
professional
solutions business
corporate
demand, which comprises a substantial percentage of the demand for our
professional workstation products, has recently shown some signs of economic
recovery. workstation product revenue currently comprises a significant portion
of our total psb revenue. therefore, if corporate demand continues to recover,
we expect this trend to continue to have a positive impact on our overall gross
profit and gross margin, as the gross margin experienced by our psb is generally
higher than our overall gross margin.
mcp
business
during fiscal year 2010, we began
redirecting our development strategy in our mcp business in response to our
on-going dispute with intel. in february 2009, intel filed suit against us
related to a chipset license agreement that we entered into with intel in 2004.
in march 2009, we asserted counterclaims against intel pursuant to which we seek
an order declaring that intel breached the chipset license agreement as well as
the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing underlying the license
agreements, and seeking, among other things, termination of intel's cross
license to our technology. notwithstanding our belief that the
chipset license agreement extends to a component of the new intel processor
architecture referred to as direct media interface, or dmi, we currently have no
intention of building a dmi-based chipset while this dispute remains unresolved.
as a result, we began redirecting our mcp development resources to other
programs.
consumer
products business
during
fiscal year 2010, we demonstrated the tegra 600 series, our first generation
system-on-a-chip that enables an always-on, always-connected hd netbook that can
go days between battery charges. also, during fiscal year 2010, our tegra
product was included in microsofts zune hd and the samsung m1, both of which
were being sold in the marketplace. in addition, we announced our
next-generation of tegra processing technology during the recent consumer
electronics show in january 2010.tegra is the processor for the
mobile web, specifically designed for the high-resolution needs of
tablets.tegra combines browsing, streaming 1080p video and flash
10.1 acceleration with a 3d user interface and days of battery
life.we have multiple next-generation tegra design wins in
tablets, smartbooks and smartphones, with the first of these expected to ship
during the second quarter of fiscal year 2011.weve also announced
that volkswagen and audi will use next-generation tegra starting in
2012.additionally, we announced 3d vision surround for geforce, a
high-definition 3d stereo solution for the home at the recent consumer
electronics show in january 2010. 3d vision is a combination of wireless
glasses, a high-power infrared emitter and software that transforms pc games
into full stereoscopic 3d experiences.over 420 games now
support nvidia 3d vision.
tender
offer
during
the first quarter of fiscal year 2010, we announcedthat our board of
directors approved a cash tender offer for certain employee stock options. the
tender offer applied to outstanding stock options held by employees with an
exercise price equal to or greater than $17.50 per share. none of the
non-employee members of our board of directors or our officers who file reports
under section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended,
including our former chief financial officer, marvin d. burkett, were eligible
to participate in the offer.all eligible options with exercise prices less
than $28.00 per share, but not less than $17.50 per share, were eligible to
receive a cash payment of $3.00 per option in exchange for the cancellation of
the eligible option. all eligible options with exercise prices greater than
$28.00 per share were eligible to receive a cash payment of $2.00 per option in
exchange for the cancellation of the eligible option.
a total
of 28.5 million options were tendered under the offer for an aggregate cash
purchase price of $78.1 million, which was paid in exchange for the cancellation
of the eligible options.as a result of the tender offer, we incurred
a charge of $140.2 million consisting of $124.1 million related to the remaining
unamortized stock based compensation expense associated with the unvested
portion of the options tendered in the offer, $11.6 million related to
stock-based compensation expense resulting from amounts paid in excess of the
fair value of the underlying options, plus $4.5 million related to associated
payroll taxes, professional fees and other costs.
product
defect
our
products are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to any
number of issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use within
a system. if any of our products or technologies contains a defect,
compatibility issue or other error, we may have to invest additional research
and development efforts to find and correct the issue.such efforts
could divert our managements and engineers attention from the development of
new products and technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce
our gross margin. in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or
related software drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result
in failure to achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be
required to reimburse customers, including for customers costs to repair or
replace the products in the field, which could cause our revenue to decline. a
product recall or a significant number of product returns could be expensive,
damage our reputation and could result in the shifting of business to our
competitors. costs associated with correcting defects, errors, bugs or other
issues could be significant and could materially harm our financial
results.
during
fiscal year 2010, we recorded an additional net warranty charge of $95.8 million
against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return,
replacement and other costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in
certain versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in
notebook systems. this charge included an additional accrual of $164.4 million
for related estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of
$68.6 million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal year
2010.during fiscal year 2009, we recorded a net warranty
charge of $189.3 million charge against cost of revenue for the purpose of
supporting the product repair costs of our affected customers around the
world.this charge included an accrual of $196.0 million for related
estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of $6.7
million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal year
2009.although the number of units that we estimate will be impacted
by this issue remains consistent with our initial estimates in july 2008, the
overall cost of remediation and repair of impacted systems has been higher than
originally anticipated.the weak die/packaging material combination
is not used in any of our products that are currently in
production.
the
previous generation mcp and gpu products that are impacted were included in a
number of notebook products that were shipped and sold in significant
quantities. certain notebook configurations of these products are failing in the
field at higher than normal rates. while we have not been able to determine with
certainty a root cause for these failures, testing suggests a weak material set
of die/package combination, system thermal management designs, and customer use
patterns are contributing factors. we have worked with our customers to develop
and have made available for download a software driver to cause the system fan
to begin operation at the powering up of the system and reduce the thermal
stress on these chips. we have also recommended to our customers that they
consider changing the thermal management of the products in their notebook
system designs. we intend to fully support our customers in their repair and
replacement of these impacted products that fail, and their other efforts to
mitigate the consequences of these failures.
we
continue to seek access to our insurance coverage regarding reimbursement to us
for some or all of the costs we have incurred and may incur in the future
relating to the weak material set. however, there can be no
assurance that we will recover any additional reimbursement. we continue to not
see any abnormal failure rates in any systems using nvidia products other than
certain notebook configurations. however, we are continuing to test and
otherwise investigate other products. there can be no assurance that we will not
discover defects in other products.
in
september, october and november2008, several putative class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted
mcp and gpu products.please refer to note 13 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further information regarding this litigation.
subsequent event
our board of directors has authorized
us, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common stock
up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7 billion through may 2010.
through january 31, 2010, we have repurchased an aggregate of 90.9 million
shares under our stock repurchase program for a total cost of
$1.46billion.as of january 31, 2010, we are authorized,
subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common stock up
to an additional amount of $1.24 billion through may 2010. on march 16,
2010, our board of directors further authorized an extension of the stock
repurchase program from may 2010 to may 2013.
the
repurchases will be made from time to time in the open market, in privately
negotiated transactions, or in structured stock repurchase programs, and may be
made in one or more larger repurchases, in compliance with rule 10b-18 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, subject to market conditions,
applicable legal requirements, and other factors. the program does not obligate
nvidia to acquire any particular amount of common stock and the program may be
suspended at any time at our discretion.as part of our share repurchase
program, we have entered into, and we may continue to enter into, structured
share repurchase transactions with financial institutions. these agreements
generally require that we make an up-front payment in exchange for the right to
receive a fixed number of shares of our common stock upon execution of the
agreement, and a potential incremental number of shares of our common stock,
within a pre-determined range, at the end of the term of the
agreement.
critical
accounting policies and estimates
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are
based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in
accordance with u.s. gaap. the preparation of these financial statements
requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of
assets, liabilities, revenue, cost of revenue, expenses and related disclosure
of contingencies. on an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including
those related to revenue recognition, cash equivalents and marketable
securities, accounts receivable, inventories, income taxes, goodwill,
stock-based compensation, warranty liabilities, litigation, investigation and
settlement costs and other contingencies. we base our estimates on historical
experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable
under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making
judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
we
believe the following critical accounting policies affect our significant
judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial
statements. our management has discussed the development and selection of these
critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our board
of directors, or board.the audit committee has reviewed our
disclosures relating to our critical accounting policies and estimates in this
annual report on form 10-k.
revenue
recognition
product
revenue
we
recognize revenue from product sales when persuasive evidence of an arrangement
exists, the product has been delivered, the price is fixed or determinable, and
collection is reasonably assured. for most sales, we use a binding purchase
order and in certain cases we use a contractual agreement as evidence of an
arrangement. we consider delivery to occur upon shipment provided title and risk
of loss have passed to the customer based on the shipping terms. at the point of
sale, we assess whether the arrangement fee is fixed or determinable and whether
collection is reasonably assured. if we determine that collection of a fee is
not reasonably assured, we defer the fee and recognize revenue at the time
collection becomes reasonably assured, which is generally upon receipt of
payment. our policy on sales to certain distributors, with rights of
return,is to defer recognition of revenue and related cost of revenue
until the distributors resell the product.
our
customer programs primarily involve rebates, which are designed to serve as
sales incentives to resellers of our products in various target markets. we
accrue for 100% of the potential rebates and do not apply a breakage factor. we
recognize a liability for these rebates at the later of the date at which we
record the related revenue or the date at which we offer the rebate. rebates
typically expire six months from the date of the original sale, unless we
reasonably believe that the customer intends to claim the rebate. unclaimed
rebates are reversed to revenue.
our
customer programs also include marketing development funds, or mdfs. we account
for mdfs as either a reduction of revenue or an operating expense. mdfs
represent monies paid to retailers, system builders, original equipment
manufacturers, or oems, distributors and add-in card partners that are earmarked
for market segment development and expansion and typically are designed to
support our partners activities while also promoting nvidia products. depending
on market conditions, we may take actions to increase amounts offered under
customer programs, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue or
incremental operating expense at the time such programs are
offered.
we also
record a reduction to revenue by establishing a sales return allowance for
estimated product returns at the time revenue is recognized, based primarily on
historical return rates. however, if product returns for a particular fiscal
period exceed historical return rates we may determine that additional sales
return allowances are required to properly reflect our estimated exposure for
product returns.
license and development
revenue
for
license arrangements that require significant customization of our intellectual
property components, we generally recognize this license revenue over the period
that services are performed. for all license and service arrangements, we
determine progress to completion based on actual direct labor hours incurred to
date as a percentage of the estimated total direct labor hours required to
complete the project. we periodically evaluate the actual status of each project
to ensure that the estimates to complete each contract remain accurate. a
provision for estimated losses on contracts is made in the period in which the
loss becomes probable and can be reasonably estimated. costs incurred in advance
of revenue recognized are recorded as deferred costs on uncompleted contracts.
if the amount billed exceeds the amount of revenue recognized, the excess amount
is recorded as deferred revenue. revenue recognized in any period is dependent
on our progress toward completion of projects in progress. significant
management judgment and discretion are used to estimate total direct labor
hours. any changes in or deviations from these estimates could have a material
effect on the amount of revenue we recognize in any period.
accounts
receivable
we
maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts receivable for estimated losses
resulting from the inability of our customers to make required
payments.management determines this allowance, which consists of an
amount identified for specific customer issues as well as an amount based on
overall estimated exposure. our accounts receivable are highly concentrated and
make us vulnerable to adverse changes in our customers' businesses, and to
downturns in the industry and the worldwide economy. our overall
estimated exposure excludes significant amounts that are covered by credit
insurance and letters of credit. if the financial condition of our customers,
the financial institutions providing letters of credit, or our credit insurance
carrier were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make
payments, additional allowances may be required that could adversely affect our
operating results. this risk is heightened during periods when economic
conditions worsen, such as the when the worldwide economy is experiencing a
significant downturn. the financial turmoil that affected the banking system and
financial markets and increased the risk that financial institutions mighty
consolidate or go out of business resulted in a tightening in the credit
markets, a lower than normal level of liquidity in many financial markets, and
extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency and equity markets. there
could be a number of follow-on effects from this type of credit crisis on our
business, including inability of customers, including channel partners, to
obtain credit to finance purchases of our products and/or customer, insolvencies
and failure of financial institutions, which could negatively impact our
financial results. furthermore, there can be no assurance that we will be able
to continue to obtain credit insurance in the future.
as of
january 31, 2010, our allowance for doubtful accounts receivable was $1.0
million and our gross accounts receivable balance was $414.0 million. of the
$414.0 million, $95.9 million was covered by credit insurance and $15.8 million
was covered by letters of credit. if the financial condition of our customers
were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make
payments, additional allowances may be required and we may have to record
additional reserves or write-offs on certain sales transactions in the future.
factors impacting the allowance include the level of gross receivables, the
financial condition of our customers and the extent to which balances are
covered by credit insurance or letters of credit. we have incurred cumulative
bad debts of $0.5 million over the last three fiscal years.as a
result of our low bad debt experience, our allowance for doubtful accounts
receivable has ranged between 0.1% and 0.3% during fiscal years 2010
and2009, respectively. as of january 31, 2010, our allowance for doubtful
accounts receivable represented 0.2% of our gross accounts receivable
balance.
inventories
inventory
cost is computed on an adjusted standard basis; which approximates actual cost
on an average or first-in, first-out basis. we write down our inventory for
estimated lower of cost or market, obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal
to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value
based upon assumptions about future demand, future product purchase commitments,
estimated manufacturing yield levels and market conditions. if actual market
conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, or if our
future product purchase commitments to our suppliers exceed our forecasted
future demand for such products, additional future inventory write-downs may be
required that could adversely affect our operating results. inventory reserves
once established are not reversed until the related inventory has been sold or
scrapped, so if actual market conditions are more favorable in the fiscal
periods subsequent to that in which we record larger than normal inventory
reserves, we may have higher gross margins when products are sold. as of january
31, 2010, our inventory reserve was $64.8 million. as a percentage of our gross
inventory balance, our inventory reserve has ranged between 7.8% and 19.6%
during fiscal years 2010 and 2009. as of january 31, 2010, our inventory reserve
represented 16.4% of our gross inventory balance.
warranty
liabilities
cost of
revenue includes the estimated cost of product warranties that are calculated at
the point of revenue recognition. under limited circumstances, we may offer an
extended limited warranty to customers for certain products.our
products are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to any
number of issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use within
a system. if any of our products or technologies contains a defect,
compatibility issue or other error, we may have to invest additional research
and development efforts to find and correct the issue.such efforts
could divert our managements and engineers attention from the development of
new products and technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce
our gross margin. in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or
related software drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result
in failure to achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be
required to reimburse customers, including our customers costs to repair or
replace products in the field. a product recall or a significant number of
product returns could be expensive, damage our reputation and could result in
the shifting of business to our competitors. costs associated with correcting
defects, errors, bugs or other issues could be significant and could materially
harm our financial results.
during
fiscal years 2010 and 2009, we recorded $164.4 million and $196.0 million,
respectively, as warranty charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated
customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and other associated costs
arising from a weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our
previous generation mcp and gpu products used in notebook systems. the mcp and
gpu products that were impacted were included in a number of notebook products
that were shipped and sold in significant quantities. certain notebook
configurations of these mcp and gpu products were identified as failing in the
field at higher than normal rates.
determining
the amount of the warranty charges related to this issue required management to
make estimates and judgments based on historical experience, test data and
various other assumptions including estimated field failure rates that we
believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. the results of these judgments
formed the basis for our estimate of the total charge to cover anticipated
customer warranty, repair, return and replacement and other associated costs.
however, if actual repair, return, replacement and other associated costs and/or
actual field failure rates exceed our estimates, we may be required to record
additional reserves, which would increase our cost of revenue and materially
harm our financial results.
income
taxes
we
recognize federal, state and foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on
our estimate of taxes payable or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax
jurisdiction. we recognize federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets or
liabilities, as appropriate, for our estimate of future tax effects attributable
to temporary differences and carryforwards; and we record a valuation allowance
to reduce any deferred tax assets by the amount of any tax benefits that, based
on available evidence and judgment, are not expected to be
realized.
united
states income tax has not been provided on earnings of our non-u.s. subsidiaries
to the extent that such earnings are considered to be indefinitely
reinvested.
our calculation of
current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on certain estimates
and judgments and involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of
complex tax laws. our estimates of current and deferred tax assets and
liabilities may change based, in part, on added certainty or finality to an
anticipated outcome, changes in accounting standards or tax laws in the united
states, or foreign jurisdictions where we operate, or changes in other facts or
circumstances. in addition, we recognize liabilities for potential united states
and foreign income tax contingencies based on our estimate of whether, and the
extent to which, additional taxes may be due. if we determine that payment of
these amounts is unnecessary or if the recorded tax liability is less than our
current assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax benefit or
additional income tax expense in our financial statements,
accordingly.
as of january31, 2010, we
had a valuation allowance of $113.4million related to state and certain
foreign deferred tax assets that management determined are not likely to be
realized due, in part, to projections of future taxable income and potential
utilization limitations of tax attributes acquired as a result of stock
ownership changes.to the extent realization of the deferred tax
assets becomes more-likely-than-not,we would recognize such deferred tax
asset as an income tax benefit during the period the realization
occurred.
our deferred tax
assets do not include the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation
that are a component of our federal and state net operating loss and research
tax credit carryforwards in the amount of $401.5 million as of january 31, 2010.
consistent with prior years, the excess tax benefit reflected in our net
operating loss and research tax credit carryforwards will be accounted for as a
credit to stockholders equity, if and when realized.in determining
if and when excess tax benefits have been realized, we have elected to do a
with-and-without approach with respect to such excess tax benefits. we have also
elected to ignore the indirect tax effects of stock-based compensation
deductions for financial and accounting reporting purposes, and specifically to
recognize the full effect of the research tax credit in income from continuing
operations.
we
recognize the benefit from a tax position only if it is more-likely-than-not
that the position would be sustained upon audit based solely on the technical
merits of the tax position. our policy is to include interest and penalties
related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
please refer to note 14 of these notes to the consolidated financial statements
in partiv, item15 of this form10-k for additional
information.
goodwill
our impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting
unitin which the goodwill resides to its carrying value. we
determined that our reporting units are equivalent to our operating segments, or
components of an operating segment, for the purposes of completing
ourgoodwill impairment test. we utilize a two-step approach to
testing goodwill for impairment. the first step tests for possible impairment by
applying a fair value-based test. in computing fair value of our reporting
units, we use estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows from such
units. the second step, if necessary, measures the amount of such impairment by
applying fair value-based tests to individual assets and liabilities. goodwill
is subject to our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year, or earlier if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair
value-based approach.
during
the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2010, our market capitalization increased over
100% when compared to the same period in fiscal year 2009. we completed
our most recent annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of fiscal year
2010 and concluded that there was no impairment as the fair value of our
reporting units exceeded their carrying value. this assessment was based
upon a discounted cash flow analysis, analysis of market comparables, where
appropriate, and analysis of our market capitalization. determining the number
of reporting units and the fair value of a reporting unit requires us to make
judgments and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. we also
make judgments and assumptions in allocating assets and liabilities to each of
our reporting units. we base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe
to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently
uncertain.
our
estimates of cash flows were based upon, among other things, certain assumptions
about expected future operating performance, such as revenue growth rates,
operating margins, risk-adjusted discount rates, and future economic and market
conditions. our estimates of discounted cash flows may differ from actual cash
flows due to, among other things, economic conditions, changes to our business
model or changes in operating performance. additionally, certain estimates of
discounted cash flows involve businesses with limited financial history and
developing revenue models, which increases the risk of differences between the
projected and actual performance. the long-term financial forecasts that we
utilize represent the best estimate that we have at this time and we believe
that its underlying assumptions are reasonable. significant differences between
our estimates and actual cash flows could materially affect our future financial
results, which could impact our future estimates of the fair value of some or
all of our reporting units. determining the fair value of our reporting
units also requires us to use judgment in the selection of appropriate market
comparables, if there are any, and the amount of weight to ascribe to fair value
measurements that are based on the market approach.
any
significant reductions in the actual amount of cash flows realized by our
reporting units, reductions in the value of market comparables, or reductions in
our market capitalization could impact future estimates of the fair value of our
reporting units. such events could ultimately result in a charge to our earnings
in future periods due to the potential for a write-down of the goodwill
associated with some or all of our reporting units.
cash equivalents and marketable securities
cash
equivalents consist of financial instruments which are readily convertible into
cash and have original maturities of three months or less at the time of
acquisition.marketable securities consist primarily of highly liquid
investments with maturities of greater than three months when
purchased.we generally classify our marketable securities at the
date of acquisition as available- for- sale.these securities are
reported at fair value with the related unrealized gains and losses included in
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a component of stockholders
equity, net of tax.any unrealized losses which are considered to be
other-than-temporary impairments are recorded in the other income (expense)
section of our consolidated statements of operations.realized gains
(losses) on the sale of marketable securities are determined using the
specific-identification method and recorded in the other income (expense)
section of our consolidated statements of operations. please refer to
note18 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k. we measure our cash
equivalents and marketable securities at fair value. the fair values of our
financial assets and liabilities are determined using quoted market prices of
identical assets or quoted market prices of similar assetsfrom active
markets. level1 valuations are obtained from real-time quotes for
transactions in active exchange markets involving identical assets. level2
valuations are obtained from quoted market prices in active markets involving
similar assets. level 3 valuations are based on unobservable inputs to the
valuation methodology and include our own data about assumptions market
participants would use in pricing the asset or liability based on the best
information available under the circumstances.each level of input has
different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair
value. while most of our cash equivalents and marketable securities are valued
based on level 2 inputs, the valuation of our holdings of the reserve
international liquidity fund, ltd., or international reserve fund are classified
as a level 3 input due to the inherent subjectivity and the significant judgment
involved in its valuation. total financial assets at fair value classified
within level 3 were 0.4% of total assets on our consolidated balance sheet as of
january 31, 2010.
all
of our available-for-sale investments are subject to a periodic impairment
review. we record a charge to earnings when a decline in fair value is
significantly below cost basis and judged to be other-than-temporary, or have
other indicators of impairments.if the fair value of an
available-for-sale debt instrument is less than its amortized cost basis, an
other-than - temporary impairment is triggered in circumstances where (1) we
intend to sell the instrument, (2) it is more likely than not that we will be
required to sell the instrument before recovery of its amortized cost basis, or
(3) a credit loss exists where we do not expect to recover the entire amortized
cost basis of the instrument. if we intend to sell or it is more likely than not
that we will be required to sell the available-for-sale debt instrument before
recovery of its amortized cost basis, we recognize an other-than- temporary
impairment in earnings equal to the entire difference between the debt
instruments amortized cost basis and its fair value.for
available-for-sale debt instruments that are considered other-than-temporarily
impaired due to the existence of a credit loss, if we do not intend to sell and
it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the instrument
before recovery of its remaining amortized cost basis (amortized cost basis less
any current-period credit loss), we separate the amount of the impairment into
the amount that is credit related and the amount due to all other
factors.the credit loss component is recognized in
earnings.
stock-based
compensation
our stock-based compensation cost
is measured at grant date, based on the fair value of the awards, and is
recognized as expense over the requisite employee service period.we recognize stock-based compensation expense
using the straight-line attribution method.we estimate the fair
value of employee stock options on the date of grant using a binomial model and
we use the closing trading price of our common stock on the date of grant as the
fair value of awards of restricted stock units, or rsus.the
determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant
using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as
assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. these
variables include, but are not limited to, the expected stock price volatility
over the term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise
behaviors, vesting schedules, death and disability probabilities, expected
volatility and risk-free interest. our management has determined that the use of
implied volatility is expected to be more reflective of market conditions and,
therefore, can reasonably be expected to be a better indicator of our expected
volatility than historical volatility. the risk-free interest rate assumption is
based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our employee
stock options. the dividend yield assumption is based on the history and
expectation of dividend payouts. we began segregating options into groups for
employees with relatively homogeneous exercise behavior in order to calculate
the best estimate of fair value using the binomial valuation model.
using the binomial model, we estimated
the fair value of the stock options granted under our stock option plans using
the following assumptions during the fiscal year ended january 31,
2010:
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
3.7-5.8
risk
free interest rate
1.8%
- 2.9
%
volatility
45%
- 72
%
dividend
yield
-
we used
the black-scholes model to estimate the fair value of shares issued under our
employee stock purchase plan during the fiscal year ended january 31, 2010,
using the following assumptions:
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
0.5-2.0
risk
free interest rate
0.2-1.0
%
volatility
53%-73
%
dividend
yield
-
accounting standards also require forfeitures to be estimated at the time of
grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures
differ from those estimates. forfeitures were estimated based on our historical
experience. if factors change and we employ different assumptions in the
application of accounting standards in future periods, the compensation expense
that we record under these accounting standards may differ significantly from
what we have recorded in the current period.
litigation,
investigation and settlement costs
from
time to time, we are involved in legal actions and/or investigations by
regulatory bodies. we are aggressively defending our current litigation matters
for which we are responsible. however, there are many uncertainties associated
with any litigation or investigations, and we cannot be certain that these
actions or other third-party claims against us will be resolved without costly
litigation, fines and/or substantial settlement payments. if that occurs, our
business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially and
adversely affected. if information becomes available that causes us to determine
that a loss in any of our pending litigation, investigations or settlements is
probable, and we can reasonably estimate the loss associated with such events,
we will record the loss in accordance with u.s.gaap. however, the actual
liability in any such litigation or investigations may be materially different
from our estimates, which could require us to record additional
costs.
results
of operations
the
following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain items in our
consolidated statements of operations expressed as a percentage of
revenue.
year
ended
january
31, 2010
january
25, 2009
january
27, 2008
revenue
100.0
%
100.0
100.0
%
cost
of revenue
64.6
65.7
54.4
gross
profit
35.4
34.3
45.6
operating
expenses:
research
and development
27.3
25.0
16.9
sales,
general and administrative
11.0
10.6
8.3
restructuring
charges and other
-
0.8
-
total
operating expenses
38.3
36.4
25.2
income
(loss) from operations
(2.9)
(2.1
)
20.4
interest
and other income, net
0.5
0.8
1.6
income
(loss) before income taxes
(2.4)
(1.3
)
22.0
income
tax expense (benefit)
(0.4)
(0.4
)
2.5
net
income (loss)
(2.0)
%
(0.9
)%
19.5
%
fiscal
years ended january 31, 2010, january 25, 2009 and january 27, 2008
revenue
fiscal year 2010 vs. fiscal
year 2009
revenue was $3.33 billion for the fiscal year 2010 and $3.42 billion for fiscal
year 2009, a decrease of 3%. a discussion of our revenue results for
each of our operating segments is as follows:
gpu business. gpu business
revenue decreased by 8% to $1.76 billion for fiscal year 2010 compared to $1.91
billion for fiscal year 2009.the decrease was primarily the result
of a decline in sales of notebook gpus, offset by a slight increase in sales of
memory products.sales of our notebook gpu products decreased by
approximately 31% while sales of our desktop gpu products were essentially flat,
increasing by only 1%, and our memory products increased by 38% as compared to
fiscal year 2009. the decrease in notebook gpu revenue was driven
primarily by a combination of a decline in unit demand and a decline in average
selling price (asps) as a result of increased competition in the marketplace
and due to share losses we experienced within the notebook segment, during
calendar year 2009 compared to calendar year 2008 as reported in the november pc
graphics 2009 report from mercury research.the very slight increase
in sales of our desktop gpu products resulted from an increase in unit volume in
fiscal year 2010, which was driven by a strong unit sales recovery during the
fourth quarter of fiscal year 2010, offset by a decline in asps for the full
fiscal year, which was driven by pricing pressures in the marketplace for our
high-end and mainstream products. sales of our memory products increased as a
result of the overall increase in desktop gpu unit demand.
psb. psb revenue decreased by
26% to $510.2 million for the fiscal year 2010 as compared to $693.4 million for
fiscal year 2009.both the asps and unit shipments of professional
workstation products decreased, primarily due to the relatively slow recovery of
corporate spending following the economic recession that began during fiscal
year 2009.
mcp business. mcp business
revenue increased by 33% to $871.6 million for fiscal year 2010 as compared to
$655.6 million for fiscal year 2009.the increase was a result of
increased sales of our intel-based platform products by over 100%, offset by a
decrease in sales of our amd-based platform products by approximately 12%. the
increase in intel-basedplatform product sales was driven by sales of our
ion products.the decrease in amd-based platform products was driven by
limited availability of low-end amd cpus in the marketplace during the last half
of fiscal year 2010 as well as by amd continuing to market their own chipset
product lines in place of ours.
cpb. cpb revenue
increased by 20% to $163.9 million for fiscal year 2010 as compared to $136.3
million for fiscal year 2009. this increase in cpb revenue was primarily
driven by sales growth from our embedded products for the automotive and
entertainment markets, and was partially offset by a decrease in revenue from
development arrangements and royalties from game console-related products in the
comparative periods.
fiscal year 2009 vs. fiscal
year 2008
revenue
was $3.42billion for fiscal year 2009, compared to $4.10 billion for
fiscal year 2008, which represents a decrease of 16%.a
discussion of our revenue results for each of our operating segments is as
follows:
gpu business. gpu
business revenue decreased by 24% to $1.91 billion for fiscal year 2009,
compared to $2.52 billion for fiscal year 2008. this decrease resultedfrom
decreasedsales of our desktop gpu and memory products, offset by increased
sales of our notebook gpu products.sales of our desktop gpu and memory
products decreased by approximately 29% and 59%, respectively, in fiscal year
2009 when compared to fiscal year 2008.these decreases were
primarily due to a decline in the standalone desktop market segment as reported
in the december 2008 pc graphics report from mercury research, driven by a
combination of market migration from desktop pcs towards notebook pcs and an
overall market shift in the mix of products towards lower priced products. this
overall market decline translated into a decline of over 20% in the number of
units of desktop gpu products that we sold in fiscal year 2009 compared to
fiscal year 2008. the decline in desktop gpu revenue also reflects the impact of
a slight average sales price regression in our products and a decline in our
share position during the middle portion of fiscal year 2009 as a result of
increased competition. memory sales declinedas a result of a decline in
sales of our high-end desktop gpu products.sales of our notebook gpu
products increased approximately 3% in fiscal year 2009 when compared to fiscal
year 2008, due to higher unit sales aided by a market move toward notebook pcs
over desktop pcs, offset by a slight decline in average selling
prices.additionally, the overall global economic recessionary
climate contributed to a significant decline in the demand for total graphics
during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009.
psb.psb revenue
increased by 18% to $693.4 million for fiscal year 2009, compared to $588.4
million for fiscal year 2008. our nvidia professional workstation product sales
increased due to an overall unit increase of approximately 15% in shipments of
boards and chips as compared to fiscal year 2008, due to strong demand and our
transition from previous generations of nvidia quadro professional workstation
products to geforce 8-based and geforce 9-based products. sales of nvidia quadro
cx for adobes cs4 software, which we launched in the third quarter of fiscal
year 2009, also contributed towards the increase in sales in fiscal year
2009.
mcp business.mcp
business revenue decreased by 8% to $655.6 millionfor fiscal year 2009,
compared to $710.4 million for fiscal year 2008. this decrease was due to a
decline of approximately 32% in sales of our amd-based platform products
resulting from increased competition in amd-based products, offset by an
increase of approximately 120% in sales of our intel-based platform products.
the increase in intel-based product sales was driven by sales of our geforce
9400m mgpu, which we launched in october 2008 along with apple inc., or apple,
for their new lineup of mac notebooks, and our new geforce 9400 and 9300 mgpus
for intel desktop pcs.
cpb.cpb revenue
decreased by 46% to $136.3 millionfor fiscal year 2009, compared to $251.1
million for fiscal year 2008. the decline in cpb revenue is primarily driven by
a combination of a decrease in revenue from our cell phone products and a
decrease in revenue from sony computer entertainment, or sce. the decrease in
revenue from our cell phone products resulted from our shift from marketing and
developing legacy products to achieving design wins and marketing our newer
tegra products.the decrease in our revenue from sce resulted from a
decline in license revenue and a decline in royalty revenue that was caused by a
lower number of units shipped as well as by a step-down in the per unit royalty
rate during the year due to achievement of a unit-based milestone in our
agreement with sce.
concentration of
revenue
we generated 84%, 87% and 89% of our total revenue for fiscal years 2010, 2009
and 2008, respectively, from sales to customers outside the united states and
other americas. revenue by geographic region is allocated to individual
countries based on the location to which the products are initially billed even
if the foreign contract equipment manufacturers, or cems, add-in board and
motherboard manufacturers revenue is attributable to end customers in a
different location.
revenue
from significant customers, those representing 10% or more of total revenue for
the respective dates, is summarized as follows:
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
revenue:
customer
a
%
%
%
customer
b
%
%
%
customer
c
%
%
%
gross profit and gross
margin
gross profit consists of total revenue, net of allowances, less cost of revenue.
cost of revenue consists primarily of the cost of semiconductors purchased from
subcontractors, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging,
manufacturing support costs, including labor and overhead associated with such
purchases, final test yield fallout, inventory and warranty provisions and
shipping costs.cost of revenue also includes development costs for
license, service arrangements and stock-based compensation related to personnel
associated with manufacturing.
gross
margin is the percentage of gross profit to revenue. our gross margin was
35.4%, 34.3% and 45.6% for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively.our gross margin is significantly impacted by the mix
of products we sell and can vary in any period depending on that product
mix.
our
strategy for improving our gross margin relies upon delivering competitive
product offerings that allow us to maintain our market leadership position and
expand our addressable markets, lowering our product costs by introducing
product architectures that take advantage of smaller process geometries and
improving our product mix.we expect gross margin to be in the range
of 44% to 45% during the first quarter of fiscal year 2011.
a
discussion of our gross margin results for each of our operating segments is as
follows:
fiscal year 2010 vs. fiscal
year 2009
our gross
margin increased to 35.4% in fiscal year 2010 from 34.3% for fiscal year
2009.the improvement in gross margin was driven primarily by
improved yields of our 55nm products, transition to 40nm products, as well as
other manufacturing cost reductions, and more favorable product mix,
particularly with increased sales of higher margin mcp
products.furthermore, during the first quarter of fiscal year 2010
our gross margin benefited from the sell-through of inventory that had
previously been written down in the fourth quarter of fiscal year
2009.this did not have a significant impact on our gross margin for
the remaining quarters in fiscal year 2010.offsetting these
improvements, we recorded a charge to cost of revenue, net of insurance
reimbursement in the amount of $95.9 million in fiscal year 2010 compared to
$189.3 million in fiscal year 2009 related to weak die/packing material set that
was used in certain versions of our previous generation chips.
gpu business. the gross
margin of our gpu business decreased during fiscal year 2010 as compared to
fiscal year 2009.this decline resulted from lower asps in our
mainstream desktop gpu products as well as in our notebook gpu products that we
believe were driven by pricing pressures in the marketplace over the comparable
period. these factors were further exacerbated in the first quarter of fiscal
year 2010 as a result of losses we incurred selling certain older, transitioning
products. these decreases in gross margins were offset by improving yields
of our 55nm products, a transition to 40nm products, and other manufacturing
cost reductions achieved during fiscal year 2010, plus a net benefit arising
from the sell-through of inventory during primarily the first half of fiscal
year 2010 that had previously been written down in the fourth quarter of fiscal
year 2009.
psb. the gross margin of our
psb decreased during fiscal year 2010 as compared to fiscal year 2009.
this decrease was primarily due to a decline in asps caused primarily by
pricing pressure resulting from the relatively slow recovery of corporate
spending during fiscal year 2010 following the economic recession that began
during fiscal year 2009 .
mcp business. the gross
margin of our mcp business increased during fiscal year 2010 as compared to
fiscal year 2009.this increase was primarily driven by a shift
in product mix toward higher margin intel-based and amd-based platform products
and a reduction in the warranty charge arising from a weak die/packaging
material set in certain versions of our previous generation
products.in addition, we recorded greater benefits to cost of
revenue for insurance reimbursements received during the comparable
periods.
cpb.the gross
margin of our cpb decreased during fiscal year 2010 as compared to fiscal year
2009.this decrease was a result of declining revenue from higher margin
products and services, including development arrangements and royalties from
game console-related products, in the comparative periods.
fiscal year 2009 vs. fiscal
year 2008
our
gross margin declined to 34.3% in fiscal year 2009 from 45.6% for fiscal year
2008. the gross margin for fiscal year 2009 includes the impact of a $196.0
million charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty,
repair, return, replacement and associated costs arising from a weak
die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp
and gpu products used in notebook systemsoffset by allocated insurance
claim proceeds of $6.7 million from an insurance provider. this warranty charge
had an adverse impact of approximately 6.0% on our gross margin for fiscal year
2009. we also incurred a charge of $4.5 million related to a royalty dispute
during fiscal year 2009.additionally, inventory reserves taken
during fiscal year 2009 were approximately $50.0 million higher compared to
fiscal year 2008,reflecting a significant decline in our forecasted future
demand for the related products and having a negative impact on our gross
margin.
gpu business. the gross
margin of our gpu business decreased during fiscal year 2009 as compared to
fiscal year 2008.this decrease was due to a charge against cost of
revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return, replacement and
associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in certain
versions of our previous generation gpu products used in notebook systems, the
negative impact of inventory reserves taken during the fourth quarter of fiscal
year 2009, and average sales price regression in our geforce 9-based and
previous generations of desktop products resulting from increased competition.
the average sales price regression was also driven by a combination of market
migration from desktop pcs towards notebook pcs and an overall market shift in
the mix of products towards lower priced products.
psb. the gross margin of our
psb increased slightly during fiscal year 2009 as compared to fiscal year
2008.this increase was primarily due to increased sales of our
geforce 9-based nvidia quadro products, which began selling in the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2008, and geforce 8-based nvidia quadro products, which
generally have higher gross margins than our previous generations of nvidia
quadro products.
mcp business. the gross
margin of our mcp business decreased during fiscal year 2009 as compared to
fiscal year 2008, due to a decline in the margins of our amd and intel-based
products.during fiscal year 2009, gross margins declined primarily due to
a charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair,
return, replacement and associated costs arising from a weak die/packaging
material set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp products used in
notebook systems.
cpb. the gross margin of our
cpb increased during fiscal year 2009 as compared to fiscal year
2008.this increase was primarily due to changes in the product mix
in our cpb product lines.we experienced greater revenue decline in
our lower margin cell phone and other handheld devices product lines as compared
to higher margin sce transactions in the current year.
operating
expenses
year
ended
year
ended
january
31,
january
25,
$
change
%
change
january
25,
january
27,
$
change
%
change
(in
millions)
(in
millions)
research
and development expenses
$
908.9
$
855.9
$
53.0
%
$
855.9
$
691.6
$
164.3
%
sales,
general and administrative expenses
367.0
362.2
4.8
%
362.2
341.3
20.9
%
restructuring
charges and other
-
26.9
(26.9
)
(100
%
)
26.9
-
26.9
%
total operating expenses
$
1,275.9
$
1,245.0
$
30.9
2.5
%
$
1,245.0
$
1,032.9
$
212.1
%
research
and development as a percentage of net revenue
27%
%
%
%
sales,
general and administrative as a percentage of net
revenue
11%
%
%
%
research and
development
fiscal year 2010 vs.
fiscal year 2009
research and development expenses
increased by $53.0 million, or 6%.the majority of the increase was
caused by stock-based compensation charges recorded during fiscal year 2010 of
$90.5 million related to a tender offer that closed in march 2009, offset by a
reduction in ongoing stock-based compensation expense of $36.7 million resulting
from the cancellation of stock options pursuant to the tender offer.
compensation and benefits related to research and development increased by $11.9
million due to additional new hires and depreciation and amortization expense
increased by $4.2 million due to property and equipment purchases. additionally,
our cost reduction initiatives across several discretionary spending areas
resulted in decreased expenses related to computer software and equipment of
$7.7 million, travel and entertainment of $5.4 million, employee related
expenses of $3.5 million, and development expenses of $2.8 million.
fiscal year 2009 vs.
fiscal year 2008
research and development expenses increased by $164.3 million, or 24%. the
increase was primarily due to increase in salaries and benefits by approximately
$64.9 million primarily as a result of the net addition of approximately 500
personnel in departments related to research and development functions, offset
by lower expenses during fiscal year 2009 related to our variable compensation
programs when compared to fiscal year 2008.stock-based compensation
expense increased by $21.4 million primarily because of the impact of new hire
and semi-annual stock awards granted subsequent to the third quarter of fiscal
year 2008, offset by a reduction in expense related to older stock awards that
were almost fully vested and for which the related expense had been almost fully
amortized by the end of the first quarter of fiscal year
2009.development expenses increased by $18.8 millionprimarily
due to increase in expenses related to engineering services, prototype materials
and internal board requests.other increases in research and
development expenses are primarily related to costs that were driven by
personnel growth, including depreciation and amortization, facilities, and
computer software and equipment.
sales, general and administrative
fiscal year 2010 vs.
fiscal year 2009
sales,
general and administrative expensesincreased by $4.8 million, or 1%. the
majority of the increase was caused by stock-based compensation charges recorded
during fiscal year 2010 of $38.3 million related to a tender offer that closed
in march 2009, offset by a reduction in ongoing stock-based compensation expense
of $19.1 million resulting from the cancellation of stock options pursuant to
the tender offer. the increase was also driven by an increase in compensation
and benefits by $8.4 million due to additional new hires and professional fees
by $11.3 million due to legal service charges. offsetting these increases, our
cost reduction initiatives across several discretionary spending areas resulted
in decreased expenses related to advertising and promotions of $9.3 million,
employee related expenses of $8.0 million, contract labor of $6.6 million,
computer software and equipment of $6.5 million, and marketing of $5.4
million.
fiscal year 2009
vs. fiscal year 2008
sales, general and administrative expensesincreased by $20.9 million, or
6%. outside professional fees increased by $17.5 million primarily
due to increased legal fees pertaining to ongoing litigationmatters
described in note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k. marketing and advertising
expenses increased by $22.3 million, primarily due to increased advertising
campaign related activities and trade shows in the current year. depreciation
and amortization expense increased by $15.4 million primarily due to
amortization of intangible assets acquired from our acquisitions of mental
images and ageia, technologies, inc., and from increased capital expenditures.
stock-based compensation expense increased by $6.9 million primarily due to the
impact of new hire and semi-annual stock awards granted subsequent to the third
quarter of fiscal year 2008, offset by a reduction in expense related to older
stock awards that were almost fully vested and for which the related expense had
been almost fully amortized by the end of the first quarter of fiscal year
2009.headcount related to personnel in departments related to sales,
general and administrative functions remained relatively flat year-over-year,
but labor and related expenses decreased by $13.9 million due to lower expenses
during fiscal year 2009 related to our variable compensation programs when
compared to fiscal year 2008.
restructuring charges and other
we
announced a workforce reduction to allow for continued investment in strategic
growth areas during fiscal year 2009. as a result, we eliminated approximately
360 positions worldwide, or about 6.5% of our global
workforce.during fiscal year 2009, expenses associated with the
workforce reduction, which were comprised primarily of severance and benefits
payments to these employees, totaled $8.0 million.
restructuring
and other expenses in fiscal year 2009 also included a non-recurring charge of
$18.9 million associated with the termination of a development contract related
to a new campus construction project that has been put on hold.there
were no restructuring related charges in fiscal years 2010 or 2008.
interest
income and interest expense
interest
income, net of interest expense consists of interest earned on cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities. interest income decreased to $19.8
million in fiscal year 2010, from $42.5 million in fiscal year 2009 primarily
due to the result of lower interest rates and interest expense recorded on a
capital lease for a data center in santa clara, california during fiscal year
2010.interest income decreased to $42.5 million in fiscal year 2009
from $64.2 million in fiscal year 2008 primarily due to the result of lower
average balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and lower
interest rates in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008.
other
income (expense), net
other income and expense primarily consists of realized gains and losses on the
sale of marketable securities and foreign currency translation. other
(expense), net of other income was ($3.1) million, ($14.7) million, and $0.8
million in fiscal years 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively. the fluctuation
between these years was primarily due to other than temporary impairment charges
of $9.9 million that we recorded during fiscal year 2009.these
charges included $5.6 million related to an other than temporary impairment of
our investment in the money market funds held by the reserve international
liquidity fund, ltd., or international reserve fund, $2.5 million related to a
decline in the value of publicly traded equity securities and $1.8 million
related to debt securities held by us that were issued by companies that had
filed for bankruptcy.please refer to note 18 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further discussion.
income
taxes
we recognized
income tax expense (benefit) of $(14.3) million, $(12.9) million and $103.7
million during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. income tax
expense (benefit) as a percentage of income (loss) before taxes, or our annual
effective tax rate, was 17.4 % in fiscal year 2010, 30.0% in fiscal year 2009
and 11.5% in fiscal year 2008.
the difference in the effective tax rates amongst the three years was primarily
a result of changes in our geographic mix of income subject to tax, with the
additional impact of the federal research tax credit recognized in fiscal years
2010 and 2009 relative to the loss before taxes in such fiscal
years.
please refer to note 14 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
part iv, item 15 of this form 10-k for further information regarding the
components of our income tax expense.
liquidity
and capital resources
january
31, 2010
january
25, 2009
(in
millions)
cash
and cash equivalents
$
447.2
$
417.7
marketable
securities
1,281.0
837.7
cash,
cash equivalents, and marketable securities
$
1,728.2
$
1,255.4
year
ended
january
31,
january
25,
january
27,
(in
millions)
net
cash provided by operating activities
$
487.8
$
249.4
$
1,270.2
net
cash used in investing activities
(519.3
)
(209.4
)
(761.3
)
net
cash used in financing activities
61.1
(349.3
)
(326.3
)
as of january 31, 2010, we had
$1.73 billion in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, an increase
of $472.8 million from the end of fiscal year 2009. our portfolio of cash
equivalents and marketable securities is managed by several financial
institutions. our investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier investment
grade securities, the diversification of asset types and includes certain limits
on our portfolio duration.
operating activities
operating activities generated
cash of $487.8 million, $249.4 million and $1.27 billion during fiscal years
2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
the increase in cash provided by
operating activities in fiscal year 2010 when compared to fiscal year 2009 was
primarily due to changes in operating assets and liabilities, including
increases in accounts payable resulting from the timing of payments to vendors
and a decrease in inventory resulting from an increase in inventory
turnover.additionally,while we experienced a net loss in fiscal year
2010 of $68.0 million, versus a net loss of $30.0 million in fiscal year 2009,
non-cash charges to earnings included stock-based compensation of $242.8 million
and depreciation and amortization of $196.7 million.
the cash provided by operating
activities decreased in fiscal year 2009 due to a decrease in our net income
compared to fiscal year 2008 plus the impact of non-cash charges to earnings and
deferred income taxes.during fiscal year 2009, non-cash charges to
earnings included stock-based compensation of $162.7 million and depreciation
and amortization of $185.0 million.additionally, operating cash
flows for fiscal year 2009 also declined due to changes in operating assets and
liabilities, including the timing of payments to vendors and a decrease in
inventory turnover.additionally, we incurred $21.8 million in net
cash outflows in fiscal year 2009 towards a confidential patent licensing
agreement that we entered into in fiscal year 2007.
the increase in cash flows from operating activities in fiscal year 2008 when
compared to fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to an increase in our net income
during the comparable periods plus the impact of non-cash charges to
earnings.during fiscal year 2008, non-cash charges to earnings
included stock-based compensation of $133.4 million and depreciation and
amortization on our long-term assets of $133.2 million.additionally,
operating cash flows for fiscal year 2008 also improved due to changes in
operating assets and liabilities, including the timing of payments to vendors
and an improvement in inventory turnover.these increases were offset
by approximately $57.3 million in net cash outflows towards a confidential
patent licensing agreement that we entered into in fiscal year
2007.
investing activities
investing activities have consisted primarily of purchases and sales of
marketable securities, acquisition of businesses and purchases of property and
equipment, which include leasehold improvements for our facilities and
intangible assets. investing activities used cash of $519.3 million, $209.4
million and $761.3 million during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008,
respectively.
investing
activities for fiscal year 2010used cash of $441.5 million towards the
purchase of marketable securities, net of proceeds from sales of marketable
securities. additionally, we used $77.6 million towards capital expenditures in
fiscal year 2010.capital expenditures included purchase of new
research and development equipment, testing equipment to support our increased
production requirements, technology licenses, software, intangible assets and
leasehold improvements at our facilities in various international
locations.
investing
activities for fiscal year 2009used cash of $27.9 million in connection
with our acquisition of ageia and $407.7 million towards capital expenditures,
as we built additional facilities to accommodate our growing employee headcount,
new research and development equipment, testing equipment to support our
increased production requirements, technology licenses, software, intangible
assets and leasehold improvements at our facilities in various international
locations. investing activities for capital expenditures in fiscal year 2009
also included payment of approximately $183.8 million for purchase of a property
in santa clara, california, that includes approximately 25 acres of land and ten
commercial buildings. our original plans for the purchased property included
constructing a new campus on the site. we are currently re-evaluating those
plans.this cash outflow is offset by $226.7 million of cash from the
net proceeds from sales of marketable securities.
investing
activities for fiscal year 2008 used cash of $496.4 million towards the net
purchases of marketable securities, resulting from the need to invest the
additional amounts of cash we received from operating activities, and $75.5
million for our acquisition of mental images.investing activities
for fiscal year 2008 also included $187.7 million of capital expenditures.
capital expenditures included purchase of property in anticipation of building
additional facilities to accommodate our growing employee headcount, new
research and development equipment, testing equipment to support our increased
production requirements, technology licenses, software, intangible assets and
leasehold improvements at our facilities in various international
locations.
financing activities
financing
activities provided cash of $61.1 million during fiscal year 2010, and used cash
of $349.3 million and $326.3 million during fiscal years 2009 and 2008,
respectively.
net cash
provided by financing activities in fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to cash
proceeds of $138.0 million from common stock issued under our employee stock
plans, offset by $78.1 million used for the purchase of outstanding stock
options related to a tender offer that closed in march
2009.
net cash
used by financing activities in fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to $423.6
million used in our stock repurchase program, offset by cash proceeds of $73.5
million from common stock issued under our employee stock plans.
net
cash used by financing activities in fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to
$552.5 million used in our stock repurchase program, offset by cash proceeds of
$226.0 million from common stock issued under our employee stock
plans.
liquidity
our
primary source of liquidity is cash generated by our operations. our investment
portfolio consisted of cash and cash equivalents, asset-backed securities,
commercial paper, mortgage-backed securities issued by government-sponsored
enterprises, equity securities, money market funds and debt securities of
corporations, municipalities and the united statesgovernment and its
agencies. these investments are denominated in united states dollars. as of
january 31, 2010, we did not have any investments in auction-rate preferred
securities.
all
of the cash equivalents and marketable securities are treated as
available-for-sale. investments in both fixed rate and floating rate interest
earning instruments carry a degree of interest rate risk. fixed rate debt
securities may have their market value adversely impacted due to a rise in
interest rates, while floating rate securities may produce less income than
expected if interest rates fall. due in part to these factors, our future
investment income may fall short of expectations due to changes in interest
rates or if the decline in fair value of our publicly traded debt or equity
investments is judged to be other-than-temporary. we may suffer losses in
principal if we are forced to sell securities that decline in market value due
to changes in interest rates. however, because any debt securities we hold are
classified as available-for-sale, no gains or losses are realized in our
statement of operations due to changes in interest rates unless such securities
are sold prior to maturity or unless declines in market values are determined to
be other-than-temporary.these securities are reported at fair value
with the related unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other
comprehensive income, a component of stockholders equity, net of
tax.
as
of january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009, we had $1.73 billion and $1.26
billion, respectively, in cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities.our investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier
investment grade securities, the diversification of asset types and includes
certain limits on our portfolio duration, as specified in our investment policy
guidelines. these guidelines also limit the amount of credit exposure to any one
issue, issuer or type of instrument.as of january 31, 2010, we were in
compliance with our investment policy.as of january 31, 2010, our
investments in government agencies and government sponsored enterprises
represented approximately 62% of our total investment portfolio, while the
financial sector accounted for approximately 22% of our total investment
portfolio. all of our investments are with a/a2 or better rated
securities.
we
performed an impairment review of our investment portfolio as of january 31,
2010. based on our quarterly impairment review, we concluded that our
investments were appropriately valued and did not record any impairment during
fiscal year 2010.however, werecorded other than temporary
impairment charges of $9.9 million during fiscal year 2009. these charges
included $5.6 million related to an other than temporary impairment of our
investment in the money market funds held by the reserve international liquidity
fund, ltd., or international reserve fund, $2.5 million related to a decline in
the value of publicly traded equity securities, and $1.8 million related to debt
securities held by us that were issued by companies that had filed for
bankruptcy.please refer to note 18 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further details.
net
realized gains, excluding any impairment charges, were $1.8 million and $2.1
million for fiscal year 2010 and 2009, respectively. net realized gains for
fiscal year 2008 were not material. as of january 31, 2010, we had a net
unrealized gain of $12.6 million, which was comprised of gross unrealized gains
of $12.7 million,offset by $0.1 million of gross unrealized losses.
as of january 25, 2009, we had a net unrealized gain of $4.4 million, which was
comprised of gross unrealized gains of $7.8 million,offset by $3.4 million
of gross unrealized losses.
as of
january 31, 2010, we held a money market investment in the international reserve
fund, which was valued at $13.0 million, net of $5.6 million of other than
temporary impairment charges that we recorded during fiscal year 2009. we
reclassified this amount out of cash and cash equivalents in our consolidated
balance sheet due to the halting of redemption requests in september 2008 by the
international reserve fund. the $13.0 million value of our holdings in the
international reserve fund as of january 31, 2010 reflects an initial investment
of $130.0 million, reduced by $111.4 million that we received from the
international reserve fund during the fiscal year 2010 and the $5.6 million
other than temporary impairment charge we recorded against the value of this
investment during fiscal year 2009. the $111.4 million we received was our
portion of a payout of approximately 85.6% of the total assets of the
international reserve fund. all of the underlying securities held by the
international reserve fund had matured by the end of fiscal year 2010. we expect
to ultimately receive the proceeds from our remaining investment in the
international reserve fund, excluding some or all of the $5.6 million impairment
charges. however, redemptions from the international reserve fund are currently
subject to pending litigation, which could cause further delay in receipt of our
funds.
our
accounts receivable are highly concentrated and make us vulnerable to adverse
changes in our customers businesses, and to downturns in the industry and the
worldwide economy.two customers accounted for approximately 20% of
our accounts receivable balance at january 31, 2010. while we strive to limit
our exposure to uncollectible accounts receivable using a combination of credit
insurance and letters of credit, difficulties in collecting accounts receivable
could materially and adversely affect our financial condition and results of
operations. these difficulties are heightened during periods when economic
conditions worsen. we continue to work directly with more foreign customers and
it may be difficult to collect accounts receivable from them. we maintain an
allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the
inability of our customers to make required payments. this allowance consists of
an amount identified for specific customers and an amount based on overall
estimated exposure. if the financial condition of our customers were to
deteriorate, resulting in an impairment in their ability to make payments,
additional allowances may be required, we may be required to defer revenue
recognition on sales to affected customers, and we may be required to pay higher
credit insurance premiums, any of which could adversely affect our operating
results. in the future, we may have to record additional reserves or write-offs
and/or defer revenue on certain sales transactions which could negatively impact
our financial results.
cash
tender offer
during fiscal year 2010, our board of directors approved a cash tender offer for
certain employee stock options. the tender offer commencedon february 11,
2009 and was completed during the first quarter of fiscal year 2010. the tender
offer applied to outstanding stock options held by employees with an exercise
price equal to or greater than $17.50 per share. none of the non-employee
members of our board of directors or our officers who file reports under
section16(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934 were eligible to
participate in the tender offer.all eligible options with exercise prices
equal to or greater than $17.50 per share but less than $28.00 per share were
eligible to receive a cash payment of $3.00 per option in exchange for the
cancellation of the eligible option. all eligible options with exercise prices
equal to or greater than $28.00 per share were eligible to receive a cash
payment of $2.00 per option in exchange for the cancellation of the eligible
option.
a total of 28.5 million options were tendered under the offer for an aggregate
cash purchase price of $78.1 million, which was paid in exchange for the
cancellation of the eligible options.as a result of the tender
offer, we incurred a charge of $140.2 million consisting of $124.1 million
related to the remaining unamortized stock based compensation expense associated
with the unvested portion of the options tendered in the offer, $11.6 million
related to stock-based compensation expense resulting from amounts paid in
excess of the fair value of the underlying options, plus $4.5 million related to
associated payroll taxes, professional fees and other costs.
please refer to note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k for further discussion
regarding the cash tender offer.
stock repurchase
program
our
board of directors has authorized us, subject to certain specifications, to
repurchase shares of our common stock up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7
billion through may 2010.the repurchases will be made from time to time in
the open market, in privately negotiated transactions, or in structured stock
repurchase programs, and may be made in one or more larger repurchases, in
compliance with rule 10b-18 of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended,
subject to market conditions, applicable legal requirements, and other factors.
the program does not obligate nvidia to acquire any particular amount of common
stock and the program may be suspended at any time at our discretion.as
part of our share repurchase program, we have entered into, and we may continue
to enter into, structured share repurchase transactions with financial
institutions. these agreements generally require that we make an up-front
payment in exchange for the right to receive a fixed number of shares of our
common stock upon execution of the agreement, and a potential incremental number
of shares of our common stock, within a pre-determined range, at the end of the
term of the agreement. we did not enter into any structured share repurchase
transactions or otherwise purchase any shares of our common stock during fiscal
year 2010.through january 31, 2010, we have repurchased an aggregate of
90.9 million shares under our stock repurchase program for a total cost of
$1.46billion.as of january 31, 2010, we are authorized,
subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common stock up
to an additional amount of $1.24 billion through may 2010.
operating
capital and capital expenditure requirements.
we believe
that our existing cash balances and anticipated cash flows from operations will
be sufficient to meet our operating, acquisition and capital requirements for at
least the next twelve months. however, there is no assurance that we will not
need to raise additional equity or debt financing within this time frame.
additional financing may not be available on favorable terms or at all and may
be dilutive to our then-current stockholders. we also may require additional
capital for other purposes not presently contemplated. if we are unable to
obtain sufficient capital, we could be required to curtail capital equipment
purchases or research and development expenditures, which could harm our
business. factors that could affect our cash used or generated from operations
and, as a result, our need to seek additional borrowings or capital
include:
decreased
demand and market acceptance for our products and/or our customers
products;
inability
to successfully develop and produce in volume production our next-generation
products;
competitive
pressures resulting in lower than expected average selling prices;
and
new
product announcements or product introductions by our competitors.
we expect to spend approximately $110.0 million to $200.0 million for capital
expenditures during fiscal year 2011, primarily for property development,
leasehold improvements, software licenses, emulation equipment, computers and
engineering workstations.in addition, we may continue to use cash in
connection with the acquisition of new businesses or assets.
for additional factors see item
1a. risk factors - risks related to our business, industry and partners - our revenue may fluctuate while our
operating expenses are relatively fixed, which makes our results difficult to
predict and could cause our results to fall short of
expectations.
3dfx asset purchase
on december 15, 2000, nvidia corporation and one of our indirect subsidiaries
entered into an asset purchase agreement, or apa, which closed on april 18,
2001, to purchase certain graphics chip assets from 3dfx. under the terms of the
apa, the cash consideration due at the closing was $70.0 million, less $15.0
million that was loaned to 3dfx pursuant to a credit agreement dated
december15, 2000. the apa also provided, subject to the other provisions
thereof, that if 3dfx properly certified that all its debts and other
liabilities had been provided for, then we would have been obligated to pay 3dfx
one million shares, which due to subsequent stock splits now totals six million
shares, of nvidia common stock. if 3dfx could not make such a certification, but
instead properly certified that its debts and liabilities could be satisfied for
less than $25.0 million, then 3dfx could have elected to receive a cash payment
equal to the amount of such debts and liabilities and a reduced number of shares
of our common stock, with such reduction calculated by dividing the cash payment
by $25.00 per share. if 3dfx could not certify that all of its debts and
liabilities had been provided for, or could not be satisfied, for less than
$25.0 million, we would not be obligated under the agreement to pay any
additional consideration for the assets.
in october 2002, 3dfx filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the united
states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california. in march 2003,
we were served with a complaint filed by the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy
court which sought, among other things, payments from us as additional purchase
price related to our purchase of certain assets of 3dfx. in early november
2005, nvidia and the official committee of unsecured creditors, or the
creditors committee, agreed to a plan of liquidation of 3dfx, which included a
conditional settlement of the trustees claims against us. this conditional
settlement was subject to a confirmation process through a vote of creditors and
the review and approval of the bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement
called for a payment by nvidia of approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx
estate. under the settlement, $5.6 million related to various administrative
expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0 million related to the satisfaction of
debts and liabilities owed to the general unsecured creditors of 3dfx.
accordingly, during the three month period ended october 30, 2005, we recorded
$5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee advised that he intended to
object to the settlement.
the conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed through the
confirmation process and the trustees case still remains pending
appeal.as such, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6 million
($5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx) that we recorded during the three months ended october
30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees case.
please refer to note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k for further information
regarding this litigation.
product
defect
during fiscal year 2010, we recorded an additional net warranty charge of $95.8
million against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair,
return, replacement and other costs arising from a weak die/packaging material
set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp and gpu products used in
notebook systems. this charge included an additional accrual of $164.4 million
for related estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of
$68.6 million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal year
2010.during fiscal year 2009, we recorded a net warranty
charge of $189.3 million charge against cost of revenue for the purpose of
supporting the product repair costs of our affected customers around the
world.this charge included an accrual of $196.0 million for related
estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of $6.7
million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal year
2009.although the number of units that we estimate will be impacted
by this issue remains consistent with our initial estimates in july 2008, the
overall cost of remediation and repair of impacted systems has been higher than
originally anticipated.the weak die/packaging material combination
is not used in any of our products that are currently in
production.
we
continue to seek access to our insurance coverage regarding reimbursement to us
for some or all of the costs we have incurred and may incur in the future
relating to the weak material set. however, there can be no
assurance that we will recover any additional reimbursement.
through january 31, 2010, we have made an aggregate of $233.5 million in cash
payments related to the warranty accrual associated with incremental repair and
replacement costs from the weak die/packaging material set and our remaining
accrual balance was $88.1 million.
in september, october and november2008, several putative class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted
mcp and gpu products.please refer to note 13 of the notes to the
consolidated financial statements in partiv, item15 of this
form10-k for further information regarding this litigation.
contractual obligations
the following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of january 31,
2010:
contractual
obligations
total
within
1 year
2-3
years
4-5
years
after
5 years
all
other
(in
thousands)
operating
leases
$
144,960
$
46,905
$
63,874
$
15,786
$
18,395
$
-
capital
lease
43,791
4,311
9,013
9,562
20,905
-
purchase
obligations (1)
461,988
461,988
-
-
-
-
uncertain
tax positions, interest and penalties (2)
120,997
-
-
-
-
120,997
capital
purchase obligations
25,177
25,177
-
-
-
-
total
contractual obligations
$
805,269
$
540,301
$
77,125
$
27,546
$
39,300
$
120,997
(1)
represents
our inventory purchase commitments as of january 31,
2010.
(2)
represents
unrecognized tax benefits of $109.8 million which consists of $42.2
million recorded in non-current income taxes payable and $67.6 million
reflected as a reduction to the related deferred tax assets, and the
related interest and penalties on the non-current income tax payable of
$11.2 million as of january 31, 2010.we are unable to
reasonably estimate the timing of any potential tax liability or
interest/penalty payments in individual years due to uncertainties in the
underlying income tax positions and the timing of the effective settlement
of such tax positions.
off-balance sheet arrangements
as of january 31, 2010, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as
defined in regulation s-k 303(a)(4)(ii).
adoption
of new accounting pronouncements
please see note 1of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k fora discussion of
adoption of new accounting pronouncements.
recently
issued accounting pronouncements
please see note 1of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in
partiv, item15 of this form10-k fora discussion of
recently issued accounting pronouncements.
item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk
investment
and interest rate risk
as of january 31, 2010 and
january 25, 2009, we had $1.73 billion and $1.26 billion, respectively, in cash,
cash equivalents and marketable securities.we invest in a variety of
financial instruments, consisting principally of cash and cash equivalents,
asset-backed securities, commercial paper, mortgage-backed securities issued by
government-sponsored enterprises, equity securities, money market funds and debt
securities of corporations, municipalities and the united statesgovernment
and its agencies. as of january 31, 2010, we did not have any investments in
auction-rate preferred securities. our investments are denominated in united
states dollars.
all of the cash equivalents and
marketable securities are treated as available-for-sale. investments in both
fixed rate and floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree of
interest rate risk. fixed rate securities may have their market value adversely
impacted due to a rise in interest rates, while floating rate securities may
produce less income than expected if interest rates fall. due in part to these
factors, our future investment income may fall short of expectations due to
changes in interest rates or if the decline in fair value of our publicly traded
debt or equity investments is judged to be other-than-temporary. we may suffer
losses in principal if we are forced to sell securities that decline in
securities market value due to changes in interest rates. however, because any
debt securities we hold are classified as available-for-sale, no gains or
losses are realized in our consolidated statements of operationsdue to
changes in interest rates unless such securities are sold prior to maturity or
unless declines in value are determined to be other-than-temporary.these
securities are reported at fair value with the related unrealized gains and
losses included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a component of
stockholders equity, net of tax.
as of january 31, 2010, we
performed a sensitivity analysis on our floating and fixed rate financial
investments. according to our analysis, parallel shifts in the yield curve of
both plus or minus 0.5% would result in changes in fair market values for these
investments of approximately $8.3 million.
the financial turmoil that
affected the banking system and financial markets and increased the possibility
that financial institutions might consolidate or go out of business resulted in
a tightening in the credit markets, a low level of liquidity in many financial
markets, and extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency and equity
markets. there could be a number of follow-on effects from the credit crisis on
our business, including insolvency of key suppliers resulting in product delays;
inability of customers, including channel partners, to obtain credit to finance
purchases of our products and/or customer, including channel partner,
insolvencies; and failure of financial institutions, which may negatively impact
our treasury operations. other income and expense could also vary materially
from expectations depending on gains or losses realized on the sale or exchange
of financial instruments; impairment charges related to debt securities as well
as equity and other investments; interest rates; and cash, cash equivalent and
marketable securities balances. volatility in the financial markets and economic
uncertainty increases the risk that the actual amounts realized in the future on
our financial instruments could differ significantly from the fair values
currently assigned to them. as of january 31, 2010, our investments in
government agencies and government sponsored enterprises represented
approximately 62% of our total investment portfolio, while the financial sector
accounted for approximately 22% of our total investment portfolio.of
the financial sector investments, over half are guaranteed by the u.s.
government.substantially all of our investments are with a/a2 or
better rated securities.if the fair value of our investments in
these sectors was to decline by 2%-5%, fair market values for these investments
would decline by approximately $27-$67 million.
exchange
rate risk
we consider our direct exposure
to foreign exchange rate fluctuations to be minimal.gains or losses
from foreign currency remeasurement are included in other income (expense),
net in our consolidated financial statements and to date have not been
significant.the impact of foreign currency transaction loss included
in determining net income (loss) for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 was $0.9
million, $2.0 million and $1.7 million, respectively.currently,
sales and arrangements with third-party manufacturers provide for pricing and
payment in united states dollars, and, therefore, are not subject to exchange
rate fluctuations. increases in the value of the united states dollar relative
to other currencies would make our products more expensive, which could
negatively impact our ability to compete. conversely, decreases in the value of
the united states dollar relative to other currencies could result in our
suppliers raising their prices in order to continue doing business with us.
fluctuations in currency exchange rates could harm our business in the
future.
we may enter into certain transactions such as forward contracts which are
designed to reduce the future potential impact resulting from changes in foreign
currency exchange rates. there were no forward exchange contracts outstanding at
january 31, 2010.
item8. financial statements and supplementary
data
the information required by this
item is set forth in our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto
included in this annual report on form 10-k.
item9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a. controls and procedures
controls
and procedures
disclosure
controls and procedures
based on their evaluation as of january31, 2010, our management, including
our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, has concluded that our
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in rule 13a-15(e) under the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, or the exchange act) were
effective.
managements
annual report on internal control over financial reporting
our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal
control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in exchange act
rule13a-15(f). under the supervision and with the participation of our
management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer,
we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over
financial reporting as of january31, 2010 based on the criteria set forth
in internal control -
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations
of the treadway commission. based on our evaluation under the criteria set forth
in internal control
integrated framework, our management concluded that our internal control
over financial reporting was effective as of january31, 2010.
the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of
january31, 2010 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in its report which is
included herein.
changes
in internal control over financial reporting
there were no changes in our internal controls over financial reporting during
our last fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely
to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting.
inherent
limitations on effectiveness of controls
our management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial
officer, does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our
internal controls, will prevent all error and all fraud. a control system, no
matter how well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not
absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. further,
the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource
constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their
costs. because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation
of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances
of fraud, if any, within nvidia have been detected.
item9b.other information
none.
part iii
item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
identification
of directors
reference is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the
heading proposal 1 - election of directors in our 2010 proxy statement, which
information is hereby incorporated by reference.
identification
of executive officers
reference is made to the information regarding executive officers appearing
under the heading executive officers of the registrant in part i of this
annual report on form 10-k, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
identification of audit committee and
financial expert
reference is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the
heading report of the audit committee of the board of directors and
information about the board of directors and corporate governance in our 2010
proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
material changes to procedures for
recommending directors
reference is made to the information regarding directors appearing under the
heading information about the board of directors and corporate governance in
our 2010 proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by
reference.
compliance with section16(a) of
the exchange act
reference is made to the information appearing under the heading section 16(a)
beneficial ownership reporting compliance in our 2010 proxy statement, which
information is hereby incorporated by reference.
code of conduct
reference is made to the information appearing under the heading information
about the board of directors and corporate governance - code of conduct in our
2010 proxy statement, which information is hereby incorporated by reference. the
full text of our code and financial team code are published on the investor
relations portion of our web site, under corporate governance, at www.nvidia.com. the
contents of our website are not a part of this annual report on form
10-k.
item 11. executive compensation
the information required by this item is hereby incorporate by reference from
the sections entitled executive compensation,compensation committee
interlocks and insider participation, director compensationand
compensation committee report in our 2010 proxy statement.
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and
management and related stockholder matters
ownership
of nvidia securities
the information required by this item
is hereby incorporated by reference from the section entitled security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management in our 2010 proxy
statement.
equity
compensation plan information
information
regarding our equity compensation plans, including both stockholder approved
plans and non-stockholder approved plans, will be contained in our 2010 proxy
statement under the caption equity compensation plan information, and is
incorporated by reference into this annual report on form 10-k.
item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and
director independence
the information required by this item is hereby incorporated by reference from
the sections entitled transactions with related persons, review of
transactions with related persons and information about the board of directors
and corporate governance -independence of the members of the board of
directors in our 2010 proxy statement.
item 14. principal accounting fees and services
the information required by this item is hereby incorporated by reference from
the section entitled fees billed by the independent registered public
accounting firm in our 2010 proxy statement.
part iv
item15.exhibits,
financial statement schedule
page
(a)
1.
consolidated
financial statements
report of independent
registered public accounting firm, pricewaterhousecoopers
llp
consolidated statements of
operations for the years ended january 31, 2010, january 25, 2009 and
january 27, 2008
consolidated balance sheets as of
january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009
consolidated statements of
stockholders equity and comprehensive income (loss) for the years ended
january 31, 2010, january 25, 2009 and january 27,
consolidated statements of cash
flows for the years ended january 31, 2010, january 25, 2009 and january
27, 2008
notes to the consolidated
financial statements
(a)
2.
financial
statement schedule
schedule ii valuation and
qualifying accounts
(a)
3.
exhibits
the exhibits listed in the
accompanying index to exhibits are filed or incorporated by reference as a
part of this annual report on form 10-k.
report of independent registered public accounting
firm
to
thestockholders
and board of directors of nvidia corporation:
in our
opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in the index appearing
under item 15(a)(1) present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of nvidia corporation and its subsidiaries at january 31, 2010 and
january 25, 2009, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended january 31, 2010 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of
america.in addition, in our opinion, the financial statement
schedule listed in the index appearing under item 15(a)(2) presents fairly, in
all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in
conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.also
in our opinion, the company maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of january 31, 2010, based on
criteria established in internal control - integrated
framework issued by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the
treadway commission (coso).the company's management is responsible
for these financial statements and financial statement schedule, for maintaining
effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of
the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in
management's report on internal control over financial reporting appearing under
item 9a.our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial
statements, on the financial statement schedule, and on the company's internal
control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits.we
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the public company
accounting oversight board (united states).those standards require
that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects.our audits of the financial statements included examining,
on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation.our audit of internal control over financial reporting
included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and
evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on
the assessed risk.our audits also included performing such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. we believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
a
companys internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles.a companys internal
control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(i)pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of
the company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that transactions are
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the company; and
(iii)provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the companys assets that
could have a material effect on the financial statements.
because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements.also, projections of any evaluation
of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
san jose,
ca
march 17,
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of operations
(in
thousands, except per share data)
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
revenue
$
3,326,445
$
3,424,859
$
4,097,860
cost
of revenue
2,149,522
2,250,590
2,228,580
gross
profit
1,176,923
1,174,269
1,869,280
operating
expenses:
research and development
908,851
855,879
691,637
sales,
general and administrative
367,017
362,222
341,297
restructuring
charges and other
-
26,868
-
total
operating expenses
1,275,868
1,244,969
1,032,934
income
(loss) from operations
(98,945
)
(70,700
)
836,346
interest
income
23,115
42,859
64,289
interest
expense
(3,320
)
(406
)
(54
)
other
income (expense), net
(3,144
)
(14,707
)
income
(loss) before income tax
(82,294
)
(42,954
)
901,341
income
tax expense (benefit)
(14,307
)
(12,913
)
103,696
net
income (loss)
$
(67,987
)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.12
)
$
(0.05
)
$
1.45
weighted
average shares used in basic per share computation (1)
549,574
548,126
550,108
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.12
)
$
(0.05
)
$
1.31
weighted
average shares used in diluted per share
computation(1)
549,574
548,126
606,732
(1)
reflects a three-for-two stock split effective on september 10,
2007.
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
balance sheets
(in
thousands, except share and per share data)
january
31, 2010
january
25, 2009
assets
current
assets :
cash and cash equivalents
$
447,221
$
417,688
marketable securities
1,281,006
837,702
accounts receivable, less allowances of $16,330 and $18,399 in 2010
and2009, respectively
374,963
318,435
inventories
330,674
537,834
prepaid expenses and other
38,214
39,794
deferred income taxes
8,752
16,505
total
current assets
2,480,830
2,167,958
property
and equipment, net
571,858
625,798
goodwill
369,844
369,844
intangible
assets, net
120,458
147,101
deposits
and other assets
42,928
40,026
total
assets
$
3,585,918
$
3,350,727
liabilities
and stockholders equity
current
liabilities:
accounts payable
$
344,527
$
218,864
accrued liabilities and other
439,851
559,727
total
current liabilities
784,378
778,591
other
long-term liabilities
111,950
151,850
capital
lease obligations, long term
24,450
25,634
commitments
and contingencies - see note 13
stockholders
equity:
preferred stock, $.001 par value; 2,000,000 shares authorized; none
issued
-
-
common stock, $.001 par value; 2,000,000,000 shares authorized;
652,391,708 shares issued and 561,465,851 outstanding in 2010; and
629,386,584 shares
issued
and 538,460,766 outstanding in 2009
additional paid-in capital
2,219,401
1,889,257
treasury stock, at cost (90,925,857 shares in 2010 and 90,925,818 shares
in 2009)
(1,463,268
)
(1,463,268
)
accumulated other comprehensive income
12,172
3,865
retained earnings
1,896,182
1,964,169
total
stockholders' equity
2,665,140
2,394,652
total
liabilities and stockholders' equity
$
3,585,918
$
3,350,727
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity
and
comprehensive income (loss)
(in
thousands, except share data)
common
stock
outstanding
amount
shares
(1)
(1)
additional
paid-in capital (1)
treasury
stock
accumulated
other comprehensive income(loss)
retained
earnings
total
stockholders' equity
balances,
january 28, 2007
541,497,756
$
$
1,295,455
$
(487,120
)
$
1,436
$
1,196,565
$
2,006,919
comprehensive
income (loss):
unrealized
gain, net of$2,860 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
6,703
-
6,703
reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of $4 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
(105
)
-
(105
)
net
income
-
-
-
-
797,645
797,645
total
comprehensive income (loss)
804,243
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
36,238,014
225,933
-
-
-
225,969
stock
repurchase
(20,633,182
)
-
-
(552,512
)
-
-
(552,512
)
tax
benefitfrom stock-based compensation
-
-
-
-
-
stock-based
compensation related to employees
-
-
133,073
-
-
-
133,073
balances,
january 27, 2008
557,102,588
1,654,681
(1,039,632
)
8,034
1,994,210
2,617,912
comprehensive
income (loss):
unrealized
gain, net of$2,054 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
(3,920
)
-
(3,920
)
reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of $135 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
(249
)
-
(249
)
net
income (loss)
-
-
-
-
(30,041
)
(30,041
)
total
comprehensive income (loss)
(34,210
)
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
10,685,101
73,537
-
-
-
73,547
stock
repurchase
(29,326,923
)
-
-
(423,636
)
-
-
(423,636
)
tax
benefitfrom stock-based compensation
-
-
(2,946
)
-
-
-
(2,946
)
stock-based
compensation related to employees
-
-
163,985
-
-
-
163,985
balances,
january 25, 2009
538,460,766
1,889,257
(1,463,268
)
3,865
1,964,169
2,394,652
comprehensive
income (loss):
unrealized
gain, net of$484 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
9,417
-
9,417
reclassification
adjustment for net realized gains included in net income, net of $598 tax
effect
-
-
-
-
(1,110
)
-
(1,110
)
net income (loss)
-
-
-
-
-
(67,987
)
(67,987
)
total
comprehensive income (loss)
(59,680
)
issuance
of common stock from stock plans
23,005,124
138,005
-
-
-
138,029
stock
repurchase
(39
)
tax
benefitfrom stock-based compensation
-
-
29,891
-
-
-
29,891
stock-based
compensation related to employees
-
-
104,588
-
-
-
104,588
tender
offer
-
-
(78,075
)
-
-
-
(78,075
)
charges
related to stock option purchase-tender offer
-
-
135,735
-
-
-
135,735
balances,
january 31, 2010
561,465,851
$
$
2,219,401
$
(1,463,268
)
$
12,172
$
1,896,182
$
2,665,140
(1)reflects
a three-for-two stock split effective on september 10, 2007.
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial
statements.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
consolidated
statements of cash flows
(in
thousands)
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
cash
flows from operating activities:
net
income (loss)
$
(67,987
)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
adjustments
to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating
activities:
stock-based compensation expense related to stock option
purchase
135,735
-
-
stock-based compensation expense
107,091
162,706
133,365
depreciation and amortization
196,664
185,023
133,192
impairment charge on investments
-
9,891
-
deferred income taxes
(21,147
)
(23,277
)
89,516
payments under patent licensing arrangement
(857
)
(21,797
)
(57,255
)
in-process research and development expenses
-
-
4,000
other
1,893
(216
)
changes
in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects of
acquisitions:
accounts receivable
(56,741
)
348,873
(146,055
)
inventories
204,656
(177,295
)
(3,690
)
prepaid expenses and other current assets
1,580
21,528
(6,293
)
deposits and other assets
3,857
(2,108
)
(13,914
)
accounts payable
119,366
(283,207
)
216,875
accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities
(136,303
)
58,876
123,026
net
cash provided by operating activities
487,807
249,360
1,270,196
cash
flows from investing activities:
purchases of marketable securities
(1,193,948
)
(999,953
)
(1,250,248
)
proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable
securities
752,434
1,226,646
753,839
purchases of property and equipment and intangible assets
(77,601
)
(407,670
)
(187,745
)
acquisition of businesses, net of cash and cash
equivalents
-
(27,948
)
(75,542
)
other
(218
)
(442
)
(1,622
)
net
cash used in investing activities
(519,333
)
(209,367
)
(761,318
)
cash
flows from financing activities:
payments related to stock option purchase
(78,075
)
-
-
payments related to repurchases of common stock
-
(423,636
)
(552,512
)
proceeds from issuance of common stock under employee stock
plans
138,029
73,547
225,969
other
1,105
net
cash used in financing activities
61,059
(349,274
)
(326,323
)
change
in cash and cash equivalents
29,533
(309,281
)
182,555
cash
and cash equivalents at beginning of period
417,688
726,969
544,414
cash
and cash equivalents at end of period
$
447,221
$
417,688
$
726,969
supplemental
disclosures of cash flow information:
cash
paid for income taxes, net
$
4,217
$
7,620
$
2,328
cash
paid for interest on capital lease obligations
$
3,256
$
-
$
-
yearended
january31,
january25,
january27,
non-cash
activities:
change
in unrealized gains (losses) from marketable securities
$
8,305
$
(6,360
)
$
9,462
assets
acquired by assuming related liabilities
$
37,830
$
47,236
$
18,072
acquisition
of business - goodwill adjustment
$
-
$
3,411
$
2,633
see
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
note
1 - organization and summary of significant accounting policies
our company
nvidia
corporation is the worldwide leader in visual computing technologies and the
inventor of the graphics processing unit, or the gpu.our products
are designed to generate realistic, interactive graphics on workstations,
personal computers, game consoles and mobile devices.expertise in
programmable gpus has led to breakthroughs in parallel processing which make
supercomputing inexpensive and widely accessible.we serve the
entertainment and consumer market with our geforce graphics products, the
professional design and visualization market with our quadro graphics products,
the high-performance computing market with our tesla computing solutions
products, and the mobile computing market with our tegra system-on-a-chip
products. during the last several fiscal years, we have operated and reported
four major product-line operating segments: the gpu business, the professional
solutions business, or psb, the media and communications processor, or mcp,
business, and the consumer products business, or cpb. however, effective with
the first quarter of fiscal year 2011, we will no longer separate our mcp and
gpu operating segments as such segmentation will no longer be reflective of the
way we manage those businesses.
our gpu business is comprised
primarily of our geforce products that support desktop and notebook personal
computers, or pcs, plus memory products. our psb is comprised of our nvidia
quadro professional workstation products and other professional graphics
products, including our nvidia tesla high-performance computing products. our
mcp business, as we have reported it through fiscal year 2010, has been
comprised primarily of our ion nvidia motherboard gpu, or mgpu products. our cpb
is comprised of our tegra mobile brand and products that support tablets and
smartbooks, smartphones, personal media players, or pmps, internet television,
automotive navigation,and other similar devices. cpb also includes
license, royalty, other revenue and associated costs related to video game
consoles and other digital consumer electronics devices.original
equipment manufacturers, original design manufacturers, add-in-card
manufacturers, system builders and consumer electronics companies worldwide
utilize our processors as a core component of their entertainment, business and
professional solutions.
we
were incorporated in california in april 1993 and reincorporated in delaware in
april 1998. our headquarter facilities are in santa clara, california. our
internet address is www.nvidia.com. the
contents of our website are not a part of these notes to the consolidated
financial statements.
all references to nvidia, we,
us, our or the company mean nvidia corporation and its subsidiaries,
except where it is made clear that the term means only the parent
company.
fiscal year
we operate on a 52 or 53-week year, ending on the last sunday in january. fiscal
year 2010 was a 53-week year while fiscal years 2009 and 2008 were 52-week
years.
stock splits
in august 2007,our board of directors, or the board, approved a
three-for-two stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock on monday,
august 20, 2007 to be effected in the form of a stock dividend.the stock
split was effective on monday,september 10, 2007 and entitled each
stockholder of record on august 20, 2007 to receive one additional share for
every two outstanding shares of common stock held and cash in lieu of fractional
shares. all share and per-share numbers contained herein have been retroactively
adjusted to reflect this stock split.
reclassifications
certain prior fiscal year balances have been reclassified to conform to the
current fiscal year presentation.
principles of consolidation
our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of nvidia
corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. all material intercompany
balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
use
of estimates
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the united states of america, or u.s.gaap, requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of
assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at
the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and
expenses during the reporting period. actual results could differ from those
estimates. on an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those
related to revenue recognition, cash equivalents and marketable securities,
accounts receivable, inventories, income taxes, goodwill, stock-based
compensation, warranty liabilities, litigation, investigation and settlement
costs and other contingencies. these estimates are based on historical facts and
various other assumptions that we believe are
reasonable.
revenue recognition
product
revenue
we recognize revenue from product sales when persuasive evidence of an
arrangement exists, the product has been delivered, the price is fixed or
determinable, and collection is reasonably assured. for most sales, we use a
binding purchase order and in certain cases we use a contractual agreement as
evidence of an arrangement. we consider delivery to occur upon shipment provided
title and risk of loss have passed to the customer based on the shipping terms.
at the point of sale, we assess whether the arrangement fee is fixed and
determinable and whether collection is reasonably assured. if we determine that
collection of a fee is not reasonably assured, we defer the fee and recognize
revenue at the time collection becomes reasonably assured, which is generally
upon receipt of payment.
our policy on sales to certain distributors, with rights of return,is to
defer recognition of revenue and related cost of revenue until the distributors
resell the product.
our customer programs primarily involve rebates, which are designed to serve as
sales incentives to resellers of our products in various target markets. we
accrue for 100% of the potential rebates and do not apply a breakage factor. we
recognize a liability for these rebates at the later of the date at which we
record the related revenue or the date at which we offer the rebate. rebates
typically expire six months from the date of the original sale, unless we
reasonably believe that the customer intends to claim the rebate. unclaimed
rebates are reversed to revenue.
our customer programs also include marketing development funds, or mdfs. we
account for mdfs as either a reduction of revenue or an operating expense. mdfs
represent monies paid to retailers, system builders, original equipment
manufacturers, or oems, distributors and add-in card partners that are earmarked
for market segment development and expansion and typically are designed to
support our partners activities while also promoting nvidia products. depending
on market conditions, we may take actions to increase amounts offered under
customer programs, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at
the time such programs are offered.
we also record a reduction to revenue by establishing a sales return allowance
for estimated product returns at the time revenue is recognized, based primarily
on historical return rates. however, if product returns for a particular fiscal
period exceed historical return rates we may determine that additional sales
return allowances are required to properly reflect our estimated exposure for
product returns.
license and
development revenue
for license arrangements that require significant customization of our
intellectual property components, we generally recognize this license revenue
over the period that services are performed. for all license and service
arrangements, we determine progress to completion based on actual direct labor
hours incurred to date as a percentage of the estimated total direct labor hours
required to complete the project. we periodically evaluate the actual status of
each project to ensure that the estimates to complete each contract remain
accurate. a provision for estimated losses on contracts is made in the period in
which the loss becomes probable and can be reasonably estimated. costs incurred
in advance of revenue recognized are recorded as deferred costs on uncompleted
contracts. if the amount billed exceeds the amount of revenue recognized, the
excess amount is recorded as deferred revenue. revenue recognized in any period
is dependent on our progress toward completion of projects in progress.
significant management judgment and discretion are used to estimate total direct
labor hours. any changes in or deviations from these estimates could have a
material effect on the amount of revenue we recognize in any
period.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
advertising expenses
we expense advertising costs in the period in which they are incurred.
advertising expenses for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 were $16.3 million,
$28.5 million and $11.4 million, respectively.
rent expense
we
recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease period and accrue
for rent expense incurred, but not paid.
product warranties
we generally offer limited warranty to end-users that ranges from one to three
years for products in order to repair or replace products for any manufacturing
defects or hardware component failures. cost of revenue includes the estimated
cost of product warranties that are calculated at the point of revenue
recognition. under limited circumstances, we may offer an extended limited
warranty to customers for certain products. we also accrue for known warranty
and indemnification issues if a loss is probable and can be reasonably
estimated.
stock-based compensation
we measure stock-based compensation for equity awards exchanged for employee
services at grant date, based on the fair value of the awards, and we recognize
that compensation as expense using the straight-line attribution method over the
requisite employee service period, which is typically the vesting period of each
award. our estimates of the fair values of employee stock options are calculated
using a binomial model.
litigation, investigation and settlement costs
from time to time, we are involved in legal actions and/or investigations by
regulatory bodies. we are aggressively defending our current litigation matters
for which we are responsible. however, there are many uncertainties associated
with any litigation or investigation, and we cannot be certain that these
actions or other third-party claims against us will be resolved without costly
litigation, fines and/or substantial settlement payments. if that occurs, our
business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially and
adversely affected. if information becomes available that causes us to determine
that a loss in any of our pending litigation, investigations or settlements is
probable, and we can reasonably estimate the loss associated with such events,
we will record the loss in accordance with u.s.gaap. however, the actual
liability in any such litigation or investigations may be materially different
from our estimates, which could require us to record additional
costs.
foreign currency translation
we use the united states dollar as our functional currency for all of our
subsidiaries. foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are remeasured
into united states dollars at end-of-period exchange rates. non-monetary assets
and liabilities such as property and equipment, and equity, are remeasured at
historical exchange rates. revenue and expenses are remeasured at average
exchange rates in effect during each period, except for those expenses related
to the previously noted balance sheet amounts, which are remeasured at
historical exchange rates. gains or losses from foreign currency remeasurement
are included in other income (expense), net in our consolidated financial
statements and to date have not been significant.
the impact of foreign currency transaction loss included in determining net
income (loss) for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 was $0.9 million, $2.0
million and $1.7 million, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
income
taxes
we
recognize federal, state and foreign current tax liabilities or assets based on
our estimate of taxes payable or refundable in the current fiscal year by tax
jurisdiction. we recognize federal, state and foreign deferred tax assets or
liabilities, as appropriate, for our estimate of future tax effects attributable
to temporary differences and carryforwards; and we record a valuation allowance
to reduce any deferred tax assets by the amount of any tax benefits that, based
on available evidence and judgment, are not expected to be
realized.
united states income tax has not been provided on earnings of our non-u.s.
subsidiaries to the extent that such earnings are considered to be indefinitely
reinvested.
our calculation of current and
deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on certain estimates and judgments
and involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws.
our estimates of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities may change
based, in part, on added certainty or finality to an anticipated outcome,
changes in accounting standards or tax laws in the united states, or foreign
jurisdictions where we operate, or changes in other facts or circumstances. in
addition, we recognize liabilities for potential united states and foreign
income tax contingencies based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to
which, additional taxes may be due. if we determine that payment of these
amounts is unnecessary or if the recorded tax liability is less than our current
assessment, we may be required to recognize an income tax benefit or additional
income tax expense in our financial statements, accordingly.
as of january31, 2010, we
had a valuation allowance of $113.4million related to state and certain
foreign deferred tax assets that management determined are not likely to be
realized due, in part, to projections of future taxable income and potential
utilization limitations of tax attributes acquired as a result of stock
ownership changes.to the extent realization of the deferred tax
assets becomes more-likely-than-not,we would recognize such deferred tax
asset as an income tax benefit during the period the realization
occurred.
our deferred tax assets do not
include the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation that are a
component of our federal and state net operating loss and research tax credit
carryforwards in the amount of $401.5 million as of january 31, 2010. consistent
with prior years, the excess tax benefit reflected in our net operating loss and
research tax credit carryforwards will be accounted for as a credit to
stockholders equity, if and when realized.in determining if and
when excess tax benefits have been realized, we have elected to do a
with-and-without approach with respect to such excess tax benefits. we have also
elected to ignore the indirect tax effects of stock-based compensation
deductions for financial and accounting reporting purposes, and specifically to
recognize the full effect of the research tax credit in income from continuing
operations.
we
recognize the benefit from a tax position only if it is more-likely-than-not
that the position would be sustained upon audit based solely on the technical
merits of the tax position. our policy is to include interest and penalties
related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
please refer to note 14 of these notes to the consolidated financial statements
for additional information.
comprehensive
income (loss)
comprehensive income (loss) consists of net income (loss) and other
comprehensive income or loss. other comprehensive income or loss components
include unrealized gains or losses on available-for-sale securities, net of
tax.
net
income(loss) per share
basic net income (loss) per share is computed using the weighted average number
of common shares outstanding during the period. diluted net income (loss) per
share is computed using the weighted average number of common and dilutive
common equivalent shares outstanding during the period, using the treasury stock
method. under the treasury stock method, the effect of stock options outstanding
is not included in the computation of diluted net income (loss) per share for
periods when their effect is anti-dilutive.
cash
and cash equivalents
we
consider all highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into cash
and have an original maturity of three months or less at the time of purchase to
be cash equivalents. as of january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009, our cash and
cash equivalents were $447.2 million and $417.7 million, respectively, which
include $81.4 million and $14.6 million invested in money market funds for
fiscal year 2010 and fiscal year 2009, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
marketable securities
cash equivalents consist of financial instruments which are readily convertible
into cash and have original maturities of three months or less at the time of
acquisition. marketable securities consist primarily of highly liquid
investments with maturities of greater than three months when
purchased.we generally classify our marketable securities at the
date of acquisition as available-for-sale. these securities are reported at fair
value with the related unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss), a component of stockholders equity, net of
tax.any unrealized losses which are considered to be
other-than-temporary impairments are recorded in the other income (expense)
section of our consolidated statements of operations.realized gains
(losses) on the sale of marketable securities are determined using the
specific-identification method and recorded in the other income (expense)
section of our consolidated statements of operations.
all of our available-for-sale investments are subject to a periodic impairment
review. we record a charge to earnings when a decline in fair value is
significantly below cost basis and judged to be other-than-temporary, or have
other indicators of impairments. if the fair value of an available-for-sale debt
instrument is less than its amortized cost basis, an other-than-temporary
impairment is triggered in circumstances where (1)we intend to sell the
instrument, (2)it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell
the instrument before recovery of its amortized cost basis, or (3)a credit
loss exists where we do not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of
the instrument. if we intend to sell or it is more likely than not that we will
be required to sell the available-for-sale debt instrument before recovery of
its amortized cost basis, we recognize an other-than-temporary impairment in
earnings equal to the entire difference between the debt instruments amortized
cost basis and its fair value. for available-for-sale debt instruments that are
considered other-than-temporarily impaired due to the existence of a credit
loss, if we do not intend to sell and it is not more likely than not that we
will be required to sell the instrument before recovery of its remaining
amortized cost basis (amortized cost basis less any current-period credit loss),
we separate the amount of the impairment into the amount that is credit related
and the amount due to all other factors. the credit loss component is recognized
in earnings.
we
performed an impairment review of our investment portfolio as of january 31,
2010.based on our impairment review and having considered the
guidance of the relevant accounting literature, we did not record any other than
temporary impairment charges during fiscal year 2010.we concluded
that our investments were appropriately valued and that no additional other than
temporary impairment charges were necessary on our portfolio of available for
sale investments as of january 31, 2010.
fair value of financial instruments
the carrying value of cash, cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts
payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values due to their
relatively short maturities as of january31, 2010 and january25,
2009. marketable securities are comprised of available-for-sale securities that
are reported at fair value with the related unrealized gains and losses included
in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a component of stockholders
equity, net of tax. fair value of the marketable securities is determined based
on quoted market prices.
concentration of credit risk
financial instruments that potentially subject us to concentrations of credit
risk consist primarily of cash equivalents, marketable securities and accounts
receivable. our investment policy requires the purchase of top-tier investment
grade securities, the diversification of asset type and includes certain limits
on our portfolio duration. all marketable securities are held in our name,
managed by several investment managers and held by one major financial
institution under a custodial arrangement.accounts receivable from
significant customers, those representing 10% or more of total accounts
receivable aggregated approximately 20% of our accounts receivable balance from
two customers at january 31, 2010 and approximately 38% of our accounts
receivable balance from three customers at january 25, 2009. we perform ongoing
credit evaluations of our customers financial condition and maintain an
allowance for potential credit losses. this allowance consists of an amount
identified for specific customers and an amount based on overall estimated
exposure. our overall estimated exposure excludes amounts covered by credit
insurance and letters of credit.
accounts receivable
we maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts receivable for estimated losses
resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. we
determine this allowance, which consists of an amount identified for specific
customer issues as well as an amount based on overall estimated exposure.
factors impacting the allowance include the level of gross receivables, the
financial condition of our customers and the extent to which balances are
covered by credit insurance or letters of credit.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
inventories
inventory cost is computed on an adjusted standard basis, which approximates
actual cost on an average or first-in, first-out basis. inventory costs consist
primarily of the cost of semiconductors purchased from subcontractors, including
wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging, manufacturing support costs,
including labor and overhead associated with such purchases, final test yield
fallout, inventory provisions and shipping costs. we write down our inventory
for estimated lower of cost or market, obsolescence or unmarketable inventory
equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market
value based upon assumptions about future demand, future product purchase
commitments, estimated manufacturing yield levels and market conditions. if
actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management,
or if our future product purchase commitments to our suppliers exceed our
forecasted future demand for such products, additional future inventory
write-downs may be required that could adversely affect our operating results.
inventory reserves once established are not reversed until the related inventory
has been sold or scrapped, so if actual market conditions are more favorable in
the fiscal periods subsequent to that in which we record larger than normal
inventory reserves, we may have higher gross margins when products are sold.
sales of such products did not have a significant impact on our gross margin for
fiscal year 2010.
property and equipment
property and equipment are stated at cost. depreciation of property and
equipment is computed using the straight-line method based on the estimated
useful lives of the assets, generally three to five years.the
estimated useful lives of our buildings are up to twenty-five years.
depreciation expense includes the amortization of assets recorded under capital
leases. leasehold improvements and assets recorded under capital leases are
amortized over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful life of the
asset.
goodwill
goodwill
is subject to our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year, or earlier if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair
value-based approach. our impairment review process compares the fair value of
the reporting unitin which the
goodwill resides to its carrying value.for the purposes of completing
ourimpairment test, weperform our analysison a reporting unit
basis.we utilize a two-step approach to testing goodwill for impairment.
the first step tests for possible impairment by applying a fair value-based
test. in computing fair value of our reporting units, we use estimates of future
revenues, costs and cash flows from such units. the second step, if necessary,
measures the amount of such impairment by applying fair value-based tests to
individual assets and liabilities.
intangible assets
intangible assets primarily represent rights acquired under technology licenses,
patents, acquired intellectual property, trademarks and customer
relationships.we currently amortize our intangible assets with
definitive lives over periods ranging from one to ten years using a method that
reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible asset are
consumed or otherwise used up or, if that pattern cannot be reliably determined,
using a straight-line amortization method.
impairment of long-lived assets
long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangible assets subject
to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be
recoverable. recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a
comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future
cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. if the carrying amount of an
asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is
recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the
fair value of the asset. fair value is determined based on the estimated
discounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. assets and
liabilities to be disposed of would be separately presented in the consolidated
balance sheet and the assets would be reported at the lower of the carrying
amount or fair value less costs to sell, and would no longer be
depreciated.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
accounting for asset retirement obligations
we account for asset retirement obligations associated with the retirement of
tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement costs. the
accounting guidance applies to legal obligations associated with the retirement
of long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development
and/or normal use of the assets andrequires that the fair value of a
liability for an asset retirement obligation be recognized in the period in
which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. the
fair value of the liability is added to the carrying amount of the associated
asset and this additional carrying amount is depreciated over the life of the
asset.as of january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009, our asset
retirement obligations to return the leasehold improvements to their original
condition upon lease termination at our headquarters facility in santa clara,
california and certain laboratories at our international locations were $10.6
million and $9.5 million, respectively.
adoption of new accounting pronouncements
business
combinations
in the first
quarter of fiscal year 2010, we adopted new accounting guidance issued by the
financial accounting standards board, or fasb, for business combinations. under
this guidance, an entity is required to recognize assets acquired, liabilities
assumed, contractual contingencies and contingent consideration at their fair
value on the acquisition date. it further requires: that acquisition-related
costs be recognized separately from the acquisition and expensed as incurred;
that restructuring costs generally be expensed in periods subsequent to the
acquisition date; and that changes in accounting for deferred tax asset
valuation allowances and acquired income tax uncertainties after the measurement
period, including changes related to acquired tax assets and income tax
uncertainties from acquisitions that occurred prior to the date of adoption, be
recognized as a component of the provision for taxes. in addition, acquired
in-process research and development is measured at fair value, capitalized as an
indefinite-life intangible asset and tested for impairment during the
development period. subsequent to the development period the carrying value, if
any, of acquired in-process development will be considered a definite-life
intangible asset and amortized over its estimated useful life. the new
accounting guidance also establishes disclosure requirements to enable users to
evaluate the nature and financial effects of the business combination. we will
apply this new accounting guidance to any future business
combinations.
in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010, we also adopted new accounting
guidance issued by the fasb for assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a
business combination that arise from contingencies. the new guidance amends the
provisions previously issued by the fasb related to the initial recognition and
measurement, subsequent measurement and accounting and disclosures for assets
and liabilities arising from contingencies in business combinations. the new
guidance eliminates the distinction between contractual and non-contractual
contingencies, including the initial recognition and measurement. we will apply
this new accounting guidance to any future business combinations.
life of intangible assetsduring the first
quarter of fiscal year 2010, we adopted new accounting guidance issued by the
fasb for the determination of the useful life of intangible assets. the new
guidance amends the factors that should be considered in developing the renewal
or extension assumptions used to determine the useful life of a recognized
intangible asset. the new guidance also requires expanded disclosure regarding
the determination of intangible asset useful lives. the adoption of this
accounting guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial
position, results of operations or financial condition..
fair value of financial instruments and
other-than-temporary impairmentduring the second
quarter of fiscal year 2010, we adopted three related sets of accounting
guidance issued by the fasb. the accounting guidance sets forth rules related to
determining the fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities when
the activity levels have significantly decreased in relation to the normal
market, guidance related to the determination of other-than-temporary
impairments to include the intent and ability of the holder as an indicator in
the determination of whether an other-than-temporary impairment exists and
interim disclosure requirements for the fair value of financial instruments. the
adoption of these three sets of accounting guidance did not have a material
impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or
financial condition..
subsequent
events
during
the second quarter of fiscal year 2010, we adopted new accounting guidance
issued by the fasb related to subsequent events. the new requirement establishes
the accounting for and disclosure of events that occur after the balance sheet
date but before financial statements are issued or are available to be issued.
the adoption of this accounting guidance did not have a material impact on our
consolidated financial position, results of operations or financial
condition.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
accounting standards
codification
during
the third quarter of fiscal year 2010, we adopted the new accounting standards
codification, or asc, issued by the fasb. the asc has become the source of
authoritative u.s. gaap, recognized by the fasb to be applied by nongovernmental
entities. the asc is not intended to change or alter existing u.s. gaap. the
adoption of the asc did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial
position, results of operations or financial condition..
recently
issued accounting pronouncements
variable interest
entities
in june
2009, the fasb issued new accounting guidance which amends the evaluation
criteria to identify the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity, or
vie, and requires ongoing reassessment of whether an enterprise is the primary
beneficiary of the vie. the new guidance significantly changes the consolidation
rules for vies including the consolidation of common structures, such as joint
ventures, equity method investments and collaboration arrangements. the guidance
is applicable to all new and existing vies. the provisions of this new
accounting guidance are effective for interim and annual reporting periods
beginning after november15, 2009. we do not believe the adoption of this
new accounting guidance will have a material impact on our consolidated
financial position, results of operations or financial condition.
revenue recognition
in
september 2009, the fasb issued new accounting guidance related to the revenue
recognition of multiple element arrangements. the new guidance states that if
vendor specific objective evidence or third party evidence for deliverables in
an arrangement cannot be determined, companies will be required to develop a
best estimate of the selling price to separate deliverables and allocate
arrangement consideration using the relative selling price method. in addition,
the fasb also issued new accounting guidance related to certain revenue
arrangements that include software elements. previously, companies that sold
tangible products with more than incidental software were required to apply
software revenue recognition guidance. this guidance often delayed revenue
recognition for the delivery of the tangible product. under the new guidance,
tangible products that have software components that are essential to the
functionality of the tangible product will be excluded from the software
revenue recognition guidance. the new guidance will include factors to help
companies determine what is essential to the functionality. software-enabled
products will now be subject to other revenue guidance and will likely follow
the guidance for multiple deliverable arrangements issued by the fasb in
september 2009.
these two
new guidance are to be applied on a prospective basis for revenue arrangements
entered into or materially modified in fiscal years beginning on or after
june15, 2010, with earlier application permitted. if a company elects
earlier application and the first reporting period of adoption is not the first
reporting period in the companys fiscal year, the guidance must be applied
through retrospective application from the beginning of the companys fiscal
year and the company must disclose the effect of the change to those previously
reported periods. we do not believe the adoption of this accounting guidance
will have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of
operations or financial condition.
improving disclosures about
fair value measurements
in
january2010, the fasb issued a amendment to the existing disclosure
requirements by adding required disclosures about items transferring into and
out of levels 1 and 2 in the fair value hierarchy; adding separate disclosures
about purchase, sales, issuances, and settlements relative to level 3
measurements; and clarifying, among other things, the existing fair value
disclosures about the level of disaggregation. this new guidance is effective
for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after december 15, 2009,
except for the requirement to provide level 3 activity of purchases, sales,
issuances, and settlements on a gross basis, which is effective for fiscal years
beginning after december 15, 2010. since this standard impacts disclosure
requirements only, its adoption will not have a material impact on our
consolidated financial position, results of operations or financial
condition.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
2  stock option purchase
in the
first quarter of fiscal year 2010, we completed a cash tender offer for certain
employee stock options. the tender offer applied to outstanding stock options
held by employees with an exercise price equal to or greater than $17.50 per
share. none of the non-employee members of our board of directors or our
officers who file reports under section16(a) of the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended, were eligible to participate in the tender
offer.all eligible options with exercise prices equal to or greater than
$17.50 per share but less than $28.00 per share were eligible to receive a cash
payment of $3.00 per option in exchange for the cancellation of the eligible
option. all eligible options with exercise prices equal to or greater than
$28.00 per share were eligible to receive a cash payment of $2.00 per option in
exchange for the cancellation of the eligible option.
our
consolidated statement of operations for fiscal year 2010 includes stock-based
compensation charges related to the stock option purchase (in
thousands):
cost
of revenue
$
11,412
research
and development
90,456
sales,
general and administrative
38,373
total
$
140,241
a total
of 28.5 million options were tendered under the offer for an aggregate cash
purchase price of $78.1 million, which was paid in exchange for the cancellation
of the eligible options.as a result of the tender offer, we incurred
a charge of $140.2 million consisting of $124.1 million related to the remaining
unamortized stock based compensation expense associated with the unvested
portion of the options tendered in the offer, $11.6 million related to
stock-based compensation expense resulting from amounts paid in excess of the
fair value of the underlying options, plus $4.5 million related to associated
payroll taxes, professional fees and other costs.
note
3 - stock-based compensation
we
measure stock-based compensation expense at the grant date of the related equity
awards, based on the fair value of the awards, and recognize the expense using
the straight-line attribution method over the requisite employee service period
adjusted for estimated forfeitures. we estimate the fair value of employee stock
options on the date of grant using a binomial model and we use the closing
trading price of our common stock on the date of grant as the fair value of
awards of restricted stock units, or rsus. we calculate the fair value of our
employee stock purchase plan using the black-scholes model.
in
addition to the stock-based compensation expense related to our cash tender
offer to purchase certain employee stock options as described in note 2  stock
option purchase, our consolidated statementsof operations include
stock-based compensation expense,net of amounts capitalized as inventory,
as follows:
year
ended
january
31,
january
25,
january
27,
(in
thousands)
cost
of revenue
$
12,050
$
11,939
$
10,886
research
and development
61,337
98,007
76,617
sales,
general and administrative
33,704
52,760
45,862
total
$
107,091
$
162,706
$
133,365
as of january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009, the aggregate amount of unearned
stock-based compensation expense related to our equity awards was $125.3 million
and $193.8 million, respectively, adjusted for estimated
forfeitures.as of january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009, we
expect to recognize the unearned stock-based compensation expense related to
equity awards over an estimated weighted average amortization period of 1.80
years and 1.82 years, respectively.as of january 31, 2010, we
expect to recognize the unearned stock-based compensation expense related to
rsus over an estimated weighted average amortization period of 2.3
years.during fiscal year 2009, we did not grant any
rsus.
stock-based compensation capitalized in inventories resulted in a charge of $2.5
million and benefit of $2.0 million in cost of revenue during the fiscal years
ended january 31, 2010 and january 25, 2009, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, we granted approximately 7.7 million,
17.9 million and 17.2 million stock options, respectively, with estimated total
grant-date fair values of $44.2 million, $143.6 million and $207.4 million,
respectively, and weighted average grant-date fair values of $5.74, $8.03 and
$11.98 per option, respectively.during fiscal year 2010 we granted
approximately 7.7 million rsus, with estimated total grant-date fair values of
$94.1 million and weighted average grant-date fair value of
$12.27.during the fiscal years 2009 and 2008, we did not grant
any rsus.
of the estimated total grant-date fair value, we estimated that the stock-based
compensation expense related to the equity awards that are not expected to vest
for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 was $25.7 million, $23.8 million and $40.0
million, respectively.
valuation assumptions
we
utilize a binomial model for calculating the estimated fair value of new
stock-based compensation awards granted under our stock option plans. we
have determined that the use of implied volatility is expected to be reflective
of market conditions and, therefore, can be expected to be a reasonable
indicator of our expected volatility. we also segregate options into groups of
employees with relatively homogeneous exercise behavior in order to calculate
the best estimate of fair value using the binomial valuation model. as
such, the expected term assumption used in calculating the estimated fair value
of our stock-based compensation awards using the binomial model is based on
detailed historical data about employees' exercise behavior, vesting schedules,
and death and disability probabilities. our management believes the
resulting binomial calculation provides a reasonable estimate of the fair value
of our employee stock options. for our employee stock purchase plan we continue
to use the black-scholes model.
we
estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise the estimates of
forfeiture, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ
from those estimates. forfeitures are estimated based on historical
experience.
the fair
value of stock options granted under our stock option plans and shares issued
under our employee stock purchase plan have been estimated at the date of grant
with the following assumptions:
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
stock
options
(usingabinomial
model)
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
3.7-5.8
3.6-5.8
3.8-5.8
risk
free interest rate
1.8%-2.9
%
1.7%
- 3.7
%
3.3%
- 5.0
%
volatility
45%-72
%
52%
-105
%
37%
-54
%
dividend
yield
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
employee
stock purchase plan
(usingthe
black-scholes model)
weighted
average expected life of stock options (in years)
0.5-2.0
0.5
- 2.0
0.5
- 2.0
risk
free interest rate
0.2
% 1.0
%
1.6%
- 2.4
%
3.5%
- 5.2
%
volatility
53%-73
%
62%
- 68
%
38%
- 54
%
dividend
yield
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
equity incentive program
we consider equity compensation
to be long-term compensation and an integral component of our efforts to attract
and retain exceptional executives, senior management and world-class employees.
in march 2009, we introduced rsus as a form of equity compensation to all
employees.currently, we grant stock options and rsus under our
equity incentive plans.we believe that properly structured equity
compensation aligns the long-term interests of stockholders and employees by
creating a strong, direct link between employee compensation and stock
appreciation, as stock options are only valuable to our employees if the value
of our common stock increases after the date of grant.
equity incentive plan
at the annual meeting of stockholders held on june21, 2007, our
stockholders approved the nvidia corporation 2007 equity incentive plan, or the
2007 plan.
the 2007 plan authorizes the issuance of incentive stock options, nonstatutory
stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock unit, stock appreciation
rights, performance stock awards, performance cash awards, and other stock-based
awards to employees, directors and consultants. only our employees may receive
incentive stock options. the 2007 plan succeeds our 1998 equity incentive plan,
our 1998 non-employee directors stock option plan, our 2000 nonstatutory equity
incentive plan, and the portalplayer, inc. 2004 stock incentive plan, or the
prior plans. all options and stock awards granted under the prior plans shall
remain subject to the terms of the prior plans with respect to which they were
originally granted. up to 101,845,177 shares, which due to the subsequent stock
split now totals 152,767,766 shares, of our common stock may be issued pursuant
to stock awards granted under the 2007 plan or the prior
plans.currently, we grant stock options and rsus under our equity
incentive plans.as of january 31, 2010, 44,016,042 shares were available
for future issuance under the 2007 plan.
options
granted to new employees that started before the beginning of fiscal year 2010
generally vest ratably quarterly over a three-year period. in addition, options
granted prior to the beginning of fiscal year 2010 to existing employees in
recognition of performance generally vest as to 25% of the shares two years and
three months after the date of grant and as to the remaining 75% of the shares
subject to the option in equal quarterly installments over a nine month
period.options granted to new employees and to existing employees in
recognition of performance with a vesting commencement date in fiscal year 2010
generally vest as to 33.36% of the shares one year after the date of grant and
as to the remaining 66.64% of the shares subject to the option in equal
quarterly installments over the remaining period.options granted under the
2007 plan generally expire six years from the date of grant.
in
general, rsus are subject to the recipients continuing service to nvidia. rsus
with a vesting commencement date in fiscal year 2010 vest over three years at
the rate of 33.36% on pre-determined dates that are close to the anniversary of
the grant date and vest ratably on a semi-annual basis thereafter.
unless terminated sooner, the 2007 plan is scheduled to terminate on
april23, 2017. our board may suspend or terminate the 2007 plan at any
time. no awards may be granted under the 2007 plan while the 2007 plan is
suspended orafter it is terminated. the board may also amend the 2007 plan
at any time. however, if legal, regulatory or listing requirements require
stockholder approval, the amendment will not go into effect until the
stockholders have approved the amendment.
portalplayer, inc. 1999
stock option plan
we assumed options issued under the portalplayer, inc. 1999 stock option plan,
or the 1999 plan, when we completed our acquisition of portalplayer on january
5, 2007. the 1999 plan was terminated upon completion of portalplayers initial
public offering of common stock in 2004. no shares of common stock are available
for issuance under the 1999 plan other than to satisfy exercises of stock
options granted under the 1999 plan prior to its termination and any shares that
become available for issuance as a result of expiration or cancellation of an
option that was issued pursuant to the 1999 plan. previously authorized yet
unissued shares under the 1999 plan were cancelled upon completion of
portalplayers initial public offering.
each option we assumed in connection with our acquisition of portalplayer was
converted into the right to purchase that number of shares of nvidia common
stock determined by multiplying the number of shares of portalplayer common
stock underlying such option by 0.3601 and then rounding down to the nearest
whole number of shares. the exercise price per share for each assumed option was
similarly adjusted by dividing the exercise price by 0.3601 and then rounding up
to the nearest whole cent. vesting schedules and expiration dates did not
change.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
under the
1999 plan, incentive stock options were granted at a price that was not less
than 100% of the fair market value of portalplayers common stock, as determined
by its board of directors, on the date of grant. non-statutory stock options
were granted at a price that was not less than 85% of the fair market value of
portalplayers common stock, as determined by its board of directors, on the
date of grant.
generally,
options granted under the 1999 plan are exercisable for a period of ten years
from the date of grant, and shares vest at a rate of 25% on the first
anniversary of the grant date of the option, and an additional 1/48th of the
shares upon completion of each succeeding full month of continuous employment
thereafter.
1998 employee stock purchase
plan
in
february 1998, our board approved the 1998 employee stock purchase plan, or the
purchase plan. in june 1999, the purchase plan was amended to increase the
number of shares reserved for issuance automatically each year at the end of our
fiscal year for the next 10 years (commencing at the end of fiscal 2000 and
ending 10 years later in 2009) by an amount equal to 2% of the outstanding
shareson each such date, including on an as-if-converted basis preferred
stock and convertible notes, and outstanding options and warrants, calculated
using the treasury stock method; provided that the maximum number of shares of
common stock available for issuance from the purchase plan could not exceed
52,000,000 shares which, due to subsequent stock-splits, is now 78,000,0000
shares. the number of shares will no longer be increased annually as we reached
the maximum permissible number of shares at the end of fiscal year 2006. there
are a total of 78,000,000 shares authorized for issuance. at january31,
2010, 39,298,760 shares had been issued under the purchase plan
and38,701,240 shares were available for future issuance.
the purchase plan is intended to qualify as an employee stock purchase plan
under section423 of the internal revenue code. under the purchase plan,
the board has authorized participation by eligible employees, including
officers, in periodic offerings following the adoption of the purchase plan.
under the purchase plan, separate offering periods shall be no longer than 27
months. under the current offering adopted pursuant to the purchase plan, each
offering period is 24 months, which is divided into four purchase periods of 6
months.
employees are eligible to participate if they are employed by us or an affiliate
of us as designated by the board. employees who participate in an offering may
have up to 10% of their earnings withheld pursuant to the purchase plan up to
certain limitationsand applied on specified dates determined by the board
to the purchase of shares of common stock. the board may increase this
percentage at its discretion, up to 15%. the price of common stock purchased
under the purchase plan will be equal to the lower of the fair market value of
the common stock on the commencement date of each offering period and the
purchase date of each offering period at 85% at the fair market value of the
common stock on the relevant purchase date. during fiscal years 2010, 2009 and
2008, employees purchased approximately 5.9 million, 3.0 million and 2.1 million
shares, respectively, with weighted-average prices of $6.76, $12.79 and $14.29
per share, respectively, and grant-date fair values of $4.60, $5.90 and $5.48
per share, respectively. employees may end their participation in the purchase
plan at any time during the offering period, and participation ends
automatically on termination of employment with us and in each case their
contributions are refunded.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the
following summarizes the stock option and rsu transactions under our equity
incentive plans:
options
available for grant
options
outstanding
weighted
average exercise price per share
weighted
average remainingcontractual life
aggregate
intrinsic value (1)
stock
options:
balances,
january28, 2007
32,670,427
110,991,992
$
8.86
authorized
25,114,550
-
-
granted
(17,201,305
)
17,201,305
$
27.32
exercised
-
(34,151,892
)
$
5.74
cancelled
3,460,332
(3,460,332
)
$
18.45
balances,
january27, 2008
44,044,004
90,581,073
$
13.18
authorized
-
-
-
granted
(17,888,695
)
17,888,695
$
8.03
exercised
-
(7,670,038
)
$
3.14
cancelled
3,345,450
(3,345,450
)
$
7.66
balances,
january25, 2009
29,500,759
97,454,280
$
13.83
authorized
-
-
-
granted
(7,701,396
)
7,701,396
$
11.51
exercised
-
(17,099,663
)
$
5.74
cancelled
1,175,541
(1,175,541
)
$
12.90
cancellations
related to stock options purchase (2)
28,532,050
(28,532,050
)
$
23.35
balances,
january31, 2010
51,506,954
58,348,422
$
11.30
2.56
$
287,877
exercisable
at january 31, 2010
39,297,611
$
10.44
1.50
$
217,449
vested
and expected to vest after january 31, 2010
56,221,636
11.23
2.47
$
280,015
(1)
the aggregate intrinsic value in the table above represents the total pre-tax
intrinsic value for in-the-money options at january 31, 2010, based on the
$15.39 closing stock price of our common stock on the nasdaq global select
market, which would have been received by the option holders had all
in-the-money option holders exercised their options as of that date. the total
number of in-the-money options outstanding and exercisable as of january 31,
2010 was 48.1million shares and 35.1 million shares,
respectively.
(2)
please refer to note 2 of these notes to the consolidated financial statements
for further discussion regarding the cash tender offer for certain employee
stock options that our board of directors approved in february
2009.
the total
intrinsic value of options exercised was $140.3 million, $84.9 million and
$757.5 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. the total
fair value of options vested was $37.0 million, $117.0 million and $102.8
million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
rsus
weighted
average grant-date fair value
weighted
average remaining contractual life
restricted stock
units:
balances,
january 25, 2009
-
$
-
awarded
7,672,899
$
12.26
vested
(1)
(2,400
)
$
12.40
forfeited
(181,987
)
$
11.37
balances,
january 31, 2010
7,488,512
$
12.28
expected
to vest after january 31, 2010
6,401,099
$
12.28
2.34
(1)
the
aggregate tax withheld for rsus vested during fiscal year 2010 was
immaterial.
note
4  restructuring charges and other
in september2008, we
announced a workforce reduction to allow for continued investment in strategic
growth areas, which was completed in the third quarter of fiscal year 2009. as a
result, we eliminated approximately 360 positions worldwide, or about 6.5% of
our global workforce.during fiscal year 2009, expenses associated
with the workforce reduction, which were comprised primarily of severance and
benefits payments to these employees, totaled $8.0 million.the remaining
accrual of $0.2 million as of january 25, 2009 relates to severance and benefits
payments, which was paid by the third quarter of fiscal year 2010.
the following table provides a summary of the restructuring activities and
related liabilities recorded in accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance
sheet as of january 31, 2010 (in thousands):
accrued
restructuring charges :
balance
at january 25, 2009
$
cash
payments
(186
)
balance
at january 31, 2010
$
-
restructuring and other expenses for fiscal year 2009 also included a
non-recurring charge of $18.9 million associated with the termination of a
development contract related to a new campus construction project that has been
put on hold.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
5  net income (loss) per share
the following is a reconciliation
of the numerators and denominators of the basic and diluted net income (loss)
per share computations for the periods presented:
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
(in
thousands, except per share data)
numerator:
net
income (loss)
$
(67,987
)
$
(30,041
)
$
797,645
denominator:
denominator
for basic net income (loss) per share, weighted average
shares
549,574
548,126
550,108
effect
of dilutive securities:
stock
options outstanding
-
-
56,624
denominator
for diluted net income (loss) per share, weighted average
shares
549,574
548,126
606,732
net
income (loss) per share:
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.12
)
$
(0.05
)
$
1.45
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.12
)
$
(0.05
)
$
1.31
all of our outstanding stock
options were anti-dilutive during fiscal years 2010 and 2009 and excluded from
the computation of diluted earnings per share due to the net loss for fiscal
years 2010 and 2009. diluted net income (loss) per share does not include the
effect of anti-dilutive common equivalent shares from stock options outstanding
of11.9 million for fiscal year 2008. the weighted average exercise price
of stock options excluded from the computation of diluted earnings per share was
$32.05 for fiscal year 2008.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
6 - 3dfx
during
fiscal year 2002, we completed the purchase of certain assets from 3dfx
interactive, inc., or 3dfx, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately
$74.2 million. on december 15, 2000, nvidia corporation and one of our indirect
subsidiaries entered into an asset purchase agreement, or the apa, which closed
on april 18, 2001, to purchase certain graphics chip assets from
3dfx.
in
october 2002, 3dfx filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the united
states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california. in march 2003,
the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to represent 3dfxs bankruptcy
estate served his complaint on nvidia.the trustees complaint
asserted claims for, among other things, successor liability and fraudulent
transfer and sought additional payments from us. in early november
2005, nvidia and the official committee of unsecured creditors, or the
creditors committee, agreed to a plan of liquidation of 3dfx, which included a
conditional settlement of the trustees claims against us. this conditional
settlement was subject to a confirmation process through a vote of creditors and
the review and approval of the bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement
called for a payment by nvidia of approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx
estate. under the settlement, $5.6 million related to various administrative
expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0 million related to the satisfaction of
debts and liabilities owed to the general unsecured creditors of 3dfx.
accordingly, during the three month period ended october 30, 2005, we recorded
$5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee advised that he intended to
object to the settlement.
the
conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed through the
confirmation process and the trustees case still remains pending
appeal.as such, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6 million
($5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as additional
purchase price for 3dfx) that we recorded during the three months ended october
30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees
case.
the 3dfx
asset purchase price of $95.0 million and $4.2 million of direct transaction
costs were allocated based on fair values presented below. the final allocation
of the purchase price of the 3dfx assets is contingent upon the outcome of all
of the 3dfx litigation. please refer to note 13 of these notes to the
consolidated financial statements for further information regarding this
litigation.
fair
market value
straight-line
amortization period
(in
thousands)
(years)
property
and equipment
$
2,433
1-2
trademarks
11,310
goodwill
85,418
-
total
$
99,161
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
7  business combinations
on february 10, 2008, we acquired ageia technologies, inc., or ageia, an
industry leader in gaming physics technology. the combination of the graphics
processing unit, or gpu, and physics engine brands is expected to enhance the
visual experience of the gaming world. the aggregate purchase price consisted of
total consideration of approximately $29.7 million.
we allocated the purchase price of this acquisition to tangible assets,
liabilities and identifiable intangible assets acquired, based on their
estimated fair values. the excess of purchase price over the aggregate fair
values was recorded as goodwill. the fair value assigned to identifiable
intangible assets acquired was based on estimates and assumptions made by
management. purchased intangibles are amortized on a straight-line basis over
their respective useful lives.
as of
january 31, 2010, the estimated fair values of the purchase price allocated to
assets we acquired and liabilities we assumed on the acquisition date were as
follows:
ageia
fair
market values
(inthousands)
cash
and cash equivalents
$
1,744
marketable
securities
accounts
receivable
prepaid
and other current assets
1,149
property
and equipment
goodwill
19,198
intangible
assets:
existing technology
13,450
customer relationships
trademark
total
assets acquired
37,719
current
liabilities
(6,969
)
acquisition
related costs
(1,030
)
total
liabilities assumed
(7,999
)
purchase
price allocation
$
29,720
ageia
(straight-line
depreciation/amortization period)
property
and equipment
1-2
years
intangible
assets:
existing technology
years
customer relationships
years
trademark
years
the pro forma results of operations for our acquisitions during fiscal years
2009 and 2008 have not been presented because the effects of the acquisitions,
individually or in the aggregate, were not material to our results.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
8 - goodwill
the
carrying amount of goodwill is as follows:
january31,
january25,
(in
thousands)
portalplayer
$
104,896
$
104,896
3dfx
75,326
75,326
mental
images
59,252
59,252
mediaq
35,167
35,167
uli
31,115
31,115
hybrid
graphics
27,906
27,906
ageia
19,198
19,198
other
16,984
16,984
total goodwill
$
369,844
$
369,844
goodwill
is subject to our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of our fiscal
year, or earlier if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair
value-based approach.we completed our most recent annual impairment
test during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2010 and concluded that there was
no impairment. in computing fair value of our reporting units, we use
estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows from such units. this
assessment is based upon a discounted cash flow analysis and analysis of our
market capitalization. the estimate of cash flow is based upon, among other
things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance such as
revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future
cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions,
and determination of appropriate market comparables.
the amount of goodwill allocated to our graphics processing unit, or gpu,
business, the professional solutions business, or psb, the media and
communications processor, or mcp, business, and the consumer products business,
or cpb segments as of january31, 2010 was $86.9 million, $95.1 million,
$46.2 million and $141.6 million, respectively.please refer to note
17of these notes to the consolidated financial statements for further
segment information.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
9 - amortizable intangible assets
the components of our amortizable intangible assets are as
follows:
january31,2010
january25,2009
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
netcarrying
amount
weighted
average useful life
gross
carrying
amount
accumulated
amortization
netcarrying
amount
weighted
average useful life
(in
thousands)
(in
years)
(in
thousands)
(in
years)
technology
licenses
$
135,112
$
(48,337
)
$
$86,775
6.3
$
130,654
$
(34,610
)
$
96,044
6.2
acquired
intellectual property
75,339
(49,838
)
25,501
3.8
75,340
(35,200
)
40,140
3.1
patents
19,347
(11,165
)
8,182
5.3
18,588
(7,671
)
10,917
5.5
total
intangible assets
$
229,798
$
$(109,340
)
$
$120,458
$
224,582
$
(77,481
)
$
147,101
amortization expense
associated with intangible assets for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 was $31.9
million, $32.6 million and $24.5 million,respectively. future amortization
expense for the net carrying amount of intangible assets at january31,
2010 is estimated to be $27.9 million in fiscal year 2011, $25.6 million in
fiscal year 2012, $19.0 million in fiscal year 2013, $14.6 million in fiscal
year 2014 and $33.4 million in fiscal years subsequent to fiscal year 2014 until
fully amortized.
note 10 - marketable
securities
all of
the cash equivalents and marketable securities are classified as
available-for-sale securities. investments in both fixed rate instruments and
floating rate interest earning instruments carry a degree of interest rate risk.
fixed rate debt securities may have their market value adversely impacted due to
a rise in interest rates, while floating rate securities may produce less income
than expected if interest rates fall. due in part to these factors, our future
investment income may fall short of expectations due to changes in interest
rates or if the decline in fair value of our publicly traded debt or equity
investments is judged to be other-than-temporary. we may suffer losses in
principal if we are forced to sell securities that decline in market value due
to changes in interest rates. however, because any debt securities we hold are
classified as available-for-sale, no gains or losses are realized in our
statement of operations due to changes in interest rates unless such securities
are sold prior to maturity or unless declines in market values are determined to
be other-than-temporary.these securities are reported at fair value
with the related unrealized gains and losses included in accumulated other
comprehensive income, a component of stockholders equity, net of
tax.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the
following is a summary of cash equivalents and marketable securities at
january31, 2010 and january25, 2009:
january31,
amortized
cost
unrealized
gain
unrealized
loss
estimated
fair
value
(in
thousands)
debt
securities of united statesgovernment agencies
$
492,628
$
3,606
$
(29
)
$
496,205
corporate
debt securities
514,200
4,064
(44
)
518,220
mortgage
backed securities issued by united states government-sponsored
enterprises
162,693
3,674
(13
)
166,353
money
market funds
94,339
-
-
94,340
debt
securities issued by united states treasury
316,520
1,318
-
317,838
asset-backed
securities
-
-
total
$
1,580,397
$
12,662
$
(86
)
$
1,592,973
classified
as:
cash
equivalents
$
311,967
marketable
securities
1,281,006
total
$
1,592,973
january25,
amortized
cost
unrealized
gain
unrealized
loss
estimated
fair
value
(in
thousands)
debt
securities of united statesgovernment agencies
$
313,319
$
4,815
$
(13
)
$
318,121
corporate
debt securities
252,265
(1,771
)
251,174
mortgage
backed securities issued by united states government-sponsored
enterprises
162,243
(1,405
)
161,199
money
market funds
139,046
-
-
139,046
debt
securities issued by united states treasury
110,402
1,870
-
112,272
asset-backed
securities
39,014
(227
)
38,858
total
$
1,016,289
$
7,797
$
(3,416
)
$
1,020,670
classified
as:
cash
equivalents
$
182,968
marketable
securities
837,702
total
$
1,020,670
the
following table provides the breakdown of the investments with unrealized losses
at january31, 2010:
less
than 12 months
months or greater
total
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
fair
value
gross
unrealized
losses
(in
thousands)
corporate
debt securities
$
205,679
$
(18
)
$
312,541
$
(25
)
$
518,220
$
(43
)
mortgage
backed securities issued by united states government-sponsored
enterprises
8,921
-
157,432
(13
)
166,353
(13
)
debt
securities of united states government agencies
339,862
(18
)
156,343
(12
)
496,205
(30
)
total
$
554,462
$
(36
)
$
626,316
$
(50
)
$
1,180,778
$
(86
)
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
we performed an impairment review of
our investment portfolio as of january 31, 2010.factors considered
included general market conditions, the duration and extent to which fair value
is below cost, and our intent and ability to hold an investment for a sufficient
period of time to allow for recovery in value.we also consider
specific adverse conditions related to the financial health of and business
outlook for an investee, including industry and sector performance, changes in
technology, operational and financing cash flow factors, and changes in an
investees credit rating. investments that we identify as having an indicator of
impairment are subject to further analysis to determine if the investment was
other than temporarily impaired. based on our quarterly impairment review and
having considered the guidance in the relevant accounting literature, we did not
record any other-than-temporary impairment charges during fiscal year
2010.we concluded that our investments were appropriately valued and
that no additional other than temporary impairment charges were necessary on our
portfolio of available for sale investments as of january 31, 2010.
as
of january 31, 2010 we had 25 investments that were in an unrealized loss
position with total unrealized losses amounting to $0.04 million and with a
duration of less than one year. the gross unrealized losses related to fixed
income securities were due to changes in interest rates.we have determined
that the gross unrealized losses on investment securities at january31,
2010 are temporary in nature. currently, we have the intent and ability to hold
our investments with impairment indicators until maturity.
as of
january 31, 2010, we held a money market investment in the reserve international
liquidity fund, ltd., or the international reserve fund, which was valued at
$13.0 million, net of $5.6 million of other than temporary impairment charges
that we recorded during fiscal year 2009. the international reserve fund was
reclassified out of cash and cash equivalents in ourconsolidated
balance sheet due to the halting of redemption requests in september 2008 by the
international reserve fund. the $13.0 million value of our holdings in the
international reserve fund as of january 31, 2010 reflects an initial investment
of $130.0 million, reduced by $111.4 million that we received from the
international reserve fund during fiscal year 2010 and the $5.6 million other
than temporary impairment charge we recorded against the value of this
investment during fiscal year 2009 as a result of credit loss. the $111.4
million we received was our portion of a payout of approximately 85.6% of the
total assets of the international reserve fund. all of the underlying securities
held by the international reserve fund had matured by october 2009. we expect to
ultimately receive the proceeds from our remaining investment in the
international reserve fund, excluding some or all of the $5.6 million impairment
charges. however, redemptions from the international reserve fund are currently
subject to pending litigation, which could cause further delay in receipt of our
funds.
net
realized gains, excluding any impairment charges, were $1.8 million and $2.1
million for fiscal year 2010 and 2009, respectively. net realized gains for
fiscal year 2008 were not material.as of january 31, 2010, we had a
net unrealized gain of $12.6 million, which was comprised of gross unrealized
gains of $12.7 million,offset by $.1 million of gross unrealized
losses.as of january 25, 2009, we had a net unrealized gain of $4.4
million, which was comprised of gross unrealized gains of $7.8
million,offset by $3.4 million of gross unrealized losses.
the
amortized cost and estimated fair value of cash equivalents and marketable
securities which are primarily debt instruments, are classified as
available-for-sale at january31, 2010 and january25, 2009 and are
shown below by contractual maturity.
january31,
january25,
amortized
cost
estimated
fair
value
amortized
cost
estimated
fair
value
(in
thousands)
less
than one year
$
785,642
$
788,825
$
484,869
$
484,616
due
in 1 - 5 years
729,885
738,124
369,177
374,855
mortgage-backed
securities issued by government-sponsored enterprises not due at a single
maturity date
64,870
66,024
162,243
161,199
total
$
1,580,397
$
1,592,973
$
1,016,289
$
1,020,670
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
11 - balance sheet components
certain balance sheet components are as follows:
january31,
january25,
inventories:
(in
thousands)
raw
materials
$
76,935
$
122,024
work
in-process
67,502
38,747
finished
goods
186,237
377,063
total
inventories
$
330,674
$
537,834
january31,
january25,
estimated
usefullife
(in
thousands)
(years)
property
and equipment:
land
$
217,372
$
217,866
(a)
building
29,223
29,216
3-25
test
equipment
261,172
234,368
software
and licenses
232,785
201,560
3-5
leasehold
improvements
143,649
136,008
(b)
computer
equipment
139,482
125,533
office
furniture and equipment
34,091
32,224
capital
leases
26,618
26,618
(c)
construction
in process
4,091
5,360
(d)
1,088,483
1,008,753
accumulated
depreciation and amortization
(516,625
)
(382,955
)
total
property and equipment, net
$
571,858
$
625,798
(a) land
is a non-depreciable asset.
(b)leasehold
improvements are amortized based on the lesser of either the assets estimated
useful life or the remaining lease term.
(c)capital
leases are amortized based on the lesser of either the assets estimated useful
life or the remaining lease term.
(d)construction
in process represents assets that are not in service as of the balance sheet
date.
depreciation
expense for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 was $164.8 million, $152.4 million
and $111.0 million, respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
january31,
january25,
prepaid
expenses and other
(in
thousands)
prepaid
maintenance
$
15,153
$
11,268
prepaid
insurance
5,389
5,400
prepaid
taxes
3,574
3,571
prepaid
rent
3,352
3,254
other
10,746
16,301
total prepaid expenses and other
$
38,214
$
39,794
january31,
january25,
deposits
and other assets
(in
thousands)
prepaid
maintenance, long term
$
15,432
$
20,005
lease
deposits
10,611
10,583
investment
in non-affiliates
6,630
6,412
other
10,255
3,026
total deposits and other assets
$
42,928
$
40,026
january31,
january25,
accrued
liabilities:
(in
thousands)
accrued
customer programs (1)
$
212,107
$
239,797
warranty
accrual (2)
92,655
150,631
accrued
payroll and related expenses
54,915
82,449
accrued
legal settlement (3)
30,600
30,600
deferred
rent
10,245
11,643
deferred
revenue
9,379
3,774
other
29,950
40,833
total accrued liabilities and other
$
439,851
$
559,727
(1)please
refer to note 1 of the notes to these consolidated financial statements for
discussion regarding the nature of accrued customer programs and their
accounting treatment related to our revenue recognition policies and
estimates.
(2)please
refer to note 12 of the notes to these consolidated financial statements for
discussion regarding the warranty accrual.
(3)please
refer to note 13 of the notes to these consolidated financial statements for
discussion regarding the 3dfx litigation.
january31,
january25,
other
long term liabilities:
(in
thousands)
deferred
income tax liability
$
17,739
$
75,252
income
tax payable
53,397
49,248
asset
retirement obligations
10,638
9,515
other
30,176
17,835
total other long-term liabilities
$
111,950
$
151,850
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
12 - guarantees
u.s.
gaap requires that upon issuance of a guarantee, the guarantor must recognize a
liability for the fair value of the obligation it assumes under that guarantee.
in addition, u.s. gaap requires disclosures about the guarantees that an entity
has issued, including a tabular reconciliation of the changes of the entitys
product warranty liabilities.
product defect
our
products are complex and may contain defects or experience failures due to any
number of issues in design, fabrication, packaging, materials and/or use within
a system. if any of our products or technologies contains a defect,
compatibility issue or other error, we may have to invest additional research
and development efforts to find and correct the issue.such efforts
could divert our managements and engineers attention from the development of
new products and technologies and could increase our operating costs and reduce
our gross margin. in addition, an error or defect in new products or releases or
related software drivers after commencement of commercial shipments could result
in failure to achieve market acceptance or loss of design wins. also, we may be
required to reimburse customers, including for customers costs to repair or
replace the products in the field, which could cause our revenue to decline. a
product recall or a significant number of product returns could be expensive,
damage our reputation and could result in the shifting of business to our
competitors. costs associated with correcting defects, errors, bugs or other
issues could be significant and could materially harm our financial
results.
during
fiscal year 2010, we recorded an additional net warranty charge of $95.8 million
against cost of revenue to cover anticipated customer warranty, repair, return,
replacement and other costs arising from a weak die/packaging material set in
certain versions of our previous generation products used in notebook systems.
this charge included an additional accrual of $164.4 million for related
estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of $68.6
million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal year
2010.during fiscal year 2009, we recorded a net warranty
charge of $189.3 million charge against cost of revenue for the purpose of
supporting the product repair costs of our affected customers around the
world.this charge included an accrual of $196.0 million for related
estimated costs, offset by reimbursements from insurance carriers of $6.7
million that we recorded against cost of revenue during fiscal year
2009.although the number of units that we estimate will be impacted
by this issue remains consistent with our initial estimates in july 2008, the
overall cost of remediation and repair of impacted systems has been higher than
originally anticipated.the weak die/packaging material combination
is not used in any of our products that are currently in
production.
the
previous generation mcp and gpu products that are impacted were included in a
number of notebook products that were shipped and sold in significant
quantities. certain notebook configurations of these products are failing in the
field at higher than normal rates. while we have not been able to determine with
certainty a root cause for these failures, testing suggests a weak material set
of die/package combination, system thermal management designs, and customer use
patterns are contributing factors. we have worked with our customers to develop
and have made available for download a software driver to cause the system fan
to begin operation at the powering up of the system and reduce the thermal
stress on these chips. we have also recommended to our customers that they
consider changing the thermal management of the products in their notebook
system designs. we intend to fully support our customers in their repair and
replacement of these impacted products that fail, and their other efforts to
mitigate the consequences of these failures.
in
september, october and november2008, several putative class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims related to the impacted
mcp and gpu products.please refer to note 13 of these notes to the
consolidated financial statements for further information regarding this
litigation.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
accrual for estimated product returns and product warranty
liabilities
we record a reduction to revenue for estimated product returns at the time
revenue is recognized primarily based on historical return rates. cost of
revenue includes the estimated cost of product warranties that are calculated at
the point of revenue recognition. under limited circumstances, we may offer an
extended limited warranty to customers for certain
products.additionally, we accrue for known warranty and
indemnification issues if a loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated.
the estimated product returns and estimated product warranty liabilities for
fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 are as follows:
january
31, 2010
january
25, 2009
january
27, 2008
(in
thousands)
balanceat
beginningof period
$
150,631
$
5,708
$
3,481
additions(1)
170,715
202,698
11,660
deductions(2)
(228,691
)
(57,775
)
(9,433
)
balanceat
end of period
$
92,655
$
150,631
$
5,708
(1)includes
$164.5 million and $196.0 million for fiscal year 2010 and fiscal year 2009,
respectively, for incremental repair and replacement costs from a weak
die/packaging material set.
(2)
includes $196.0 million and $37.5 million for fiscal year 2010 and fiscal year
2009, respectively, in payments related to the warranty accrual associated with
incremental repair and replacement costs from a weak die/packaging material
set.
in connection with certain agreements that we have executed in the past, we have
at times provided indemnities to cover the indemnified party for matters such as
tax, product and employee liabilities. we have also on occasion included
intellectual property indemnification provisions in our technology related
agreements with third parties. maximum potential future payments cannot be
estimated because many of these agreements do not have a maximum stated
liability. as such, we have not recorded any liability in our consolidated
financial statements for such indemnifications.u.s. gaap requires
that upon issuance of a guarantee, the guarantor must recognize a liability for
the fair value of the obligation it assumes under that guarantee. in
addition,
disclosures
about the guarantees that an entity has issued, including a tabular
reconciliation of the changes of the entitys product warranty liabilities are
also required.
note
13 - financial arrangements, commitments and contingencies
inventory purchase obligations
at january31, 2010 and january25, 2009, we had outstanding inventory
purchase obligations totaling $ 462.0 million and $290.7 million,
respectively.
capital purchase obligations
at january31, 2010 and january25, 2009, we had outstanding capital
purchase obligations totaling $25.2 million and $20.3 million,
respectively.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
lease obligations
our headquarters complex is located in santa clara, california and includes
eight buildings that are leased properties. the lease agreements for five of the
eight leased properties expire in fiscal year 2013 and include two seven-year
renewals at our option; one leased property expires in fiscal year 2012 with an
option to extend for one year; one leased properties expire in fiscal year 2011
with an option to extend for three years; and the remaining leased building
expires in fiscal year 2015 with an option to extend for seven
years.future minimum lease payments related to headquarter operating
leases total $64.1 million over the remaining terms of the leases, including
predetermined rent escalations, and are included in the future minimum lease
payment schedule below.
in addition to the commitment of our headquarters, we have other domestic and
international office facilities under operating leases expiring through fiscal
year 2018. future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating
leases as of january31, 2010, are as follows:
future
minimum lease obligations
(inthousands)
year
ending january:
$
46,905
47,944
15,930
9,628
6,158
and thereafter
18,395
total
$
144,960
rent expense for the years ended january 31, 2010, january 25, 2009 and january
27, 2008 was $46.2 million, $43.0 million and $38.2 million,
respectively.
in addition to these operating leases, we have a capital lease for a data center
in santa clara, california. future minimum lease payments under this capital
lease total $43.8 million over the remaining lease term, including predetermined
rent escalations, and are included in the future minimum lease payment schedule
below:
future
capital lease obligations
(inthousands)
year
ending january:
$
4,311
4,440
4,573
4,710
4,852
and thereafter
20,905
total
$
43,791
present
value of minimum lease payments
$
25,634
current
portion
$
1,184
long
term portion
$
24,450
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
litigation
3dfx
on
december 15, 2000, nvidia and one of our indirect subsidiaries entered into an
asset purchase agreement, or apa, to purchase certain graphics chip assets from
3dfx.the transaction closed on april 18, 2001.that
acquisition, and 3dfxs october 2002 bankruptcy filing, led to four lawsuits
against nvidia: two brought by 3dfxs former landlords, one by 3dfxs bankruptcy
trustee and the fourth by a committee of 3dfxs equity security holders in the
bankruptcy estate.
landlord
lawsuits.
in may
2002, we were served with a california state court complaint filed by the
landlord of 3dfxs san jose, california commercial real estate lease, carlyle
fortran trust, or carlyle. in december 2002, we were served with a california
state court complaint filed by the landlord of 3dfxs austin, texas commercial
real estate lease, carramerica realty corporation, or carramerica. the landlords
both asserted claims for, among other things, interference with contract,
successor liability and fraudulent transfer. the landlords sought to recover
damages in the aggregate amount of approximately $15 million, representing
amounts then owed on the 3dfx leases.the cases were later removed to
the united states bankruptcy court for the northern district of california when
3dfx filed its bankruptcy petition and consolidated for pretrial purposes with
an action brought by the bankruptcy trustee.
in 2005,
the u.s. district court for the northern district of california withdrew the
reference to the bankruptcy court for the landlords actions, and on november
10, 2005, granted our motion to dismiss both landlords
complaints.the landlords filed amended complaints in early february
2006, and nvidia again filed motions to dismiss those claims. on september 29,
2006, the district court dismissed the carramerica action in its entirety and
without leave to amend.on december 15, 2006, the district court also
dismissed the carlyle action in its entirety.both landlords filed
timely notices of appeal from those orders.
on july
17, 2008, the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit held oral
argument on the landlords appeals. on november 25, 2008, the court of
appeals issued its opinion affirming the dismissal of carlyles complaint in its
entirety.the court of appeals also affirmed the dismissal of most of
carramericas complaint, but reversed the district courts dismissal of
carramericas claims for interference with contractual relations and
fraud.on december 8, 2008, carlyle filed a request for rehearing
en banc, which
carramerica joined. that same day, carlyle also filed a motion for clarification
of the courts opinion.on january 22, 2009, the court of appeals
denied the request for rehearing en banc, but clarified its
opinion affirming dismissal of the claims by stating that carramerica had
standing to pursue claims for interference with contractual relations, fraud,
conspiracy and tort of another, and remanding carlyles case with instructions
that the district court evaluate whether the trustee had abandoned any claims,
which carlyle might have standing to pursue. on april 2, 2009, carlyle filed a
petitionfor a writ of certiorariin the united states supreme court,
seeking review of thecourt of appeals decision. we filed an
opposition to that petition on june 8, 2009.on october 5, 2009, the
us supreme court denied carlyles petition.
the
district court held a status conference in the carramerica and carlyle cases on
march 9, 2009.that same day, 3dfxs bankruptcy trustee filed in the
bankruptcy court a notice of trustees intention to compromise controversy with
carlyle fortran trust.according to that notice, the trustee would
abandon any claims it has against us for intentional interference with contract,
negligent interference with prospective economic advantage, aiding and abetting
breach of fiduciary duty, declaratory relief, unfair business practices and tort
of another, in exchange for which carlyle will withdraw irrevocably its proof of
claim against the 3dfx bankruptcy estate and waive any further right of
distribution from the estate.in light of the trustees notice, the
district court ordered the parties to seek a hearing on the notice on or before
april 24, 2009, ordered carlyle and carramerica to file amended complaints by
may 10, 2009, and set a further case management conference for may 18,
2009.the parties subsequently filed a stipulation requesting that
the district court vacate the may 18, 2009 case management conference date and
other deadlines until after bankruptcy court rendered its
decision.at a hearing on may 13, 2009, the bankruptcy court ruled
that the trustee had not abandoned any claims against us, and denied the
trustee's notice of intention to compromise controversy with carlyle fortran
trust without prejudice.carlyle filed a motion in the district
court for leave to file an interlocutory appeal from the order denying the
notice, which was denied on november 12, 2009.on january 13,
2010, the district court, of its own accord, reconsidered and reversed its
decision denying carlyles motion for leave to file an interlocutory appeal, and
has set the interlocutory appeal for hearing on april 26, 2010.
on july 7, 2009, the
parties attended a case management conference in the district court for both the
carramerica and the carlyle cases.on july 8, 2009, the district
court issued an order requiring that carramerica file an amended complaint on or
before august 10, 2009. carramerica filed its amended complaint on august 10,
2009, alleging claims for interference with contractual relations, fraud,
conspiracy, and tort of another. thereafter, we filed motions directed at
dismissing that fourth
nvidia corporation and
subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
amended
complaint, and carramerica responded by filing a fifth amended complaint.
nvidia moved to dismiss the fifth amended complaint, but the district court
denied that motion by order dated january 27, 2010.in that same
order, however, the court invited the parties to move for summary judgment and
set the motions for hearing on may 3, 2010.nvidia intends to prepare
and file such a motion.we continue to believe that there is no merit
to carlyle or carramericas remaining claims.
trustee
lawsuit.
in march
2003, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to represent 3dfxs
bankruptcy estate served his complaint on nvidia.the trustees
complaint asserts claims for, among other things, successor liability and
fraudulent transfer and seeks additional payments from us.the
trustees fraudulent transfer theory alleged that nvidia had failed to pay
reasonably equivalent value for 3dfxs assets, and sought recovery of the
difference between the $70 million paid and the alleged fair value, which the
trustee estimated to exceed $50 million.the trustees successor
liability theory alleged nvidia was effectively 3dfxs legal successor and was
therefore responsible for all of 3dfxs unpaid liabilities.this
action was consolidated for pretrial purposes with the landlord cases, as noted
above.
on
october 13, 2005, the bankruptcy court heard the trustees motion for summary
adjudication, and on december 23, 2005, denied that motion in all material
respects and held that nvidia may not dispute that the value of the 3dfx
transaction was less than $108 million. the bankruptcy court denied the
trustees request to find that the value of the 3dfx assets conveyed to nvidia
was at least $108 million.
in early
november 2005, after several months of mediation, nvidia and the official
committee of unsecured creditors, or the creditors committee, agreed to a plan
of liquidation of 3dfx, which included a conditional settlement of the trustees
claims against us. this conditional settlement was subject to a confirmation
process through a vote of creditors and the review and approval of the
bankruptcy court. the conditional settlement called for a payment by nvidia of
approximately $30.6 million to the 3dfx estate. under the settlement, $5.6
million related to various administrative expenses and trustee fees, and $25.0
million related to the satisfaction of debts and liabilities owed to the general
unsecured creditors of 3dfx. accordingly, during the three month period ended
october 30, 2005, we recorded $5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and
$25.0 million as additional purchase price for 3dfx.the trustee
advised that he intended to object to the settlement. the conditional settlement
never progressed substantially through the confirmation process.
on
december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court scheduled a trial for one portion of the
trustees case against nvidia. on january 2, 2007, nvidia terminated the
settlement agreement on grounds that the bankruptcy court had failed to proceed
toward confirmation of the creditors committees plan. a non-jury trial began
on march 21, 2007 on valuation issues in the trustees constructive fraudulent
transfer claims against nvidia. specifically, the bankruptcy court tried four
questions: (1) what did 3dfx transfer to nvidia in the apa?; (2) of what was
transferred, what qualifies as property subject to the bankruptcy courts
avoidance powers under the uniform fraudulent transfer act and relevant
bankruptcy code provisions?; (3) what is the fair market value of the property
identified in answer to question (2)?; and (4) was the $70 million that nvidia
paid reasonably equivalent to the fair market value of that property? the
parties completed post-trial briefing on may 25, 2007.
on april
30, 2008, the bankruptcy court issued its memorandum decision after trial, in
which it provided a detailed summary of the trial proceedings and the parties
contentions and evidence and concluded that the creditors of 3dfx were not
injured by the transaction.this decision did not entirely dispose
of the trustees action, however, as the trustees claims for successor
liability and intentional fraudulent conveyance were still
pending.on june 19, 2008, nvidia filed a motion for summary judgment
to convert the memorandum decision after trial to a final
judgment.that motion was granted in its entirety and judgment was
entered in nvidias favor on september 11, 2008.the trustee filed a
notice of appeal from that judgment on september 22, 2008, and on september 25,
2008, nvidia exercised its election to have the appeal heard by the united
states district court, where the appeal is pending.the
district courtshearing on the trustees appeal was
heldon june 10, 2009 and the appeal remains under
submission.
while the
conditional settlement reached in november 2005 never progressed through the
confirmation process, the trustees case still remains pending on
appeal.accordingly, we have not reversed the accrual of $30.6
million ($5.6 million as a charge to settlement costs and $25.0 million as
additional purchase price for 3dfx) that we recorded during the three months
ended october 30, 2005, pending resolution of the appeal of the trustees
case.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the
equity-committee lawsuit.
on
december 8, 2005, the trustee filed a form 8-k on behalf of 3dfx, disclosing the
terms of the conditional settlement agreement between nvidia and the creditors
committee. thereafter, certain 3dfx shareholders filed a petition with the
bankruptcy court to appoint an official committee to represent the claimed
interests of 3dfx shareholders. the court granted that petition and appointed an
equity securities holders committee, or the equity committee. the equity
committee thereafter sought and obtained an order granting it standing to bring
suit against nvidia, for the benefit of the bankruptcy estate, to compel nvidia
to pay the stock consideration then unpaid from the apa, and filed its own
competing plan of reorganization/liquidation. the equity committees plan
assumes that 3dfx can raise additional equity capital that would be used to
retire all of 3dfxs debts, and thus to trigger nvidias obligation to pay six
million shares of stock consideration specified in the apa. nvidia contends,
among other things, that such a commitment is not sufficient and that its
obligation to pay the stock consideration had long before been extinguished. on
may 1, 2006, the equity committee filed its lawsuit for declaratory relief to
compel nvidia to pay the stock consideration. in addition, the equity committee
filed a motion seeking bankruptcy court approval of investor protections for
harbinger capital partners master fund i, ltd., an equity investment fund that
conditionally agreed to pay no more than $51.5 million for preferred stock in
3dfx. the hearing on that motion was held on january 18, 2007, and the
bankruptcy court approved the proposed protections.
after the
bankruptcy court denied our motion to dismiss on september 6, 2006, the equity
committee again amended its complaint, and nvidia moved to dismiss that amended
complaint as well. on december 21, 2006, the bankruptcy court granted the motion
as to one of the equity committees claims, and denied it as to the others.
however, the bankruptcy court also ruled that nvidia would only be required to
answer the first three causes of action by which the equity committee seeks
determinations that (1) the apa was not terminated before 3dfx filed for
bankruptcy protection, (2) the 3dfx bankruptcy estate still holds some rights in
the apa, and (3) the apa is capable of being assumed by the bankruptcy
estate.
because
of the trial of the trustees fraudulent transfer claims against nvidia, the
equity committees lawsuit did not progress substantially in 2007.on
july 31, 2008, the equity committee filed a motion for summary judgment on its
first three causes of action.on september 15, 2008, nvidia filed a
cross-motion for summary judgment.on october 24, 2008, the court
held a hearing on the parties cross-motions for summary judgment.on
january 6, 2009, the bankruptcy court issued a memorandum decision granting
nvidias motion and denying the equity committees motion, and entered an order
to that effect on january 30, 2009. on february 27, 2009, the bankruptcy court
entered judgment in favor of nvidia. the equity committee has waived its right
to appeal by stipulation entered on february 18, 2009, and the judgment is now
final.
rambus
corporation
on
july 10, 2008, rambus corporation, or rambus, filed suit against nvidia
corporation, asserting patent infringement of 17 patents claimed to be owned by
rambus.rambus seeks damages, enhanced damages and injunctive
relief.the lawsuit was filed in the northern district of california
in san jose, california.on july 11, 2008, nvidia filed suit against
rambus in the middle district of north carolina asserting numerous claims,
including antitrust and other claims.nvidia seeks damages, enhanced
damages and injunctive relief.rambus has since dropped two patents
from its lawsuit in the northern district of california.the two
cases have been consolidated into a single proceeding in the northern district
of california.on april 13, 2009, the court issued an order staying
motion practice and allowing only document discovery to proceed.on
january 27, 2010, the court entered an order setting a case management
conference for march 12, 2010.
on
november 6, 2008, rambus filed a complaint alleging a violation of 19 u.s.c.
section 1337 based on a claim of patent infringement of nine rambus patents
against nvidia and 14 other respondents with the u.s. international trade
commission, or itc.rambus has subsequently withdrawn four of the
nine patents at issue.the complaint seeks an exclusion order barring
the importation of products that allegedly infringe the now five rambus
patents.the itc has instituted the investigation and a hearing was
held on october 13-20, 2009.the administrative law judge issued an
initial determination on january 22, 2009, which found the asserted claims of
two patents in one patent family infringed but invalid, and the asserted claims
of three patents in a separate patent family, valid, infringed and
enforceable.this decision will be reviewed by the
itc.the target date by which the itc will issue its final
determination is may 24, 2010.
rambus
has alsobeen subject to other proceedings in the european union.
nvidia is not a party to those proceedings. however, as a result of
thoseproceedings, for a period of five years from the date of the european
union resolution,rambus must now offer a license to memory controller
manufacturers, sellers and or companies that integrate memory controllers into
other products.the licenseterms areset forthin a
license made available on rambus' website.nvidia can choose to
accept those licenseterms at any time.
nvidia
intends to pursue its offensive and defensive cases vigorously in both
actions.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
product
defect litigation and securities cases
in
september, october and november 2008, several putative consumer class action
lawsuits were filed against us, asserting various claims arising from a weak
die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous generation mcp
and gpu products used in notebook systems.most of the lawsuits were
filed in federal court in the northern district of california, but three were
filed in state court in california, in federal court in new york, and in federal
court in texas.those three actions have since been removed or
transferred to the united states district court for the northern district of
california, san jose division, where all of the actions now are currently
pending.the various lawsuits are titled nakash v. nvidia corp.,
feinstein v. nvidia corp., inicom networks, inc. v. nvidia corp. and dell, inc.
and hewlett packard, olivos v. nvidia corp., dell, inc. and hewlett packard,
sielicki v. nvidia corp. and dell, inc., cormier v. nvidia corp., national
business officers association, inc. v. nvidia corp., and west v. nvidia
corp.the first amended complaint was filed on october 27, 2008,
which no longer asserted claims against dell, inc.the various
complaints assert claims for, among other things, breach of warranty, violations
of the consumer legal remedies act, business & professions code sections
17200 and 17500 and other consumer protection statutes under the laws of various
jurisdictions, unjust enrichment, and strict liability.
the
district court has entered orders deeming all of the above cases related under
the relevant local rules.on december 11, 2008, nvidia filed a motion
to consolidate all of the aforementioned consumer class action
cases.on february 26, 2009, the district court consolidated the
cases, as well as two other cases pending against hewlett-packard, under the
caption the nvidia gpu litigation and ordered the plaintiffs to file lead
counsel motions by march 2, 2009.on march 2, 2009, several of the
parties filed motions for appointment of lead counsel and briefs addressing
certain related issues.on april 10, 2009, the district court
appointed milberg llp lead counsel.on may 6, 2009, the plaintiffs
filed an amended consolidated complaint, alleging claims for violations of
california business and professions code section 17200, breach of implied
warranty under california civil code section 1792, breach of the implied
warranty of merchantability under the laws of 27 other states, breach of
warranty under the magnuson-moss warranty act, unjust enrichment, violations of
the new jersey consumer fraud act, strict liability and negligence, and
violation of californias consumer legal remedies act.on may 14,
2009, the district court entered a case schedule order, which set
aseptember 28, 2009 hearing date for an anticipated motion to dismiss, a
december 7, 2009 hearing date for anticipated class certification motion, and a
july 12, 2010 fact discovery deadline.the district court
subsequently entered an order resetting the hearing date for an anticipated
motion to dismiss for october 19, 2009, based on a stipulation of the
parties.the court heard arguments on nvidias motion to dismiss on
october 19, 2009, and took the matter under submission.
on november 19, 2009, the
court issued an order dismissing with prejudice plaintiffs causes of action for
breach of the implied warranty under the laws of 27 other states and unjust
enrichment, dismissing with leave to amend plaintiffs causes of action for
breach of implied warranty under california civil code section 1792 and breach
of warranty under the magnuson-moss warranty act, and denying nvidias motion to
dismiss as to the other causes of action.the court gave plaintiffs
until december 14, 2009 to file an amended complaint.on december 14,
2009, plaintiffs filed a second amended consolidated complaint, asserting claims
for violations of california business and professions code section 17200, breach
of implied warranty under california civil code section 1792, breach of warranty
under the magnuson-moss warranty act, violations of the new jersey consumer
fraud act, strict liability and negligence, and violation of californias
consumer legal remedies act.the second amended complaint seeks
unspecified damages.on january 19, 2010, we filed a motion to
dismiss the breach of implied warranty under california civil code section 1792,
breach of warranty under the magnuson-moss warranty act, and californias
consumer legal remedies act claims in the second amended consolidated
complaint..a hearing on this motion is currently scheduled for june
14, 2010.
in
september 2008, three putative securities class actions, or the actions, were
filed in the united states district court for the northern district of
california arising out of our announcements on july 2, 2008, that we would take
a charge against cost of revenue to cover anticipated costs and expenses arising
from a weak die/packaging material set in certain versions of our previous
generation mcp and gpu products and that we were revising financial guidance for
our second quarter of fiscal year 2009. the actions purport to be brought on
behalf of purchasers of nvidia stock and assert claims for violations of
sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended. on
october 30, 2008, the actions were consolidated under the caption in re nvidia
corporation securities litigation, civil action no. 08-cv-04260-jw (hrl). lead
plaintiffs and lead plaintiffs counsel were appointed on december 23, 2008. on
february 6, 2009, co-lead plaintiff filed a writ of mandamus with the ninth
circuit court of appeals challenging the designation of co-lead plaintiffs
counsel. on february 19, 2009, co-lead plaintiff filed with the district court,
a motion to stay the district court proceedings pending resolution of the writ
of mandamus by the ninth circuit. on february 24, 2009, judge ware granted the
stay. on november 5, 2009, the court of appeals issued an opinion reversing the
district courts appointment of one of the lead plaintiffs counsel, and
remanding the matter for further proceedings.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
on
december 8, 2009, the district court appointed milberg llp and kahn swick &
foti, llc as co-lead counsel.on january 22, 2010, plaintiffs filed a
consolidated amended class action complaint for violations of the federal
securities laws ("consolidated complaint"), asserting claims for violations of
section 10(b) of the securities exchange act, rule 10b-5, and section 20(a) of
the securities exchange act.the consolidated complaint seeks
unspecified compensatory damages.we filed a motion to dismiss the
consolidated complaint. a hearing on this motion is currently scheduled for june
14, 2010.
intel
corporation
on
february 17, 2009, intel corporation filed suit against nvidia corporation,
seeking declaratory and injunctive relief relating to a licensing agreement that
the parties signed in 2004.the lawsuit was filed in delaware
chancery court.intel seeks an order from the court declaring that
the license does not extend to certain nvidia chipset products, and enjoining
nvidia from stating that it has licensing rights for these products. the lawsuit
seeks no damages from nvidia.if intel successfully obtains such a
court order, we could be unable to sell our mcp products for use with certain
intel processors and our competitive position would be harmed.
on march
23, 2009, we filed our answer to intel's complaint and also asserted
counterclaims for declaratory relief, injunctive relief, breach of contract, and
breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.our
counterclaims seek an order declaring that nvidia has the right to sell certain
chipset products with intel's processors under the 2004 licensing agreement, and
enjoining intel from interfering with nvidia's licensing rights.in
addition, the counterclaims seek a finding that intel has materially breached
its obligations under the 2004 licensing agreement, and requests various
remedies for that breach, including termination of intel's cross licensing
rights.on april 16, 2009, intel filed its answer to our
counterclaims.
discovery
is proceeding and trial is scheduled to commence before vice chancellor strine
on august 23, 2010.nvidia disputes intels claims and intends
to vigorously defend these claims, as well as pursue its
counterclaims.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
14 - income taxes
the
income tax expense (benefit) applicable to income before income taxes consists
of the following:
yearended
january31,
january25,
january27,
(in
thousands)
current
income taxes:
federal
$
$
(31
)
$
(988
)
state
foreign
6,966
8,923
14,665
total
current
7,581
9,025
14,193
deferred
taxes:
federal
(22,013
)
(21,348
)
90,178
state
foreign
(1,929
)
(1,014
)
total
deferred
(21,147
)
(23,277
)
89,164
charge
in lieu of taxes attributable to employer stock option
plans
(741)
1,339
income tax expense
(benefit)
$
(14,307
)
$
(12,913
)
$
103,696
income (loss) before income taxes
consists of the following:
yearended
january31,
january25,
january27,
(in
thousands)
domestic
$
(245,137
)
$
(174,412
)
$
6,416
foreign
162,843
131,458
894,925
$
(82,294
)
$
(42,954
)
$
901,341
the
income tax expense (benefit) differs from the amount computed by applying the
federal statutory income tax rate of 35% to income (loss) before income taxes as
follows:
yearended
january31,
january25,
january27,
(in
thousands)
tax
expense computed at federal statutory rate
$
(28,803
)
$
(15,034
)
$
315,470
state
income taxes, net of federal tax effect
(196)
foreign
tax rate differential
26,902
18,875
(178,358
)
research
tax credit
(22,270
)
(22,766
)
(38,857
)
stock-based
compensation
10,114
5,342
4,828
other
(54
)
(287
)
income
tax expense (benefit)
$
(14,307
)
$
(12,913
)
$
103,696
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
the tax
effect of temporary differences that gives rise to significant portions of the
deferred tax assets and liabilities are presented below:
january31,
january25,
(in
thousands)
deferred
tax assets:
net
operating loss carryforwards
$
33,955
$
27,593
accruals
and reserves, not currently deductible for tax
purposes
14,027
26,015
property,
equipment and intangible assets
35,282
23,935
research
and other tax credit carryforwards
193,528
123,620
stock-based
compensation
40,202
55,680
gross deferred tax
assets
316,994
256,843
less:
valuation allowance
(113,442
)
(92,541
)
total
deferred tax assets
203,552
164,302
deferred
tax liabilities:
unremitted
earnings of foreign subsidiaries
(211,778
)
(223,223
)
net
deferred tax asset(liability)
$
(8,226
)
$
(58,921
)
income tax expense (benefit) as a
percentage of income (loss) before taxes, or our annual effective tax rate, was
17.4%, 30.0% and 11.5% for the fiscal years ended january 31, 2010, january 25,
2009 and january 27, 2008, respectively. the difference in the effective tax
rates amongst the three years was primarily a result of changes in our
geographic mix of income subject to tax, with the additional impact of the
federal research tax credit recognized in fiscal years 2010 and 2009 relative to
the loss before taxes in such fiscal years.
as of
january31, 2010, we had a valuation allowance of $113.4million
related to state and certain foreign deferred tax assets that management
determined not likely to be realized due, in part, to projections of future
taxable income and potential utilization limitations of tax attributes acquired
as a result of stock ownership changes.to the extent realization of
the deferred tax assets becomes more-likely-than-not,we would recognize
such deferred tax asset as an income tax benefit during the period the
realization occurred.
our
deferred tax assets do not include the excess tax benefit related to stock-based
compensation that are a component of our federal and state net operating loss
and research tax credit carryforwards in the amount of $401.5 million as of
january 31, 2010. consistent with prior years, the excess tax benefit reflected
in our net operating loss and research tax credit carryforwards will be
accounted for as a credit to stockholders equity, if and when
realized.in determining if and when excess tax benefits have been
realized, we have elected to utilize the with-and-without approach with respect
to such excess tax benefits. we have also elected to ignore the indirect tax
effects of stock-based compensation deductions for financial and accounting
reporting purposes, and specifically to recognize the full effect of the
research tax credit in income from continuing operations.
as of january31, 2010, we
had a federal net operating loss carryforward of $1.24 billion, combined state
net operating loss carryforwards of $852.3 million, and combined foreign net
operating loss carryforwards of $59.7 million. the federal net operating loss
carryforwards will expire beginning in fiscal year 2012 and the state net
operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in fiscal year 2011 in
accordance with the rules of each particular state.the foreign net
operating loss carryforwards, of which $53.4 million is attributable to germany,
may be carried forward indefinitely, and the remaining amount of $6.3 million
relates to other foreign jurisdictions that begin to expire in fiscal year 2011.
as of january31, 2010, we had federal research tax credit
carryforwards of $251.2 million that will begin to expire in fiscal year
2018.we have other federal tax credit carryforwards of $1.3 million
that will begin to expire in fiscal year 2011. the research tax credit
carryforwards attributable to states is in the amount of $241.7 million, of
which $233.4 million is attributable to the state of california and may be
carried over indefinitely, and $8.3 million is attributable to various other
states and will expire beginning in fiscal year 2011 according to the rules of
each particular state.we have other state tax credit carryforwards
of $5.5 million that will begin to expire in fiscal year 2011 and other foreign
tax credit carryforwards of $1.9 million that will begin to expire in fiscal
year 2013.our tax attributes, net operating loss and tax credit
carryforwards, remain subject to audit and may be adjusted for changes or
modification in tax laws, other authoritative interpretations thereof, or other
facts and circumstances.utilization of federal, state, and foreign
net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards may also be subject to
limitations due to ownership changes and other limitations provided by the
internal revenue code and similar state and foreign tax
provisions.if any such limitations apply, the federal,
states, or foreign net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, as
applicable, may expire or be denied before utilization.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
as of january 31, 2010,united statesfederal and state income taxes
have not been provided on approximately $787.4 million of undistributed earnings
of non-united statessubsidiaries as such earnings are considered to be
indefinitely reinvested.we have not provided the amount of
unrecognized deferred tax liabilities for temporary differences related to
investments in our foreign subsidiaries as the determination of such amount is
not practicable.
the company has a tax holiday in effect for its business operations in india
which will terminate in march 2011.this tax holiday provides for a
lower rate of taxation on certain classes of income based on various thresholds
of investment and employment in such jurisdiction.for fiscal year
2010, the tax savings of this holiday was approximately $1.1 million with no
material per-share impact.
as
of january 31, 2010, we had $109.8 million of unrecognized tax benefits, all of
which would affect our effective tax rate if recognized.however,
included in the unrecognized tax benefits that would affect our effective tax
rate if recognized of $109.8 million is $23.6 million and $2.1 million related
to state and foreign income tax, respectively, that, if recognized, would be in
the form of a carryforward deferred tax asset that would likely attract a full
valuation allowance.the $109.8 million of unrecognized tax benefits as of
january 31, 2010 consists of $42.2 million recorded in non-current income taxes
payable and $67.6 million reflected as a reduction to the related deferred tax
assets.
a reconciliation of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
january
31,
january
25,
january
27,
(inthousands)
balance
at beginning of period
$
95,319
$
77,791
$
57,544
increases
in tax positions for prior years
6,297
3,900
decreases
in tax positions for prior years
(131
)
(272
)
(433
)
increases
in tax positions for current year
18,342
13,622
21,716
settlements
(-
)
(181
)
(2,445
)
lapse
in statute of limitations
(4,116
)
(1,938
)
(2,491
)
balance
at end of period
$
109,765
$
95,319
$
77,791
we
classify an unrecognized tax benefit as a current liability, or as a reduction
of the amount of a net operating loss carryforward or amount refundable, to the
extent that we anticipate payment or receipt of cash for income taxes within one
year.likewise, the amount is classified as a long-term liability if
we anticipate payment or receipt of cash for income taxes during a period beyond
a year.
our
policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits
as a component of income tax expense.as of january 31, 2010 and
january 25, 2009, and january 27, 2008, we had accrued $11.2 million, $11.8
million, and $11.2 million, respectively, for the payment of interest and
penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, which is not included as a
component of our unrecognized tax benefits.as of january 31, 2010,
non-current income taxes payable of $53.4 million consists of unrecognized tax
benefits of $42.2 million and the related interest and penalties of $11.2
million.
while we
believe that we have adequately provided for all tax positions, amounts asserted
by tax authorities could be greater or less than our accrued position.
accordingly, our provisions on federal, state and foreign tax-related matters to
be recorded in the future may change as revised estimates are made or the
underlying matters are settled or otherwise resolved. as of january 31, 2010, we
do not believe that our estimates, as otherwise provided for, on such tax
positions will significantly increase or decrease within the next twelve
months.
we are subject to taxation by a number of taxing authorities both in the united
states and throughout the world. as of january 31, 2010, the material tax
jurisdictions that are subject to examination include the united states, hong
kong, taiwan, china, india, and germany and include our fiscal years 2003
through 2010. as of january 31, 2010, the material tax jurisdictions for which
we are currently under examination include india for fiscal years 2003 through
2007 and germany for fiscal years 2004 through 2006.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
15 - stockholders equity
stock repurchase
program
our board
of directors has authorized us, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase
shares of our common stock up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7 billion
through may 2010.the repurchases will be made from time to time in the
open market, in privately negotiated transactions, or in structured stock
repurchase programs, and may be made in one or more larger repurchases, in
compliance with rule 10b-18 of the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended,
subject to market conditions, applicable legal requirements, and other factors.
the program does not obligate nvidia to acquire any particular amount of common
stock and the program may be suspended at any time at our discretion.as
part of our share repurchase program, we have entered into, and we may continue
to enter into, structured share repurchase transactions with financial
institutions. these agreements generally require that we make an up-front
payment in exchange for the right to receive a fixed number of shares of our
common stock upon execution of the agreement, and a potential incremental number
of shares of our common stock, within a pre-determined range, at the end of the
term of the agreement.
we did
not enter into any structured share repurchase transactions or otherwise
purchase any shares of our common stock during fiscal year 2010.through
january 31, 2010, we have repurchased an aggregate of 90.9 million shares under
our stock repurchase program for a total cost of
$1.46billion.as of january 31, 2010, we are authorized,
subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our common stock up
to an additional amount of $1.24 billion through may 2010.
please
refer to notes 2 and 3 of these notes to the consolidated financial statements
for further information regarding stock-based compensation related to our march
2009 stock option purchase and related to equity awards granted under our equity
incentive programs.
convertible
preferred stock
as of january31, 2010 and
january25, 2009, there were no shares of preferred stock
outstanding.
common
stock
at the annual meeting of stockholders
held on june 19, 2008, our stockholders approved an increase in our authorized
number of shares of common stock to 2,000,000,000. the par value of our common
stock remained unchanged at $0.001 per share.
please refer to note 2 of these notes
to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding the
cash tender offer for certain employee stock options completed in march
2009.
note
16 - employee retirement plans
we have a 401(k)
retirement plan, or the 401(k) plan, covering substantially all of our united
states employees. under the plan, participating employees may defer up to 100%
of their pre-tax earnings, subject to the internal revenue service annual
contribution limits.some of our non-us subsidiaries have defined
benefit and defined contributions plans as required by local statutory
requirements.our costs under these plans have not been
material.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
17 - segment information
our chief
executive officer, who is considered to be our chief operating decision maker,
or codm, reviews financial information presented on an operating segment basis
for purposes of making operating decisions and assessing financial
performance.
during
the last several fiscal years, we have operated and reported four major
product-line operating segments to our codm: the gpu business, the psb, the mcp,
business, and the cpb. however, effective with the first quarter of fiscal year
2011, we will no longer separate our mcp and gpu operating segments as such
segmentation will no longer be reflective of the way we manage those businesses.
our gpu business is comprised primarily of our geforce products that support
desktop and notebook personal computers, or pcs, plus memory products. our psb
is comprised of our quadro professional workstation products and other
professional graphics products, including our nvidia tesla high-performance
computing products. our mcp business, as we have reported it through fiscal year
2010, has been comprised of our ion motherboard gpus, or mgpu products. our cpb
is comprised of our tegra mobile brand and products that support tablets and
smartbooks, smartphones, personal media players, or pmps, internet television,
automotive navigation, and other such devices. cpb also includes license,
royalty, other revenue and associated costs related to video game consoles and
other digital consumer electronics devices.
in
addition to these operating segments, we have the all other category that
includes human resources, legal, finance, general administration, corporate
marketing expenses, charges related to the stock option purchase, restructuring
charges and certain vendor price credits not allocated to specific operating
segments all of which total $386.1 million, $346.1 million and $266.2 million
for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively, that we do not allocate to
our other operating segments as these expenses are not included in the segment
operating performance measures evaluated by our codm. all other also includes
the results of operations of other miscellaneous reporting segments that are
neither individually reportable, nor aggregated with another operating
segment.revenue in the all other category is primarily derived
from sales of components. certain prior period amounts have been revised
to conform to the presentation of our current fiscal year.
our codm
does not review any information regarding total assets on an operating segment
basis. operating segments do not record intersegment revenue, and, accordingly,
there is none to be reported.the accounting policies for segment reporting
are the same as for nvidia as a whole.
gpu
psb
mcp
cpb
all
other
consolidated
(in
thousands)
year
ended january31, 2010:
revenue
$
1,764,684
$
510,223
$
871,606
$
163,878
$
16,054
$
3,326,445
depreciation
and amortization expense
$
60,102
$
20,279
$
38,209
$
16,710
$
61,379
$
196,679
operating
income (loss)
$
1,456
$
190,084
$
96,033
$
(14,195
)
$
(372,323
)
$
(98,945
)
year
ended january25, 2009:
revenue
$
1,912,262
$
693,376
$
655,565
$
136,334
$
27,322
$
3,424,859
depreciation
and amortization expense
$
55,405
$
21,587
$
32,442
$
19,372
$
56,217
$
185,023
operating
income (loss)
$
122,111
$
322,514
$
(132,921
)
$
(24,293
)
$
(358,111
)
$
(70,700
)
year
ended january27, 2008:
revenue
$
2,518,281
$
588,358
$
710,353
$
251,137
$
29,731
$
4,097,860
depreciation
and amortization expense
$
38,272
$
9,596
$
28,409
$
21,482
$
37,715
$
135,474
operating
income (loss)
$
717,985
$
305,395
$
57,214
$
28,104
$
(272,352
)
$
836,346
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
revenue
by geographic region is allocated to individual countries based on the location
to which the products are initially billed even if our customers revenue is
attributable to end customers that are located in a different location. the
following tables summarize information pertaining to our revenue from customers
based on invoicing address in different geographic regions:
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
revenue:
(in
thousands)
china
$
1,304,196
$
1,087,739
$
1,256,209
taiwan
883,137
974,077
1,293,645
other
asia pacific
406,286
601,480
662,448
europe
203,760
321,117
438,321
united
states
248,793
309,540
341,670
other
americas
280,273
130,906
105,567
total
revenue
$
3,326,445
$
3,424,859
$
4,097,860
the following table presents
summarized information for long-lived assets by geographic region. long lived
assets consist of property and equipment and deposits and other assets and
exclude goodwill and intangible assets.
january31,
january25,
long-lived
assets:
(in
thousands)
united
states
$
468,568
$
500,162
taiwan
69,051
81,761
china
39,124
42,969
india
32,070
29,639
europe
5,603
6,865
other
asia pacific
2,500
other
americas
-
1,928
total long-lived
assets
$
614,786
$
665,824
revenue from significant
customers, those representing 10% or more of total revenue for the respective
dates, is summarized as follows:
year
ended
january31,
january25,
january27,
revenue:
customer
a
%
%
%
customer
b
%
%
%
customer
c
%
%
%
accounts receivable from
significant customers, those representing 10% or more of total accounts
receivable for the respective periods, is summarized as follows:
january31,
january25,
accounts
receivable:
customer
a
%
%
customer
b
%
%
customer
c
%
%
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
note
18  fair value of cash equivalents and marketable securities
we measure our cash equivalents and marketable securities at fair value. the
fair values of our financial assets and liabilities are determined using quoted
market prices of identical assets or quoted market prices of similar
assetsfrom active markets. level1 valuations are obtained from
real-time quotes for transactions in active exchange markets involving identical
assets. level2 valuations are obtained from quoted market prices in active
markets involving similar assets. level 3 valuations are based on unobservable
inputs to the valuation methodology and include our own data about assumptions
market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability based on the
best information available under the circumstances.
financial
assets and liabilities measured at fair value are summarized below:
fair
value measurement at reporting date using
quotedpricesin
active markets for identical assets
significant
other observable inputs
high
level of judgment
january
31, 2010
(level
1)
(level
2)
(level
3)
(in
thousands)
other
debt securities issued by u.s. government agencies
(1)
$
496,205
$
-
$
496,205
$
-
corporate
debt securities (2)
518,220
-
518,220
-
mortgage-backed
securities issued by government-sponsored entities
(3)
166,353
-
166,353
-
money
market funds (4)
94,339
81,380
12,959
-
-
debt
securities issued by united states treasury (5)
317,839
-
317,839
-
asset-backed
securities (3)
-
-
total
assets
$
1,592,973
$
81,380
$
1,498,634
$
12,959
(1)includes
$92.7.million in cash equivalents and $403.5million in marketable securities on
the consolidated balance sheet.
(2)includes
$72.4 million in cash equivalents and $445.8 million in marketable securities on
the consolidated balance sheet.
(3)included
in marketable securities on the consolidated balance sheet.
(4)includes
$81.3 million in cash equivalents and $13.0 million in marketable securities on
the consolidated balance sheet.
(5)includes
$65.5 million in cash equivalents and $252.3 million in marketable securities on
the consolidated balance sheet.
for our
money market funds that were held by the international reserve fund at january
31, 2010, we assessed the fair value of the money market funds by considering
the underlying securities held by the international reserve fund. as the
international reserve fund has halted redemption requests and is currently
believed to be holding all of their securities until maturity, we valued the
underlying securities held by the international reserve fund at their maturity
value using an income approach. certain of the debt securities held by the
international reserve fund were issued by companies that had filed for
bankruptcy during fiscal year 2009 and, as such, our valuation of those
securities was zero. the net result was that, during the third quarter of fiscal
year 2009, we estimated the fair value of the international reserve funds
investments to be 95.7% of their last-known value and we recorded an other than
temporary impairment charge of $5.6 million as a result of credit loss. the
$18.7 million value of our holdings in the international reserve fund as of
january 31, 2010 reflects an initial investment of $130.0 million, reduced by
$111.4 million that we received from the international reserve fund during
fiscal year 2010 and the $5.6 million other than temporary impairment charge we
recorded against the value of this investment during fiscal year 2009 as a
result of credit loss. due to the inherent subjectivity and the significant
judgment involved in the valuation of our holdings of international reserve
fund, we have classified these securities under the level 3 fair value
hierarchy.
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
reconciliation of financial assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis
using significant unobservable inputs, or level 3 inputs (in
thousands):
year
ended
january
31, 2010
balance,
beginning of period
$
124,400
transfer
into level 3
-
other
than temporary impairment
-
redemption
of funds
(111,441)
balance,
end of period
$
12,959
total financial assets at fair
value classified within level 3 were 0.4% of total assets on our consolidated
balance sheet as of january 31, 2010.
note
19  subsequent event
our board
of directors has authorized us, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase
shares of our common stock up to an aggregate maximum amount of $2.7 billion
through may 2010. through january 31, 2010, we have repurchased an
aggregate of 90.9 million shares under our stock repurchase program for a total
cost of $1.46billion.as of january 31, 2010, we are
authorized, subject to certain specifications, to repurchase shares of our
common stock up to an additional amount of $1.24 billion through may 2010.
on march 16, 2010, our board of directors further authorized an extension of the
stock repurchase program from may 2010 to may 2013.
the
repurchases will be made from time to time in the open market, in privately
negotiated transactions, or in structured stock repurchase programs, and may be
made in one or more larger repurchases, in compliance with rule 10b-18 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, subject to market conditions,
applicable legal requirements, and other factors. the program does not obligate
nvidia to acquire any particular amount of common stock and the program may be
suspended at any time at our discretion.as part of our share repurchase
program, we have entered into, and we may continue to enter into, structured
share repurchase transactions with financial institutions. these agreements
generally require that we make an up-front payment in exchange for the right to
receive a fixed number of shares of our common stock upon execution of the
agreement, and a potential incremental number of shares of our common stock,
within a pre-determined range, at the end of the term of the
agreement.
note
20 - quarterly summary (unaudited)
the
following table sets forth our unaudited consolidated financial results, for the
last eight fiscal quarters ended january31, 2010.
fiscal
year 2010
quarters
ended
january
31, 2010
october
25, 2009 (a)
july
26, 2009 (b, c)
april
26, 2009 (d)
(in
thousands, except per share data)
statement
of operations data:
revenue
$
982,488
$
903,206
$
776,520
$
664,231
cost
of revenue
$
543,767
$
511,423
$
619,797
$
474,535
gross
profit
$
438,721
$
391,783
$
156,723
$
189,696
net
income (loss)
$
131,076
$
107,577
$
(105,302
)
$
(201,338)
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
0.24
$
0.20
$
(0.19
)
$
(0.37)
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
0.23
$
0.19
$
(0.19
)
$
(0.37)
nvidia
corporation and subsidiaries
notes
to the consolidated financial statements
(continued)
fiscal
year 2009
quarters
ended
january
25, 2009
(e,
f)
october
26, 2008
(g,
h)
july
27, 2008
(i)
april
27, 2008
(in
thousands, except per share data)
statement
of operations data:
revenue
$
481,140
$
897,655
$
892,676
$
1,153,388
cost
of revenue
$
339,474
$
529,812
$
742,759
$
638,545
gross
profit
$
141,666
$
367,843
$
149,917
$
514,843
net
income (loss)
$
(147,665
)
$
61,748
$
(120,929
)
$
176,805
basic
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.27
)
$
0.11
$
(0.22
)
$
0.32
diluted
net income (loss) per share
$
(0.27
)
$
0.11
$
(0.22
)
$
0.30
(a)
included
$25.1 million benefit from an insurance provider as reimbursement for some
claims against us towards the cost arising from a weak die/packaging
material set. portions of the reimbursement are allocated to cost of
revenue ($24.1 million) and legal expense ($1.0
million).
(b)
included
$164.4 million warranty charge against cost of revenue arising from a weak
die/packaging material set.
(c)
included
$45.4 million benefit from an insurance provider as reimbursement for some
claims against us towards the cost arising from a weak die/packaging
material set.portions of the reimbursement are allocated to
cost of revenue ($44.5 million) and legal expense ($0.9
million).
(d)
included
non-recurring charges of $140.2 million for the stock option purchase
completed in march 2009 related to personnel associated with cost of
revenue, research and development and sales, general and administrative of
$11.4 million, $90.5 million, and $38.3 million,
respectively.
(e)
included
$18.9 million for a non-recurring charge related to a termination of
development contract related to a new campus construction project we have
put on hold.
(f)
included
$8.0 million benefit from an insurance provider as reimbursement for some
claims against us towards the cost arising from a weak die/packaging
material set.
(g)
included
$4.5 million charge towards non-recurring charge related to a royalty
dispute.
(h)
included
$8.3 million towards restructuring
charges.
(i)
included
$196.0 million warranty charge against cost of revenue arising from a weak
die/packaging material set.
nvidia corporation and subsidiaries
schedule
ii - valuation and qualifying accounts
description
balanceat
beginning
of
period
additions
deductions
balance
at
end
of period
(in
thousands)
year
ended january31, 2010
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
1,062
$
(1)
$
(651
)
(2)
$
sales
return allowance
$
17,336
$
24,790
(3)
$
(26,757
)(4)
$
15,369
deferred
tax valuation allowance
$
92,541
$
20,901
(5)
$
-
$
113,442
year
ended january25, 2009
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
$
(1)
$
(514
)(2)
$
1,062
sales
return allowance
$
18,724
$
27,859
(3)
$
(29,247
)(4)
$
17,336
deferred
tax valuation allowance
$
82,522
$
10,019
(5)
$
-
$
92,541
year
ended january27, 2008
allowance
for doubtful accounts
$
1,271
$
(1)
$
(808)
(2)
$
sales
return allowance
$
14,478
$
25,536
(3)
$
(21,290
)
(4)
$
18,724
deferred
tax valuation allowance
$
68,563
$
13,959
(5)
$
-
$
82,522
(1)allowances
for doubtful accounts are charged to expenses.
(2)represents
uncollectible accounts written off against the allowance for doubtful
accounts.
(3)
represents allowance for sales returns estimated at the time revenue is
recognized primarily based on historical return rates and is charged as a
reduction to revenue.
(4)
represents allowance for sales returns written off.
(5)represents
change in valuation allowance primarily related to state deferred tax assets
that management has determined not likely to be realized due, in part, to
projections of future state taxable income.
exhibit index
incorporated
by reference
exhibit
no.
exhibit
description
schedule/form
file
number
exhibit
filing
date
2.1
agreement
and plan of merger by and among nvidia corporation, partridge acquisition,
inc. and portalplayer, inc. dated 11/6/06
8-k
0-23985
2.1
11/9/2006
3.1
amended
and restated certificate of incorporation
s-8
333-74905
4.1
3/23/1999
3.2
certificate
of amendment of amended and restated certificate of
incorporation
10-q
0-23985
3.1
8/21/2008
3.3
bylaws
of nvidia corporation, amended and restated as of february 12,
8-k
0-23985
3.1
2/19/2009
4.1
reference
is made to exhibits 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3
4.2
specimen
stock certificate
s-1/a
333-47495
4.2
4/24/1998
10.1
form
of indemnity agreement between nvidia corporation and each of its
directors and officers
8-k
0-23985
10.1
3/7/2006
10.2+
equity incentive plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.2
3/13/2006
10.3+
equity incentive plan iso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.5
11/22/2004
10.4+
equity incentive plan nso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.6
11/22/2004
10.5+
certificate
of stock option grant
10-q
0-23985
10.7
11/22/2004
10.6+
non-employee directors stock option plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/3/2006
10.7+
non-employee directors stock option plan (annual grant - board service),
as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.1
11/22/2004
10.8+
non-employee directors stock option plan (committee grant - committee
service), as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.2
11/22/2004
10.9+
non-employee directors stock option plan (initial grant)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
11/22/2004
10.10+
employee stock purchase plan, as amended and restated
10-q
0-23985
10.2
5/22/2008
10.11+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan, as amended
sc
to-1
005-56649
99(d)(1)(a)
11/29/2006
10.12+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan nso
sc
to-1
005-56649
99.1(d)(1)(b)
11/29/2006
10.13+
portalplayer,
inc. 1999 stock option plan and form of agreements thereunder
s-8
333-140021
99.1
1/16/2007
10.14+
portalplayer,
inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan
s-8
333-140021
99.2
1/16/2007
10.15+
equity incentive plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
6/27/2007
10.16+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant - board
service)
10-q
0-23985
10.2
8/22/2007
10.17+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant -
committee service)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
8/22/2007
10.18+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (initial grant  board
service)
10-q
0-23985
10.4
8/22/2007
10.19+
equity incentive plan  non-statutory stock option (annual grant - board
and committee service)
10-q
0-23985
10.1
8/20/2009
10.20+*
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option
10.21+*
equity incentive plan - incentive stock option
10.22+*
equity incentive plan  restricted stock unit grant notice and restricted
stock unit purchase agreement
10.23+
fiscal
year 2009 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/5/2007
10.24+
fiscal
year 2010 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/8/2009
10.25+
david
l. white offer letter, dated january 28, 2009
8-k
0-23985
10.1
2/27/2009
10.26
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building a
s-3/a
333-33560
10.1
4/20/2000
10.27
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building b
s-3/a
333-33560
10.2
4/20/2000
10.28
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c
s-3/a
333-33560
10.3
4/20/2000
10.29
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building d
s-3/a
333-33560
10.4
4/20/2000
10.30
amended
and restated agreement of purchase and sale by and between harvest-granite
san tomas llc and harvest 2400, llc dated january 31, 2008
10-q
0-23985
10.3
5/22/2008
21.1*
list
of registrants subsidiaries
23.1*
consent
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
24.1*
power
of attorney (included in signature page)
31.1*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
31.2*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.1#*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.2#*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
101.ins*
xbrl
instance document
101.sch*
xbrl
taxonomy extension schema document
101.cal*
xbrl
taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document
101.def*
xbrl
taxonomy extension definition linkbase document
101.lab*
xbrl
taxonomy extension labels linkbase document
101.pre*
xbrl
taxonomy extension presentation linkbase
document
*filed
herewith.
+management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
#in
accordance with item601(b)(32)(ii)of regulation s-k and sec release
nos. 33-8238 and 34-47986, final rule: managements reports on internal control
over financial reporting and certification of disclosure in exchange act
periodic reports, the certifications furnished in exhibits 32.1 and 32.2 hereto
are deemed to accompany this form10-k and will not be deemed filed for
purpose of section18 of the exchange act. such certifications will not be
deemed to be incorporated by reference into any filing under the securities act
or the exchange act, except to the extent that the registrant specifically
incorporates it by reference.
pursuant to
applicable securities laws and regulations, the company is deemed to have
complied with the reporting obligation relating to the submission of interactive
data files in such exhibits and is not subject to liability under any anti-fraud
provisions of the federal securities laws as long as the company has made a good
faith attempt to comply with the submission requirements and promptly amends the
interactive data files after becoming aware that the interactive data files
fails to comply with the submission requirements. users of this data are advised
that, pursuant to rule 406t, these interactive data files are deemed not filed
and otherwise are not subject to liability.
copies of above exhibits not
contained herein are available to any stockholder upon written request to:
investor relations: nvidia corporation, 2701 san tomas expressway, santa clara,
ca95050.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 or 15(d) of the securities
exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on
its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on march 17,
2010.
nvidia
corporation
by:
/s/
jen-hsun huang
jen-hsun
huang
president
and chief executive officer
power
of attorney
know all persons by these presents, that each person whose signature appears
below constitutes and appoints jen-hsun huang and david l. white, and each or
any one of them, his true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power
of substitution and resubstitution, for him and in his name, place and stead, in
any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments (including posting
effective amendments) to this report, and to file the same, with all exhibits
thereto, and other documents in connection therewith, with the securities and
exchange commission, granting unto said attorneys-in-facts and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing
requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully to all
intents and purposes as he might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and
confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or any of them, or their
or his substitutes or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue
hereof.
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report
has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and
in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/
jen-hsun huang
president,
chief executive officer and director
(principal
executive officer)
march
17, 2010
jen-hsun
huang
/s/
david l. white
executive
vice president and chief financial officer
(principal
financial and accounting officer)
march
17, 2010
david
l. white
/s/
tench coxe
director
march
17, 2010
tench
coxe
/s/
mark stevens
director
march
17, 2010
mark
stevens
/s/
james c. gaither
director
march
17, 2010
james
c. gaither
/s/
harvey c. jones
director
march
17, 2010
harvey
c. jones
/s/
mark l. perry
director
march
17, 2010
mark
l. perry
/s/
william j. miller
director
march
17, 2010
william
j. miller
/s/
a. brooke seawell
director
march
17, 2010
a. brooke
seawell
exhibit
index
incorporated
by reference
exhibit
no.
exhibit
description
schedule/form
file
number
exhibit
filing
date
2.1
agreement
and plan of merger by and among nvidia corporation, partridge acquisition,
inc. and portalplayer, inc. dated 11/6/06
8-k
0-23985
2.1
11/9/2006
3.1
amended
and restated certificate of incorporation
s-8
333-74905
4.1
3/23/1999
3.2
certificate
of amendment of amended and restated certificate of
incorporation
10-q
0-23985
3.1
8/21/2008
3.3
bylaws
of nvidia corporation, amended and restated as of february 12,
8-k
0-23985
3.1
2/19/2009
4.1
reference
is made to exhibits 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3
4.2
specimen
stock certificate
s-1/a
333-47495
4.2
4/24/1998
10.1
form
of indemnity agreement between nvidia corporation and each of its
directors and officers
8-k
0-23985
10.1
3/7/2006
10.2+
equity incentive plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.2
3/13/2006
10.3+
equity incentive plan iso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.5
11/22/2004
10.4+
equity incentive plan nso, as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.6
11/22/2004
10.5+
certificate
of stock option grant
10-q
0-23985
10.7
11/22/2004
10.6+
non-employee directors stock option plan, as amended
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/3/2006
10.7+
non-employee directors stock option plan (annual grant - board service),
as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.1
11/22/2004
10.8+
non-employee directors stock option plan (committee grant - committee
service), as amended
10-q
0-23985
10.2
11/22/2004
10.9+
non-employee directors stock option plan (initial grant)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
11/22/2004
10.10+
employee stock purchase plan, as amended and restated
10-q
0-23985
10.2
5/22/2008
10.11+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan, as amended
sc
to-1
005-56649
99(d)(1)(a)
11/29/2006
10.12+
nonstatutory equity incentive plan nso
sc
to-1
005-56649
99.1(d)(1)(b)
11/29/2006
10.13+
portalplayer,
inc. 1999 stock option plan and form of agreements thereunder
s-8
333-140021
99.1
1/16/2007
10.14+
portalplayer,
inc. amended and restated 2004 stock incentive plan
s-8
333-140021
99.2
1/16/2007
10.15+
equity incentive plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
6/27/2007
10.16+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant - board
service)
10-q
0-23985
10.2
8/22/2007
10.17+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (annual grant -
committee service)
10-q
0-23985
10.3
8/22/2007
10.18+
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option (initial grant  board
service)
10-q
0-23985
10.4
8/22/2007
10.19+
equity incentive plan  non-statutory stock option (annual grant - board
and committee service)
10-q
0-23985
10.1
8/20/2009
10.20+*
equity incentive plan - non statutory stock option
10.21+*
equity incentive plan - incentive stock option
10.22+*
equity incentive plan  restricted stock unit grant notice and restricted
stock unit purchase agreement
10.23+
fiscal
year 2009 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/5/2007
10.24+
fiscal
year 2010 variable compensation plan
8-k
0-23985
10.1
4/8/2009
10.25+
david
l. white offer letter, dated january 28, 2009
8-k
0-23985
10.1
2/27/2009
10.26
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building a
s-3/a
333-33560
10.1
4/20/2000
10.27
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building b
s-3/a
333-33560
10.2
4/20/2000
10.28
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building c
s-3/a
333-33560
10.3
4/20/2000
10.29
lease
dated april 4, 2000 between nvidia corporation and sobrato interests iii
for building d
s-3/a
333-33560
10.4
4/20/2000
10.30
amended
and restated agreement of purchase and sale by and between harvest-granite
san tomas llc and harvest 2400, llc dated january 31, 2008
10-q
0-23985
10.3
5/22/2008
21.1*
list
of registrants subsidiaries
23.1*
consent
of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
24.1*
power
of attorney (included in signature page)
31.1*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
31.2*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(a) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.1#*
certification
of chief executive officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
32.2#*
certification
of chief financial officer as required by rule 13a-14(b) of the securities
exchange act of 1934
101.ins*
xbrl
instance document
101.sch*
xbrl
taxonomy extension schema document
101.cal*
xbrl
taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document
101.def*
xbrl
taxonomy extension definition linkbase document
101.lab*
xbrl
taxonomy extension labels linkbase document
101.pre*
xbrl
taxonomy extension presentation linkbase
document
*filed
herewith.
+management
contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
#in
accordance with item601(b)(32)(ii)of regulation s-k and sec release
nos. 33-8238 and 34-47986, final rule: managements reports on internal control
over financial reporting and certification of disclosure in exchange act
periodic reports, the certifications furnished in exhibits 32.1 and 32.2 hereto
are deemed to accompany this form10-k and will not be deemed filed for
purpose of section18 of the exchange act. such certifications will not be
deemed to be incorporated by reference into any filing under the securities act
or the exchange act, except to the extent that the registrant specifically
incorporates it by reference.
pursuant to
applicable securities laws and regulations, the company is deemed to have
complied with the reporting obligation relating to the submission of interactive
data files in such exhibits and is not subject to liability under any anti-fraud
provisions of the federal securities laws as long as the company has made a good
faith attempt to comply with the submission requirements and promptly amends the
interactive data files after becoming aware that the interactive data files
fails to comply with the submission requirements. users of this data are advised
that, pursuant to rule 406t, these interactive data files are deemed not filed
and otherwise are not subject to liability.
copies of above exhibits not
contained herein are available to any stockholder upon written request to:
investor relations: nvidia corporation, 2701 san tomas expressway, santa clara,
ca95050.
