10-k
y17887e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended january1, 2006
commission file number 1-3215
johnson & johnson
(exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
new jersey
22-1024240
(state of
incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
one johnson & johnson plaza
new brunswick, new jersey
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including
area code (732) 524-0400
securities registered pursuant to section
12(b) of the act
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $1.00
new york stock exchange
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a
well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the
securities
act.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not
required to file reports pursuant to section 13 or section 15(d)
of the exchange
act.yesonox
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90
days.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.x
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a
non-accelerated filer.
large accelerated filerxaccelerated fileronon-accelerated filero
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesonox
the aggregate market value of the common stock
held by non-affiliates (computed by reference to the price at
which the common stock was last sold) as of the last business
day of the registrants most recently completed second
fiscal quarter was approximately $193billion.
on february28, 2006 there were
2,976,068,976shares of common stock outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference
partsi, ii and iii:
portions of registrants annual report to
shareholders for fiscal year 2005 (the annual
report).
parts i and iii:
portions of registrants proxy statement for
its 2006 annual meeting (the proxy statement).
part i
item
page
1.
business
general
segments of business
consumer
pharmaceutical
medical devices and diagnostics
geographic areas
raw materials
patents and trademarks
seasonality
competition
research
environment
regulation
available information
1a.
risk factors
1b.
unresolved staff comments
2.
properties
3.
legal proceedings
4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
executive officers of the registrant
partii
5.
market for the registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
6.
selected financial data
7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
8.
financial statements and supplementary data
9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
9a.
controls and procedures
9b.
other information
partiii
10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
11.
executive compensation
12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
13.
certain relationships and related transactions
14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
report of independent registered public
accounting firm on financial statement schedule
exhibit index
part i
item 1.business
general
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries
have approximately 115,600 employees worldwide engaged in the
manufacture and sale of a broad range of products in the health
care field. johnson & johnson has more than 230 operating
companies conducting business in virtually all countries of the
world. johnson& johnsons primary focus has been
on products related to human health and well-being.
johnson& johnson was incorporated in the state of new
jersey in 1887.
the companys structure is based on the
principle of decentralized management. the executive committee
of johnson& johnson is the principal management group
responsible for the operations and allocation of the resources
of the company. this committee oversees and coordinates the
activities of the consumer, pharmaceutical and medical devices
and diagnostics business segments. each subsidiary within the
business segments is, with some exceptions, managed by citizens
of the country in which it is located.
segments of business
johnson& johnsons worldwide
business is divided into three segments: consumer,
pharmaceutical and medical devices and diagnostics. additional
information required by this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the narrative and tabular (but not the graphic)
descriptions of segments and operating results under
managements discussion and analysis of results of
operations and financial condition on pages28
through 38 and note11 segments of business and
geographic areas under notes to consolidated
financial statements on page50 of the annual report,
filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
consumer
the consumer segment manufactures and markets a
broad range of products used in the baby and childcare,
skin care, oral and wound care and womens health care
fields, as well as nutritional and over-the-counter
pharmaceutical products. major brands include
aveeno
skin care products;
band-aid
brand adhesive bandages;
carefree
pantiliners; clean&
clear
teen skin care products;
johnsons
baby and adult lines of products;
motrin
ib ibuprofen products;
pepcid
ac acid controller from johnson& johnson
merck consumer pharmaceuticals co.;
neutrogena
skin and hair care products;
roc
skin care products;
splenda
no calorie sweetener;
stayfree
sanitary protection products; and the broad family of
tylenol
acetaminophen products. these products, available without
prescription, are marketed principally to the general public and
sold both to wholesalers and directly to independent and chain
retail outlets throughout the world.
pharmaceutical
the pharmaceutical segment includes products in
the following therapeutic areas: anti-fungal, anti-infective,
cardiovascular, contraceptive, dermatology, gastrointestinal,
hematology, immunology, neurology, oncology, pain management,
psychotropic (central nervous system) and urology. these
products are distributed directly to retailers, wholesalers and
health care professionals for prescription use by the general
public. key products in the pharmaceutical segment include:
risperdal
(risperidone) and
risperdal
consta
(risperidone long-acting injection), for treatment of the
symptoms of schizophrenia;
procrit
(epoetin alfa, sold outside the u.s. as
eprex),
a biotechnology-derived product that stimulates red blood cell
production;
remicade
(infliximab), a monoclonal antibody therapy indicated to treat
the symptoms of crohns disease, rheumatoid arthritis,
ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis and ulcerative
colitis;
topamax
(topiramate), an anti-epileptic and migraine prevention
treatment;
duragesic
(fentanyl transdermal system, sold outside the u.s. as
durogesic),
a treatment for chronic pain that offers a novel delivery
system;
levaquin
(levofloxacin) and
floxin
(ofloxacin), both in the anti-infective field; ortho
evra
(norelgestromin/ethinyl estradiol transdermal system), the first
contraceptive patch approved by the u.s. food and drug
administration (fda) and
orthotri-cyclenlo
(norgestimate/ethinyl estradiol), a low dose oral contraceptive;
doxil
(doxorubicin hci liposome injection), a cancer treatment;
ditropan
xl (oxybutynin chloride), for the treatment of overactive
bladder; razadynetm (galantamine hbr), for patients
with mild to moderate alzheimers disease;
natrecor
(nesiritide), a novel agent approved for congestive heart
failure;
velcade
(bortezomib), an oncology treatment; and
concerta
(methylphenidate hcl) a product for the treatment of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder.
medical devices and diagnostics
the medical devices and diagnostics segment
includes a broad range of products distributed to wholesalers,
hospitals and retailers, used principally in the professional
fields by physicians, nurses, therapists, hospitals, diagnostic
laboratories and clinics. these products include cordis
circulatory disease management products; depuys
orthopaedic joint reconstruction and spinal care products;
ethicons wound care and womens health products;
ethicon endo-surgerys minimally invasive surgical
products; lifescans blood glucose monitoring products;
ortho-clinical diagnostics professional diagnostic
products and vision cares disposable contact lenses.
distribution to these health care professional markets is done
both directly and through surgical supply and other dealers.
geographic areas
the international business of johnson &
johnson is conducted by subsidiaries located in 56 countries
outside the united states, which are selling products in
virtually all countries throughout the world. the products made
and sold in the international business include many of those
described above under business consumer,
pharmaceutical and
medical devices and diagnostics.
however, the principal markets, products and methods of
distribution in the international business vary with the country
and the culture. the products sold in international business
include not only those which were developed in the united
states, but also those which were developed by subsidiaries
abroad.
investments and activities in some countries
outside the united states are subject to higher risks than
comparable u.s. activities because the investment and commercial
climate is influenced by restrictive economic policies and
political uncertainties.
raw materials
raw materials essential to johnson &
johnsons operating companies businesses are
generally readily available from multiple sources.
patents and trademarks
johnson & johnson has made a practice of
obtaining patent protection on its products and processes where
possible. johnson & johnson owns or is licensed under a
number of patents relating to its products and manufacturing
processes, which in the aggregate are believed to be of material
importance in the operation of its business. sales of the
companys two largest products,
risperdal
and
procrit/eprex,
accounted for approximately 6% and 7% of johnson &
johnsons total revenues, respectively, for fiscal 2005.
accordingly, the patents related to these products are believed
to be material in relation to johnson & johnson as a whole.
during 2004, 2005 and 2006,
duragesic
(fentanyl transdermal system) in the united states and certain
international markets and
eprex
(epoetin alfa) in international markets have lost or will lose
their basic patent protection and are or will be subject to
generic competition.
duragesic
sales declined by 23.9% to $1.6billion in 2005 as compared
to 2004, due to the negative impact of generic competition
primarily in the united states. regarding
eprex,
generic competition will be limited in the near term due to the
lack of approved generic compounds. combined sales of
duragesic
and
eprex
accounted for approximately 5% of johnson&
johnsons worldwide sales in 2005. the only material patent
scheduled to expire during the next two years is related to
risperdal,
which is scheduled to expire in the united states in december
2007, with the possibility of a pediatric extension.
johnson & johnson has made a practice of
selling its products under trademarks and of obtaining
protection for these trademarks by all available means. johnson
& johnsons trademarks are protected by registration in
the united states and other countries where its products are
marketed. johnson & johnson considers these trademarks in
the aggregate to be of material importance in the operation of
its business.
seasonality
worldwide sales do not reflect any significant
degree of seasonality; however, spending has been heavier in the
fourth quarter of each year than in other quarters. this
reflects increased spending decisions, principally for
advertising and research grants.
competition
in all of their product lines, johnson &
johnson companies compete with companies both large and small,
located throughout the world. competition is strong in all
product lines without regard to the number and size of the
competing companies involved. competition in research, involving
the development and the improvement of new and existing products
and processes, is particularly significant. the development of
new and improved products is important to johnson &
johnsons success in all areas of its business. this
competitive environment requires substantial investments in
continuing research and multiple sales forces. in addition, the
development and maintenance of customer acceptance of the
products of johnson & johnsons consumer businesses
involves significant expenditures for advertising and promotion.
research
research activities are important to all segments
of johnson & johnsons business. major research
facilities are located not only in the united states but also in
australia, belgium, brazil, canada, china, france, germany,
japan, the netherlands and the united kingdom. the costs of
worldwide company-sponsored research activities relating to the
development of new products, improvement of existing products,
technical support of products and compliance with governmental
regulations for the protection of consumers and patients,
excluding in-process research and development charges, amounted
to $6,312million, $5,203million and
$4,684million for fiscal years 2005, 2004 and 2003,
respectively. these costs are charged directly to income in the
year in which incurred.
environment
during the past year johnson & johnson
companies were subject to a variety of federal, state and local
environmental protection measures. johnson & johnson
believes that its operations comply in all material respects
with applicable environmental laws and regulations. johnson
& johnsons compliance with these requirements did not
and is not expected to have a material effect upon its capital
expenditures, cash flows, earnings or competitive position.
regulation
most of johnson & johnsons business is
subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the
countries in which operations are conducted, and the general
trend is toward regulation of increasing stringency. in the
united states, the drug, device, diagnostics and cosmetic
industries have long been subject to regulation by various
federal and state agencies, primarily as to product safety,
efficacy, manufacturing, advertising and labeling. the exercise
of broad regulatory powers by the fda continues to result in
increases in the amounts of testing and documentation required
for fda clearance of new drugs and devices and a corresponding
increase in the expense of product introduction. similar trends
are also evident in major markets outside of the united states.
the costs of human health care have been and
continue to be a subject of study, investigation and regulation
by governmental agencies and legislative bodies around the
world. in the united states, attention has been focused on drug
prices and profits and programs that encourage doctors to write
prescriptions for particular drugs or recommend, use or purchase
particular medical devices. payers have become a more potent
force in the market place and increased attention
is being paid to drug and medical device pricing, appropriate
drug and medical device utilization and the quality and costs of
health care. there is also uncertainty in the united states as
to the impact of the medicare prescription drug, improvement and
modernization act, which was enacted in 2003.
the regulatory agencies under whose purview
johnson & johnson companies operate have administrative
powers that may subject those companies to such actions as
product withdrawals, recalls, seizure of products and other
civil and criminal sanctions. in some cases, johnson &
johnsons operating companies may deem it advisable to
initiate product recalls.
in addition, business practices in the health
care industry have come under increased scrutiny, particularly
in the united states, by government agencies and state attorneys
general, and resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the
risk of significant civil and criminal penalties.
available information
copies of johnson & johnsons quarterly
reports on form10-q, annual report on form10-k and
current reports on form8-k, and any amendments to the
foregoing, will be provided without charge to any shareholder
submitting a written request to the secretary at the principal
executive offices of the company or by calling 800-328-9033. all
of the companys securities and exchange commission
(sec) filings are also available on the
companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance, as soon as reasonably
practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished
to the sec. all sec filings are also available at the secs
web site at www.sec.gov. in addition, the charters of the
audit committee, the compensation & benefits committee and
the nominating & corporate governance committee of the board
of directors and the companys principles of corporate
governance, policy on business conduct for employees and code of
business conduct & ethics for members of the board of
directors and executive officers are available at the
www.investor.jnj.com/governance web site address and will
be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a
written request, as provided above.
item 1a.risk
factors
not applicable.
item
1b.unresolved staff
comments
not applicable.
item
2.properties
johnson & johnson and its worldwide
subsidiaries operate 142 manufacturing facilities occupying
approximately 18.7million square feet of floor space.
the manufacturing facilities are used by the
industry segments of johnson & johnsons business
approximately as follows:
square feet
segment
(in thousands)
consumer
4,561
pharmaceutical
6,664
medical devices and diagnostics
7,511
worldwide total
18,736
within the united states, 5facilities are
used by the consumer segment, 15 by the pharmaceutical segment
and 43 by the medical devices and diagnostics segment.
johnson& johnsons manufacturing operations
outside the united states are often conducted in facilities that
serve more than one segment of the business.
the locations of the manufacturing facilities by
major geographic areas of the world are as follows:
number
of
square feet
geographic area
facilities
(in thousands)
united states
6,569
europe
7,225
western hemisphere, excluding u.s.a.
2,732
africa, asia and pacific
2,210
worldwide total
18,736
in addition to the manufacturing facilities
discussed above, johnson & johnson maintains numerous office
and warehouse facilities throughout the world. research
facilities are also discussed in item 1 under business
research.
johnson & johnson generally seeks to own its
manufacturing facilities, although some, principally in
locations abroad, are leased. office and warehouse facilities
are often leased.
johnson & johnsons properties are
maintained in good operating condition and repair and are well
utilized.
for information regarding lease obligations see
note4 rental expense and lease commitments
under notes to consolidated financial statements on
page46 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k. segment information on additions
to property, plant and equipment is contained in note11
segments of business and geographic areas under
notes to consolidated financial statements on
page50 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k.
item 3.legal
proceedings
the information set forth in note 18 legal
proceedings under notes to consolidated financial
statements on pages57 through 63 of the annual
report is incorporated herein by reference and filed as
exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
the company or its subsidiaries are parties to a
number of proceedings brought under the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act, commonly
known as superfund, and comparable state laws, in which the
primary relief sought is the cost of past and future
remediation. while it is not feasible to predict or determine
the outcome of these proceedings, in the opinion of the company,
such proceedings would not have a material adverse effect on the
results of operations, cash flows or financial position of the
company.
item 4.submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
not applicable.
executive officers of the registrant
listed below are the executive officers of
johnson & johnson as of march14, 2006, each of whom,
unless otherwise indicated below, has been an employee of the
company or its affiliates and held the position indicated during
the past five years. there are no family relationships between
any of the executive officers, and there is no arrangement or
understanding between any executive officer and any other person
pursuant to which the executive officer was selected. at the
annual meeting of the board of directors, the executive officers
are elected by the board to hold office for one year and until
their respective successors are elected and qualified, or until
earlier resignation or removal.
information with regard to the directors of the
company, including those of the following executive officers who
are directors, is incorporated herein by reference to
pages4 through 10 of johnson & johnsons proxy
statement dated march15, 2006.
name
age
position
robert j. darretta
vice chairman, board of directors; member,
executive committee; chief financial officer
russell c. deyo
member, executive committee; vice president,
general counsel and chief compliance officer(a)
michael j. dormer
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman,
medical devices(b)
kaye i. foster-cheek
member, executive committee; vice president,
human resources(c)
colleen a. goggins
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman,
consumer & personal care group(d)
per a. peterson, m.d., ph.d.
member, executive committee; chairman, research
& development, pharmaceuticals group(e)
christine a. poon
vice chairman, board of directors; member,
executive committee; worldwide chairman, medicines &
nutritionals
joseph c. scodari
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman,
pharmaceuticals group(f)
nicholas j. valeriani
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman,
cardiovascular devices and diagnostics(g)
william c. weldon
chairman, board of directors; chairman, executive
committee; chief executive officer
(a)
mr. r. c. deyo joined the company in 1985 and
became associate general counsel in 1991. he became a member of
the executive committee and vice president, administration, in
1996 and vice president, general counsel and chief compliance
officer in april 2004.
(b)
mr.m.j. dormer joined the company in
1998 as company group chairman, worldwide franchise chairman for
depuy and codman, when the company acquired depuy, inc. at the
time of that acquisition, he had been chief operating officer of
depuy, inc. since 1996. mr.dormer became a member of the
executive committee and franchise group chairman for medical
devices in 2001. in april2002, mr.dormer was named
worldwide chairman, medical devices.
(c)
ms.k.i. foster-cheek joined the
company in 2003 as vice president, human resources, for the
johnson & johnson consumer products companies. in march
2004, she was named vice president, human resources, for the
consumer & personal care group and was named a member of the
human resources leadership team and the consumer & personal
care group operating committee. ms. foster-cheek became a member
of the executive committee and vice president, human resources,
for the company in january 2005. prior to joining the company,
ms.foster-cheek served in various human resources
management positions with pfizer inc. for 13years, most
recently supporting its pharmaceutical business in japan, asia,
africa, middle east and latin america.
(d)
ms.c. a. goggins joined the company in 1981
and held various positions before becoming president of personal
products company in 1994. she was named president of johnson
& johnson consumer products company in 1995 and company
group chairman, north america, johnson & johnson consumer
products in 1998. ms.goggins became a member of the
executive committee and worldwide chairman, consumer &
personal care group, in 2001.
(e)
dr.p.a. peterson joined the company
in 1994 as vice president, drug discovery, of the
r.w.johnson pharmaceutical research institute. he was
named group vice president of the pharmaceutical research
institute in april 1998 and its president in november 1998. in
2000, dr.peterson was named chairman, research &
development, pharmaceuticals group. dr.peterson became a
member of the executive committee in 2001.
(f)
mr.j.c. scodari joined the company in
1999 as president of centocor when the company acquired
centocor. at the time of that acquisition, he had been the
president and chief operating officer of centocor and a member
of centocors board of directors since december 1997. in
march 2001, he was named company group chairman for the north
american pharmaceutical business, and became a member of the
pharmaceuticals group operating committee. in march 2003,
mr.scodari was named company group chairman,
biopharmaceutical businesses. mr.scodari was named
worldwide chairman, pharmaceuticals group, and became a member
of the executive committee on march1, 2005.
(g)
mr. n.j. valeriani joined the company in
1978 and held various positions before becoming president of
ethicon endo-surgery, inc. in 1997. in january 2001 he was named
company group chairman for ethicon endo-surgery with additional
responsibility for the johnson& johnson medical
products medical devices and diagnostics business in canada. he
became worldwide franchise chairman for the depuy franchise in
2002. mr.valeriani became a member of the executive
committee and vice president, human resources, in september
2003. in february 2004 he assumed additional responsibilities as
worldwide chairman, diagnostics. in january 2005,
mr.valeriani was appointed worldwide chairman,
cardiovascular devices and diagnostics and relinquished his
human resources responsibilities.
part ii
item 5.
market for the registrants common
equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of
equity securities
as of february28, 2006, there were 181,031
record holders of common stock of the company. the other
information called for by this item is incorporated herein by
reference to: the material captioned managements
discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition dividends on page35;
common stock market prices on page38; and
note10 under the notes to consolidated financial
statements on page49 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
issuer purchases of equity
securities
the following table provides information with
respect to common stock share purchases by the company during
the fiscal fourth quarter of 2005. stock purchases are made as
part of a systematic plan to meet the companys
compensation programs.
total number of shares
average price paid
fiscal month
purchased
per share
october3, 2005 through october30, 2005
1,680,600
$
62.32
october31, 2005 through november27,
3,823,300
$
62.00
november28, 2005 through january1,
3,456,500
$
61.16
item 6.selected
financial data
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material captioned
summary of operations and statistical data 1995-2005
on page66 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13
to this report on form10-k.
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the narrative and tabular
(but not the graphic) material included under
managements discussion and analysis of results of
operations and financial condition on pages28
through 38 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k.
item7a.quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the narrative (but not the
graphic) material captioned managements discussion
and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition liquidity and capital resources on
pages34 and 35 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
item 8.financial
statements and supplementary data
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the audited consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto and the material
captioned report of independent registered public
accounting firm on pages39 through 65 of the annual
report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a.
controls and
procedures
disclosure controls and
procedures. at the end of the fiscal
fourth quarter, the company evaluated the effectiveness of the
design and operation of its disclosure controls and procedures.
the companys disclosure controls and procedures are
designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by
the company in the reports that it files or submits under the
securities exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and
reported, within the time periods specified in the secs
rules and forms. disclosure controls and procedures include,
without limitation, controls and procedures designed to ensure
that information required to be disclosed by the company in the
reports that it files or submits under the securities exchange
act is accumulated and communicated to the companys
management, including its principal executive and principal
financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, as
appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required
disclosure. williamc. weldon, chairman and chief executive
officer, and robertj. darretta, vice chairman and chief
financial officer, reviewed and participated in this evaluation.
based on this evaluation, messrs.weldon and darretta
concluded that, as of the date of their evaluation, the
companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
internal control.
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting is included in this report on form10-k in this
item 9a. during the fiscal quarter ended january1, 2006,
there were no changes in the companys internal control
over financial reporting that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control
over financial reporting. under
section 404 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, management is
required to assess the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting as of the end of each
fiscal year and report, based on that assessment, whether the
companys internal control over financial reporting is
effective.
management of the company is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting. the companys internal control over
financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance
as to the reliability of the companys financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.
internal controls over financial reporting, no
matter how well designed, have inherent limitations. therefore,
internal control over financial reporting determined to be
effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to
financial statement preparation and may not prevent or detect
all misstatements. moreover, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
may deteriorate.
the companys management has assessed the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of january1, 2006. in making this
assessment, the company used the criteria established by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
(coso) in internal control-integrated framework.
these criteria are in the areas of control environment, risk
assessment, control activities, information and communication,
and monitoring. the companys assessment included extensive
documenting, evaluating and testing the design and operating
effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting.
based on the companys processes and
assessment, as described above, management has concluded that,
as of january1, 2006, the companys internal control
over financial reporting was effective.
managements assessment of the effectiveness
of the companys internal control over financial reporting
as of january1, 2006 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report, which appears in the
report of independent registered public accounting
firm on page65 of the annual report, which is
incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k.
item 9b.other
information
on march8, 2006, the company announced that
its board of directors has approved a stock repurchase program,
authorizing the company to buy back up to $5billion of the
companys common stock. repurchases will take place on the
open market from time-to-time based on market conditions. the
repurchase program has no time limit and may be suspended for
periods or discontinued.
part iii
item 10.directors and executive
officers of the registrant
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to (a)the material under
the caption election of directors
nominees and other information on
pages 4 through 10 of the proxy statement, (b)the material
in part i hereof under the caption executive officers of
the registrant, (c)the discussion of the audit
committee under the heading directors fees,
committees and meetings on pages12 and 13 of the
proxy statement and (d)the material under the caption
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance on page15 of the proxy statement.
the companys policy on business conduct,
which covers all employees (including the chief executive
officer, chief financial officer and controller), meets the
requirements of the sec rules promulgated under section406
of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002. the policy on business
conduct is available on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance, and copies are available
to shareholders without charge upon written request to the
secretary at the companys principal address. any
substantive amendment to the policy on business conduct or any
waiver of the policy granted to the chief executive officer, the
chief financial officer or the controller will be posted on the
companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance within five business days
(and retained on the web site for at least one year).
in addition, the company has adopted a code of
business conduct & ethics for members of the board of
directors and executive officers. the code of business conduct
& ethics for members of the board of directors and executive
officers is available on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance, and copies are available
to shareholders without charge upon written request to the
secretary at the companys principal address. any
substantive amendment to the code or any waiver of the code
granted to any member of the board of directors or any executive
officer will be posted on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance within five business days
(and retained on the web site for at least one year).
item 11.executive
compensation
theinformation called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the following sections of
the proxy statement: election of directors
directors fees, committees and meetings on
pages12 through 13; compensation& benefits
committee report on executive compensation on
pages17 through
22; shareholder return performance
graphs on pages23 and 24; and executive
compensation on pages25 through 31.
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder matters
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material captioned
election of directors stock
ownership/control on page11 of the proxy statement
and note10 under the notes to consolidated financial
statements on page49 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
equity compensation plan information
the following table provides certain information
as of january 1, 2006 concerning the shares of the
companys common stock that may be issued under existing
equity compensation plans.
number of shares to be
weighted average
number of shares
issued upon exercise of
exercise price
remaining available for
outstanding options
of outstanding
future issuance under
and rights
options and rights
equity compensation plans
asofjan.1,2006
asofjan.1,2006
asofjan.1,2006(4)
equity compensation plans approved by
shareholders(1)
241,781,069
$
53.59
259,736,709
equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders(2)(3)
6,872,047
$
33.29
total
248,653,116
$
53.03
259,736,709
(1)
included in this category are the following
equity compensation plans which have been approved by the
companys shareholders: 1995 stock option plan, 2000 stock
option plan, 2000 stock compensation plan and 2005 long term
incentive plan.
(2)
included in this category are
6,699,547shares of common stock issuable under various
equity compensation plans assumed by the company upon
acquisition of the following companies: alza corporation,
sciosinc., biosense,inc., innovasive
devices,inc., inverness medical technology,inc. and
centocor,inc. 2,976,157 of the shares listed as issuable
in this category were issued under plans that were approved by
the shareholders of these companies prior to the acquisition and
the assumption of these plans by the company. at the time of
each of these acquisitions, options to acquire equity of the
acquired company were replaced by options to acquire the common
stock of the company. no stock options or equity awards of any
type have been made under any of these plans since the
assumption of these plans by the company, and no further stock
options or other equity awards of any type will be made under
any of these plans in the future.
the shares that are included in this column that
were issued under plans not approved by shareholders of the
applicable acquired company are: 5,742shares issuable
under the 1996 biosense stock option plan; 2,507,295shares
issuable under the 1996 scios non-officer stock option plan;
1,175,036shares issuable under an alza non-statutory plan;
and 35,317shares issuable under warrants under an
inverness medical plan.
(3)
also included in this category are
172,500shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise
of outstanding stock options under companys stock option
plan for non-employee directors.
(4)
this column excludes shares reflected under the
column number of shares to be issued upon exercise of
outstanding options and rights as of
jan.1,2006.
item 13.certain relationships and
related transactions
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material captioned
election of directors certain business
relationships on page10 of the proxy statement.
item 14.principal accounting fees
and services
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material under the
headings ratification of appointment of independent
registered public accounting firm and pre-approval
of audit and non-audit services on pages33 through
35 of the proxy statement.
part iv
item 15.exhibits, financial
statement schedules
(a)the following documents are filed as
part of this report:
1.financial statements
the following audited consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto and the report of independent
registered public accounting firm on pages 39 through 65 of the
annual report are incorporated herein by reference and filed as
exhibit13 to this report on form10-k:
consolidated balance sheets at end of fiscal
years 2005 and 2004
consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal
years 2005, 2004 and 2003
consolidated statements of equity for fiscal
years 2005, 2004 and 2003
consolidated statements of cash flows for fiscal
years 2005, 2004
and 2003
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
2.financial statement schedules
schedule ii valuation and qualifying
accounts
schedules other than those listed above are
omitted because they are not required or are not applicable.
3.exhibits required to be filed by item
60l of regulation s-k
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the exhibit index in this
report.
johnson & johnson and
subsidiaries
schedule ii valuation and
qualifying accounts
fiscal years ended january1, 2006,
january2, 2005 and december28, 2003
(dollars in millions)
balance at
balance at
beginning
payments/
end of
of period
accruals
other
period
accrued rebates, returns and
promotions(1)
$
2,785
7,798
(2)
(8,095
)
2,488
reserve for doubtful accounts
(61
)
reserve for cash discounts
(866
)
$
3,053
8,678
(9,022
)
2,709
accrued rebates, returns and
promotions(1)
$
2,622
7,514
(3)
(7,351
)
2,785
reserve for doubtful accounts
(15
)
reserve for cash discounts
(729
)
$
2,869
8,279
(8,095
)
3,053
accrued rebates, returns and
promotions(1)
$
2,035
5,850
(5,263
)
2,622
reserve for doubtful accounts
(27
)
reserve for cash discounts
(604
)
$
2,288
6,475
(5,894
)
2,869
(1)
includes reserve for customer rebates of $471
million, $488 million and $314 million at january1, 2006,
january2, 2005 and december28, 2003, respectively.
(2)
includes $186million related to previously
estimated performance-based rebate allowances in managed care
contracts.
(3)
includes $170 million related to previously
estimated performance-based rebate allowances in managed care
contracts.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section 13 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
date: march13, 2006
johnson & johnson
(registrant)
by
/s/w. c. weldon
w. c. weldon, chairman, board of directors,
and chief executive officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ w. c. weldon
w. c. weldon
chairman, board of directors,
chief executive officer, and director (principal executive
officer)
march13, 2006
/s/ r. j. darretta
r. j. darretta
vice chairman, board of directors, chief
financial officer, and director (principal financial officer)
march13, 2006
/s/ c. a. poon
c. a. poon
vice chairman, board of directors, and director
march14, 2006
/s/ s. j. cosgrove
s. j. cosgrove
controller
march13, 2006
/s/ m. s. coleman
m. s. coleman
director
march10, 2006
/s/ j. g. cullen
j. g. cullen
director
march10, 2006
/s/ m. m. e. johns
m. m. e. johns
director
march8, 2006
/s/ a. d. jordan
a. d. jordan
director
march8, 2006
/s/ a. g. langbo
a. g. langbo
director
march8, 2006
signature
title
date
/s/ s. l. lindquist
s. l. lindquist
director
march9, 2006
/s/ l.f. mullin
l.f. mullin
director
march8, 2006
/s/ c. prince
c. prince
director
march10, 2006
/s/ s. s reinemund
s. s reinemund
director
march13, 2006
/s/ d. satcher
d. satcher
director
march9, 2006
report of independent registered public
accounting firm on
financial statement schedule
to the board of directors of
johnson & johnson:
our audits of the consolidated financial
statements, of managements assessment of the effectiveness
of internal control over financial reporting and of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
referred to in our report dated february28, 2006,
appearing in the 2005 annual report to shareholders of johnson
& johnson (which report, consolidated financial statements
and assessment are incorporated by reference in this annual
report on form10-k) also included an audit of the
financial statement schedule listed in item15(a)(2) of
this form10-k. in our opinion, this financial statement
schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the
information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the
related consolidated financial statements.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february28, 2006
exhibit index
reg. s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(a)(i)
restated certificate of incorporation dated
april26, 1990 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit3(a) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december30, 1990.
(a)(ii)
certificate of amendment to the restated
certificate of incorporation of the company dated may20,
1992 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3(a) of the registrants form10-k annual
report for the year ended january3, 1993.
(a)(iii)
certificate of amendment to the restated
certificate of incorporation of the company dated may21,
1996 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3(a)(iii) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 1996.
(a)(iv)
certificate of amendment to the restated
certificate of incorporation of the company effective
may22, 2001 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit3 of the registrants form10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended july1, 2001.
(b)
by-laws of the company, as amended effective
june11, 2001 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit99.2 of the registrants form10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended july1, 2001.
(a)
upon the request of the securities and exchange
commission, the registrant will furnish a copy of all
instruments defining the rights of holders of long term debt of
the registrant.
(a)
stock option plan for non-employee
directors incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10(a) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 1996.*
(b)
2000 stock option plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(b) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december29, 2002.*
(c)
1995 stock option plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(b) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended january3, 1999.*
(d)
2000 stock compensation plan
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(e) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december31, 2000.*
(e)
2005 long-term incentive
planincorporated herein by reference to
exhibit4 of the registrants s-8 registration
statement filed with the commission on may10, 2005 (file
no.333-124785).*
(f)
form of stock option certificate and restricted
shares to non-employee directors certificate under the 2005
long-term incentive plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit10.1 of the registrants
form10-q quarterly report for the quarter ended
july3, 2005.*
(g)
form of restricted stock unit certificate under
the 2005 long-term incentive plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10.1 of the
registrants form10-q quarterly report for the
quarter ended october2, 2005.*
(h)
executive bonus plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit4 of the registrants
forms-8 registration statement filed with the commission
on november8, 2005 (file no.333-129542).*
(i)
executive incentive plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(f) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december31, 2000.*
(j)
domestic deferred compensation (certificate of
extra compensation) plan (as amended) incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(g) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december28, 2003.*
reg. s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(k)
deferred fee plan for non-employee directors (as
amended)  incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10(h) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended january2, 2005.*
(l)
executive income deferral plan (as
amended) incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10(i) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december28, 2003.*
(m)
excess savings plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(j) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december29, 1996.*
(n)
supplemental retirement plan  incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit 10(h) of the registrants
form 10-k annual report for the year ended january3, 1993.*
(o)
executive life insurance plan  incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit 10(i)of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
january3, 1993.*
(p)
stock option gain deferral plan
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(m) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended january2, 2000.*
(q)
estate preservation plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(n) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended january2, 2000.*
(r)
summary of employment arrangements for
michaelj. dormer filed with this document.*
(s)
summary of compensation arrangements for named
executive officers and directors  filed with this
document.*
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to
fixed charges  filed with this document.
pages 28 through 66 of the
companys annual report to shareholders for fiscal year
2005 (only those portions of the annual report incorporated by
reference in this report are deemed filed)
filed with this document.
subsidiaries  filed with this document.
consent of independent registered public
accounting firm filed with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant
to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002 filed with this document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant
to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002 filed with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant
to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002 furnished with this document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant
to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002 furnished with this document.
cautionary statement pursuant to private
securities litigation reform act of 1995 safe
harbor for forward-looking statements  filed with
this document.
*
management contract or compensatory plan.
a copy of any of the exhibits listed above will
be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a
written request specifying the desired exhibit(s) to the
secretary at the principal executive offices of the company.
