10-k
y29901e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form 10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
commission file number 1-3215
johnson & johnson
(exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
new jersey
22-1024240
(state of
incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer
identification no.)
one johnson & johnson plaza
new brunswick, new jersey
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including
area code: (732) 524-0400
securities registered pursuant to section
12(b) of the act
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $1.00
new york stock exchange
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a
well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the
securities
act.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not
required to file reports pursuant to section 13 or section 15(d)
of the exchange
act.yesonox
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90
days.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.x
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a
non-accelerated filer.
large accelerated
filerxaccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filero
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is
a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesonox
the aggregate market value of the common stock
held by non-affiliates (computed by reference to the price at
which the common stock was last sold) as of the last business
day of the registrants most recently completed second
fiscal quarter was approximately $175billion.
on february16, 2007 there were
2,894,082,681shares of common stock outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference
partsi, ii and iii:
portions of registrants annual report to
shareholders for fiscal year 2006 (the annual
report).
parts i and iii:
portions of registrants proxy statement for
its 2007 annual meeting of shareholders filed within 120 days
after the close of the registrants fiscal year (the
proxy statement).
part i
item
page
1.
business
general
segments of business
consumer
pharmaceutical
medical devices and diagnostics
geographic areas
raw materials
patents and trademarks
seasonality
competition
research and development
environment
regulation
available information
1a.
risk factors
1b.
unresolved staff comments
2.
properties
3.
legal proceedings
4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
executive officers of the registrant
partii
5.
market for the registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
6.
selected financial data
7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operation
7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
8.
financial statements and supplementary data
9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
9a.
controls and procedures
9b.
other information
partiii
10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
11.
executive compensation
12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
signatures
report of independent registered public
accounting firm on financial statement schedule
exhibit index
part i
item 1.business
general
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries
have approximately 122,200employees worldwide engaged in
the research and development, manufacture and sale of a broad
range of products in the health care field. johnson&
johnson has more than 250 operating companies conducting
business in virtually all countries of the world.
johnson& johnsons primary focus has been on
products related to human health and well-being.
johnson& johnson was incorporated in the state of new
jersey in 1887.
the companys structure is based on the
principle of decentralized management. the executive committee
of johnson& johnson is the principal management group
responsible for the operations and allocation of the resources
of the company. this committee oversees and coordinates the
activities of the consumer, pharmaceutical and medical devices
and diagnostics business segments. each subsidiary within the
business segments is, with some exceptions, managed by citizens
of the country where it is located.
segments of business
johnson& johnson is organized into
three business segments: consumer, pharmaceutical and medical
devices and diagnostics. additional information required by this
item is incorporated herein by reference to the narrative and
tabular (but not the graphic) descriptions of segments and
operating results under managements discussion and
analysis of results of operations and financial condition
on pages38 through 49 and note11 segments of
business and geographic areas under notes to
consolidated financial statements on page61 of the
annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
consumer
the consumer segment includes a broad range of
products used in the baby and kidscare, skin care, oral
care, wound care and womens health care fields, as well as
nutritional and over-the-counter pharmaceutical products. major
brands include
aveeno
skin care products;
band-aid
brand adhesive bandages;
carefree
pantiliners; clean&
clear
teen skin care products;
johnsons
baby and adult lines of products;
motrin
ib ibuprofen products;
neutrogena
skin and hair care products;
roc
skin care products;
pepcid
ac acid controller from johnson&
johnsonmerck consumer pharmaceuticals co.;
rembrandt
brand of oral care products;
splenda
no calorie sweetener;
stayfree
sanitary protection products; and the broad family of
tylenol
acetaminophen products. these products are marketed principally
to the general public and sold both to wholesalers and directly
to independent and chain retail outlets throughout the world.
in the fiscal fourth quarter of 2006, the company
completed the acquisition of the consumer healthcare business of
pfizer inc. comprising products related to self-medications for
oral care, upper-respiratory health, tobacco dependence,
gastrointestinal health, skin care, eye care and hair growth.
major brands of the consumer healthcare business of pfizer inc.
include
listerine
oral care products, the
nicorette
line of smoking cessation treatments, and
sudafed
cold, flu and allergy products.
pharmaceutical
the pharmaceutical segment includes products in
the following therapeutic areas: anti-fungal, anti-infective,
cardiovascular, contraceptive, dermatology, gastrointestinal,
hematology, immunology, neurology, oncology, pain management,
psychotropic (central nervous system), urology and virology.
these products are distributed directly to retailers,
wholesalers and health care professionals for prescription use
by the general public. key products in the pharmaceutical
segment include:
risperdal
(risperidone) and
risperdal
consta
(risperidone long-acting injection), for treatment of the
symptoms of schizophrenia;
procrit
(epoetin alfa, sold outside the u.s. as
eprex),
a biotechnology-derived product that stimulates red blood cell
production;
remicade
(infliximab), a monoclonal antibody therapy indicated to treat
the symptoms of crohns disease, ankylosing spondylitis,
psoriatic arthritis, ulcerative colitis, chronic severe plaque
psoriasis and use in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis;
topamax
(topiramate), an anti-epileptic and migraine prevention
treatment;
levaquin
(levofloxacin) and
floxin
(ofloxacin), both in the anti-infective field;
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal (fentanyl transdermal system, sold
outside the u.s. as
durogesic),
a treatment for chronic pain that offers a novel delivery
system; ortho
evra
(norelgestromin/ethinyl estradiol transdermal system), the first
contraceptive patch approved by the u.s. food and drug
administration (fda) and
orthotri-cyclenlo
(norgestimate/ethinyl estradiol), a low dose oral contraceptive;
concerta
(methylphenidate hcl) a product for the treatment of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder; and
natrecor
(nesiritide), a product for the treatment of patients with
acutely decompensated congestive heart failure who have dyspnea
at rest or with minimal activity.
medical devices and diagnostics
the medical devices and diagnostics segment
includes a broad range of products distributed to wholesalers,
hospitals and retailers, used principally in the professional
fields by physicians, nurses, therapists, hospitals, diagnostic
laboratories and clinics. these products include cordis
circulatory disease management products; depuys
orthopaedic joint reconstruction and spinal care products;
ethicons wound care and womens health products;
ethicon endo-surgerys minimally invasive surgical
products; lifescans blood glucose monitoring and insulin
delivery products; ortho-clinical diagnostics professional
diagnostic products and vision cares disposable contact
lenses. distribution to these health care professional markets
is done both directly and through surgical supply and other
dealers.
geographic areas
the international business of johnson &
johnson is conducted by subsidiaries located in 56 countries
outside the united states, which are selling products in
virtually all countries throughout the world. the products made
and sold in the international business include many of those
described above under business consumer,
pharmaceutical and
medical devices and diagnostics.
however, the principal markets, products and methods of
distribution in the international business vary with the country
and the culture. the products sold in international business
include not only those which were developed in the united
states, but also those which were developed by subsidiaries
abroad.
investments and activities in some countries
outside the united states are subject to higher risks than
comparable u.s. activities because the investment and commercial
climate is influenced by restrictive economic policies and
political uncertainties.
raw materials
raw materials essential to johnson &
johnsons operating companies businesses are
generally readily available from multiple sources.
patents and trademarks
johnson & johnson has made a practice of
obtaining patent protection on its products and processes where
possible. johnson & johnson owns or is licensed under a
number of patents relating to its products and manufacturing
processes, which in the aggregate are believed to be of material
importance in the operation of its business. sales of the
companys two largest products,
risperdal/risperdal
consta
and
procrit/eprex,
accounted for approximately 8% and 6% of johnson &
johnsons total revenues, respectively, for fiscal 2006.
accordingly, the patents related to these products are believed
to be material to johnson& johnson as a whole.
during 2004, 2005 and 2006,
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal (fentanyl transdermal system) lost its basic patent
protection and is subject to generic competition in the united
states and certain international markets and
eprex
(epoetin alfa) lost its basic patent protection and is subject
to generic competition in international markets.
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal sales declined by 18.3% to $1.3billion in 2006
as compared to 2005, due to the impact of generic competition.
regarding
eprex,
generic competition will be limited in the near term due to the
lack of approved generic compounds. combined sales of
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal and
eprex
accounted for approximately 5% of johnson&
johnsons worldwide sales in 2006. the only material
patents scheduled to expire within the next two years are
related to
risperdal,
which is scheduled to expire in the united states in december
2007, and
topamax,
which is scheduled to expire in the united states in september
2008. the company has submitted data to the fda in order to
obtain a pediatric extension for
risperdal,
which, if approved, would grant exclusivity in the united states
through june 2008. the
topamax
patent also carries the possibility of a pediatric extension in
the united states, which, if obtained, would grant exclusivity
in the united states until march 2009.
johnson & johnson has made a practice of
selling its products under trademarks and of obtaining
protection for these trademarks by all available means. johnson
& johnsons trademarks are protected by registration in
the united states and other countries where its products are
marketed. johnson & johnson considers these trademarks in
the aggregate to be of material importance in the operation of
its business.
seasonality
worldwide sales do not reflect any significant
degree of seasonality; however, spending has been heavier in the
fourth quarter of each year than in other quarters. this
reflects increased spending decisions, principally for
advertising and research grants.
competition
in all of their product lines, johnson &
johnson companies compete with companies both large and small,
located throughout the world. competition is strong in all
product lines without regard to the number and size of the
competing companies involved. competition in research, involving
the development and the improvement of new and existing products
and processes, is particularly significant. the development of
new and improved products is important to johnson &
johnsons success in all areas of its business. this
competitive environment requires substantial investments in
continuing research and multiple sales forces. in addition, the
development and maintenance of customer acceptance of the
products of johnson & johnsons consumer businesses
involves significant expenditures for advertising and promotion.
research and development
research activities represent a significant part
of johnson & johnsons business. major research
facilities are located not only in the united states but also in
australia, belgium, brazil, canada, china, france, germany,
india, japan, the netherlands, singapore and the united kingdom.
the costs of worldwide company-sponsored research activities
relating to the development of new products, improvement of
existing products, technical support of products and compliance
with governmental regulations for the protection of consumers
and patients, excluding in-process research and development
charges, amounted to $7,125million, $6,462million
and $5,344million for fiscal years 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. these costs are charged directly to income in the
year in which incurred.
environment
johnson & johnson companies are subject to a
variety of federal, state and local environmental protection
measures. johnson & johnson believes that its operations
comply in all material respects with applicable environmental
laws and regulations. johnson & johnsons compliance
with these requirements did not, during the past year, and is
not expected to, have a material effect upon its capital
expenditures, cash flows, earnings or competitive position.
regulation
most of johnson & johnsons business is
subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the
countries in which operations are conducted, and the general
trend is toward increasingly stringent regulation. in the united
states, the drug, device, diagnostics and cosmetic industries
have long been subject to regulation by various federal and
state agencies, primarily as to product safety, efficacy,
manufacturing, advertising, labeling and safety reporting. the
exercise of broad regulatory powers by the fda continues to
result in increases in the amounts of testing and documentation
required for fda clearance of new drugs and devices
and a corresponding increase in the expense of
product introduction. similar trends are also evident in major
markets outside of the united states.
the costs of human health care have been and
continue to be a subject of study, investigation and regulation
by governmental agencies and legislative bodies around the
world. in the united states, attention has been focused on drug
prices and profits and programs that encourage doctors to write
prescriptions for particular drugs or recommend, use or purchase
particular medical devices. payers have become a more potent
force in the market place and increased attention is being paid
to drug and medical device pricing, appropriate drug and medical
device utilization and the quality and costs of health care. in
the united states, implementation of the medicare prescription
drug, improvement and modernization act of 2003 and the deficit
reduction act of 2005 may cause uncertainty in reimbursement
levels in certain product segments.
the regulatory agencies under whose purview
johnson & johnson companies operate have administrative
powers that may subject those companies to such actions as
product withdrawals, recalls, seizure of products and other
civil and criminal sanctions. in some cases, johnson &
johnsons operating companies may deem it advisable to
initiate product recalls.
in addition, business practices in the health
care industry have come under increased scrutiny, particularly
in the united states, by government agencies and state attorneys
general, and resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the
risk of significant civil and criminal penalties.
available information
copies of johnson & johnsons quarterly
reports on form10-q, annual report on form10-k and
current reports on form8-k, and any amendments to the
foregoing, will be provided without charge to any shareholder
submitting a written request to the secretary at the principal
executive offices of the company or by calling 800-328-9033. all
of the companys securities and exchange commission
(sec) filings are also available on the
companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance, as soon as reasonably
practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished
to the sec. all sec filings are also available at the secs
web site at www.sec.gov. in addition, the charters of the
audit committee, the compensation & benefits committee and
the nominating & corporate governance committee of the board
of directors and the companys principles of corporate
governance, policy on business conduct for employees and code of
business conduct & ethics for members of the board of
directors and executive officers are available at the
www.investor.jnj.com/governance web site address and will
be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a
written request, as provided above.
item 1a.risk
factors
not applicable.
item
1b.unresolved staff
comments
not applicable.
item
2.properties
johnson & johnson and its worldwide
subsidiaries operate 148 manufacturing facilities occupying
approximately 22.6million square feet of floor space.
the manufacturing facilities are used by the
industry segments of johnson & johnsons business
approximately as follows:
square feet
segment
(in thousands)
consumer
8,410
pharmaceutical
6,743
medical devices and diagnostics
7,417
worldwide total
22,570
within the united states, 7facilities are
used by the consumer segment, 14 by the pharmaceutical segment
and 42 by the medical devices and diagnostics segment.
johnson& johnsons manufacturing operations
outside the united states are often conducted in facilities that
serve more than one segment of the business.
the locations of the manufacturing facilities by
major geographic areas of the world are as follows:
number
of
square feet
geographic area
facilities
(in thousands)
united states
7,448
europe
8,667
western hemisphere, excluding u.s.a.
3,026
africa, asia and pacific
3,429
worldwide total
22,570
in addition to the manufacturing facilities
discussed above, johnson & johnson maintains numerous office
and warehouse facilities throughout the world. research
facilities are also discussed in item 1 under business
research.
johnson & johnson generally seeks to own its
manufacturing facilities, although some, principally in
locations abroad, are leased. office and warehouse facilities
are often leased.
johnson & johnsons properties are
maintained in good operating condition and repair and are well
utilized.
for information regarding lease obligations, see
note4 rental expense and lease commitments
under notes to consolidated financial statements on
page57 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k. segment information on additions
to property, plant and equipment is contained in note11
segments of business and geographic areas under
notes to consolidated financial statements on
page61 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k.
item 3.legal
proceedings
the information set forth in note 18 legal
proceedings under notes to consolidated financial
statements on pages69 through 74 of the annual
report is incorporated herein by reference and filed as
exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
the company or its subsidiaries are parties to a
number of proceedings brought under the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act, commonly
known as superfund, and comparable state laws, in which the
primary relief sought is the cost of past and future
remediation. while it is not feasible to predict or determine
the outcome of these proceedings, in the opinion of the company,
such proceedings would not have a material adverse effect on the
results of operations, cash flows or financial position of the
company.
item 4.submission of matters to a
vote of security holders
not applicable.
executive officers of the registrant
listed below are the executive officers of
johnson & johnson as of february21, 2007, each of
whom, unless otherwise indicated below, has been an employee of
the company or its affiliates and held the position indicated
during the past five years. there are no family relationships
between any of the executive officers, and there is no
arrangement or understanding between any executive officer and
any other person pursuant to which the executive officer was
selected. at the annual meeting of the board of directors, the
executive officers are elected by the board to hold office for
one year and until their respective successors are elected and
qualified, or until earlier resignation or removal.
information with regard to the directors of the
company, including those of the following executive officers who
are directors, is incorporated herein by reference to the
material captioned election of directors in the
proxy statement.
name
age
position
dominic j. caruso
member, executive committee; vice president,
finance; chief financial officer(a)
robert j. darretta
vice chairman, board of directors; member,
executive committee(b)
russell c. deyo
member, executive committee; vice president,
general counsel and chief compliance officer(c)
kaye i. foster-cheek
member, executive committee; vice president,
human resources(d)
colleen a. goggins
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman,
consumer & personal care group(e)
per a. peterson, m.d., ph.d.
member, executive committee; chairman,
research& development, pharmaceuticals group(f)
christine a. poon
vice chairman, board of directors; member,
executive committee
joseph c. scodari
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman,
pharmaceuticals group(g)
nicholas j. valeriani
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman,
medical devices and diagnostics group(h)
william c. weldon
chairman, board of directors; chairman, executive
committee; chief executive officer
(a)
mr.d. j. caruso joined the company in
october 1999 when the company acquired centocor, inc. at the
time of that acquisition, he had been vice president, finance of
centocor. mr.caruso was named vice president, finance of
ortho-mcneil pharmaceutical, inc. in 2001 and vice president,
group finance of the companys medical devices and
diagnostics group in may 2003. in december 2005, mr.caruso
was named vice president of the companys group finance
organization. mr.caruso became a member of the executive
committee and vice president, finance and chief financial
officer on january1, 2007.
(b)
mr. r. j. darretta joined the company in 1968 and
held several accounting and finance positions before becoming
managing director of ethicon italy in 1985. he was named
president of iolab corporation in 1988 and in 1995 became
treasurer of the company. mr.darretta was named vice
president, finance and chief financial officer and appointed to
the executive committee in 1997. he was appointed executive vice
president in 2002 and vice chairman, board of directors in
january 2004. mr.darretta retired from the position of
chief financial officer as of december31, 2006 and plans
to retire from the company in 2007.
(c)
mr. r. c. deyo joined the company in 1985 and
became associate general counsel in 1991. he became a member of
the executive committee and vice president, administration, in
1996 and vice president, general counsel and chief compliance
officer in april 2004.
(d)
ms.k.i. foster-cheek joined the
company in 2003 as vice president, human resources, for the
johnson & johnson consumer products companies. in march
2004, she was named vice president, human resources, for the
consumer & personal care group and was named a member of the
human resources leadership team and the consumer & personal
care group operating committee. ms. foster-cheek became a member
of the executive committee and vice president, human resources,
for the company in january 2005. prior to joining the company,
ms.foster-cheek served in various human resources
management positions with pfizer inc. for 13years, most
recently supporting its pharmaceutical business in japan, asia,
africa, middle east and latin america.
(e)
ms.c. a. goggins joined the company in 1981
and held various positions before becoming president of personal
products company in 1994. she was named president of johnson
& johnson consumer products company in 1995 and company
group chairman, north america, johnson & johnson consumer
products in 1998. ms.goggins became a member of the
executive committee and worldwide chairman, consumer &
personal care group, in 2001.
(f)
dr.p. a. peterson joined the company in
1994 as vice president, drug discovery, of the r.w.johnson
pharmaceutical research institute. he was named group vice
president of the pharmaceutical research institute in april 1998
and its president in november 1998. in 2000, dr.peterson
was named chairman, research& development,
pharmaceuticals group. dr.peterson became a member of the
executive committee in 2001. he plans to retire from the company
in 2007.
(g)
mr.j.c. scodari joined the company in
1999 as president of centocor when the company acquired
centocor. at the time of that acquisition, he had been the
president and chief operating officer of centocor and a member
of centocors board of directors since december 1997. in
march 2001, he was named company group chairman for the north
american pharmaceutical business, and became a member of the
pharmaceuticals group operating committee. in march 2003,
mr.scodari was named company group chairman,
biopharmaceutical businesses. mr.scodari was named
worldwide chairman, pharmaceuticals group, and became a member
of the executive committee in march 2005.
(h)
mr. n.j. valeriani joined the company in
1978 and held various positions before becoming president of
ethicon endo-surgery, inc. in 1997. in january 2001 he was named
company group chairman for ethicon endo-surgery with additional
responsibility for the johnson& johnson medical
products medical devices and diagnostics business in canada. he
became worldwide franchise chairman for the depuy franchise in
2002. mr.valeriani became a member of the executive
committee and vice president, human resources, in september
2003. in february 2004 he assumed additional responsibilities as
worldwide chairman, diagnostics. in january 2005,
mr.valeriani was appointed worldwide chairman,
cardiovascular devices and diagnostics and relinquished his
human resources responsibilities. he became worldwide chairman,
medical devices and diagnostics group in october 2006.
part ii
item 5.
market for the registrants common
equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of
equity securities
as of february16, 2007, there were 176,808
record holders of common stock of the company. the other
information called for by this item is incorporated herein by
reference to: the material under the captions
managements discussion and analysis of results of
operations and financial condition share repurchase
and dividends on page45; common
stock market prices on page49; shareholder
return performance graphs on page79; and
note10 common stock, stock option plans and stock
compensation agreements under notes to consolidated
financial statements on pages59 and 60 of the annual
report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
issuer purchases of equity
securities
common stock purchases on the open market are
made as part of a systematic plan to meet the companys
compensation programs.
on march8, 2006, the company announced that
its board of directors approved a stock repurchase program,
authorizing the company to buy back up to $5billion of the
companys common stock. the program was completed in the
fiscal fourth quarter of 2006.
the following table provides information with
respect to common stock purchases by the company during the
fiscal fourth quarter of 2006.
total number of
shares purchased as
part of publicly
total number of
ave. price paid
announced plans or
fiscal month
shares purchased(1)
per share
programs
october2, 2006 through october29, 2006
12,728,600
$
66.08
3,696,019
october30, 2006 through november26,
5,446,300
$
67.29
november27, 2006 through december31,
2,164,600
$
66.02
total
20,339,500
3,696,019
(1)
during the fiscal fourth quarter of 2006, the
company repurchased an aggregate of 3,696,019shares of
johnson& johnson common stock pursuant to the
repurchase program that was publicly announced on march8,
2006 and an aggregate of 16,643,481shares in open-market
transactions outside of the program.
item 6.selected
financial data
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material captioned
summary of operations and statistical data 1996-2006
on page78 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13
to this report on form10-k.
item 7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operation
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the narrative and tabular
(but not the graphic) material captioned managements
discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition on pages38 through 49 of the annual
report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item7a.quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the narrative (but not the
graphic) material captioned managements discussion
and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition liquidity and capital resources on
pages44 and 45 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
item 8.financial
statements and supplementary data
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the audited consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto and the material
captioned report of independent registered public
accounting firm on pages50 through 77 of the annual
report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item 9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a.
controls and
procedures
disclosure controls and
procedures. at the end of the period
covered by this report, the company evaluated the effectiveness
of the design and operation of its disclosure controls and
procedures. the companys disclosure controls and
procedures are designed to ensure that information required to
be disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or
submits under the securities exchange act is recorded,
processed, summarized and reported, within the time periods
specified in the secs rules and forms. disclosure controls
and procedures include, without limitation, controls and
procedures designed to ensure that information required to be
disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or submits
under the securities exchange act is accumulated and
communicated to the companys management, including its
principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons
performing similar functions, as appropriate to allow timely
decisions regarding required disclosure. williamc. weldon,
chairman and chief executive officer, and dominic j. caruso,
chief financial officer, reviewed and participated in this
evaluation. based on this evaluation, messrs.weldon and
caruso concluded that, as of the date of their evaluation, the
companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
internal control.
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting is included in this report on form10-k in this
item 9a. during the fiscal quarter ended december31, 2006,
there were no changes in the companys internal control
over financial reporting that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
managements report on internal control
over financial reporting. under
section 404 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, management is
required to assess the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting as of the end of each
fiscal year and report, based on that assessment, whether the
companys internal control over financial reporting is
effective.
management of the company is responsible for
establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting. the companys internal control over
financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance
as to the reliability of the companys financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.
internal controls over financial reporting, no
matter how well designed, have inherent limitations. therefore,
internal control over financial reporting determined to be
effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to
financial statement preparation and may not prevent or detect
all misstatements. moreover, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions,
or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
may deteriorate.
the companys management has assessed the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of december31, 2006. in making this
assessment, the company used the criteria established by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
(coso) in internal control-integrated framework.
these criteria are in the areas of control environment, risk
assessment, control activities, information and communication,
and monitoring. the companys assessment included extensive
documenting, evaluating and testing the design and operating
effectiveness of its internal controls over financial reporting.
on december20, 2006, the company completed
the acquisition of the consumer healthcare business of pfizer
inc. due to the close proximity of the completion date of the
acquisition to the date of managements assessment of the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting, management excluded the consumer healthcare
business of pfizer inc. from its assessment of internal control
over financial reporting.
the total assets of the consumer healthcare
business of pfizer inc., which were primarily intangible assets
and goodwill, represented 26% of the companys total assets
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006.
the operating results of the consumer healthcare
business acquired from pfizer inc. on december20, 2006
will be reported in the companys financial statements
beginning in 2007, as 2006 results subsequent to the acquisition
date were not significant.
based on the companys processes and
assessment, as described above, management has concluded that,
as of december31, 2006, the companys internal
control over financial reporting was effective.
managements assessment of the effectiveness
of the companys internal control over financial reporting
as of december31, 2006 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report, which appears in the
report of independent registered public accounting
firm on page77 of the annual report, which is
incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k.
item 9b.other
information
on february12, 2007, the company announced
that michaelj. dormer, worldwide chairman, medical
devices, has retired from the company, effective immediately.
part iii
item 10.directors, executive
officers and corporate governance
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material under the
captions election of directors and stock
ownership and section16 compliance
section16(b) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance and the discussion of the audit committee under
the caption corporate governance board
meetings and committees; annual meeting attendance
board committees in the proxy statement; and the material
captioned executive officers of the registrant in
parti of this report of form10-k.
the companys policy on business conduct,
which covers all employees (including the chief executive
officer, chief financial officer and controller), meets the
requirements of the sec rules promulgated under section406
of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002. the policy on business
conduct is available on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance, and copies are available
to shareholders without charge upon written request to the
secretary at the companys principal address. any
substantive amendment to the policy on business conduct or any
waiver of the policy granted to the chief executive officer, the
chief financial officer or the controller will be posted on the
companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance within five business days
(and retained on the web site for at least one year).
in addition, the company has adopted a code of
business conduct & ethics for members of the board of
directors and executive officers. the code of business conduct
& ethics for members of the board of directors and executive
officers is available on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance, and copies are available
to shareholders without charge upon written request to the
secretary at the companys principal address. any
substantive amendment to the code or any waiver of the code
granted to any member of the board of directors or any executive
officer will be posted on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance within five business days
(and retained on the web site for at least one year).
item 11.executive
compensation
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material under the
captions, compensation discussion and analysis,
executive and director compensation and
compensation committee report in the proxy statement.
the material incorporated herein by reference to
the material under the caption compensation committee
report in the proxy statement shall be deemed furnished,
and not filed, in this report on form10-k and shall not be
deemed incorporated by reference into any filing under the
securities act of 1933, as amended, or the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended, as a result of this furnishing, except
to the extent that the registrant specifically incorporates it
by reference.
item 12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder matters
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material captioned
stock ownership and section16 compliance in
the proxy statement and note10 common stock, stock
option plans and stock compensation agreements under
notes to consolidated financial statements on
page59 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k.
equity compensation plan information
the following table provides certain information
as of december31, 2006 concerning the shares of the
companys common stock that may be issued under existing
equity compensation plans.
number of shares to be
weighted average
number of shares
issued upon exercise of
exercise price
remaining available for
outstanding options
of outstanding
future issuance under
and rights
options and rights
equity compensation plans
asofdec.31,2006
asofdec.31,2006
asofdec.31,2006(4)
equity compensation plans approved by
shareholders(1)
246,014,200
$
53.37
224,653,902
equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders(2)(3)
3,797,272
$
33.46
total
249,811,472
$
53.07
224,653,902
(1)
included in this category are the following
equity compensation plans which have been approved by the
companys shareholders: 1995 stock option plan, 2000 stock
option plan, 2000 stock compensation plan and 2005 long-term
incentive plan.
(2)
included in this category are
3,644,572shares of common stock issuable under various
equity compensation plans which were assumed by the company upon
acquisition of the following companies: alza corporation,
sciosinc., innovasive devices,inc., inverness
medical technology,inc. and centocor,inc. 1,677,521
of the shares listed as issuable in this category were issued
under plans that were approved by the shareholders of these
companies prior to the acquisition and the assumption of these
plans by the company. at the time of each of these acquisitions,
options to acquire equity of the acquired company were replaced
by options to acquire the common stock of the company. no stock
options or equity awards of any type have been made under any of
these plans since the assumption of these plans by the company,
and no further stock options or other equity awards of any type
will be made under any of these plans in the future.
the shares that are included in this column that
were issued under plans not approved by shareholders of the
applicable acquired company are: 1,085,090shares issuable
under the 1996 scios non-officer stock option plan;
846,790shares issuable under an alza non-statutory plan;
and 35,171shares issuable under warrants under an
inverness medical plan.
(3)
also included in this category are
152,700shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise
of outstanding stock options under companys stock option
plan for non-employee directors.
(4)
this column excludes shares reflected under the
column number of shares to be issued upon exercise of
outstanding options and rights as of
dec.31,2006.
item 13.
certain relationships and related
transactions, and director independence
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material under the
captions, corporate governance director
independence and transactions with related
persons in the proxy statement.
item 14.principal accounting fees
and services
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the material under the
caption ratification of appointment of independent
registered public accounting firm in the proxy statement.
part iv
item 15.exhibits, financial
statement schedules
(a)the following documents are filed as
part of this report:
1.financial statements
the following audited consolidated financial
statements and notes thereto and the material captioned
report of independent registered public accounting
firm on pages50 through 77 of the annual report are
incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k:
consolidated balance sheets at end of fiscal
years 2006 and 2005
consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal
years 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statements of equity for fiscal
years 2006, 2005 and 2004
consolidated statements of cash flows for fiscal
years 2006, 2005 and 2004
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of independent registered public
accounting firm
2.financial statement schedules
schedule ii valuation and qualifying
accounts
schedules other than those listed above are
omitted because they are not required or are not applicable.
3.exhibits required to be filed by item
60l of regulation s-k
the information called for by this item is
incorporated herein by reference to the exhibit index in this
report.
johnson& johnson and
subsidiaries
scheduleii valuation and
qualifying accounts
fiscal years ended december31, 2006,
january1, 2006 and january2, 2005
(dollars in millions)
balance at
balance at
beginning
payments/
end of
of period
accruals
other
period
accrued rebates(1)
$
1,565
5,017
(4,891
)
1,691
accrued returns
(146
)
accrued promotions
2,284
(2,215
)
subtotal
$
2,488
7,511
(7,252
)
2,747
reserve for doubtful accounts
(21
)
reserve for cash discounts
(862
)
total
$
2,709
8,395
(8,135
)
2,969
accrued rebates(1)
$
1,862
5,301
(5,598
)
1,565
accrued returns
(307
)
accrued promotions
2,112
(2,190
)
subtotal
$
2,785
7,798
(2)
(8,095
)
2,488
reserve for doubtful accounts
(61
)
reserve for cash discounts
(866
)
total
$
3,053
8,678
(9,022
)
2,709
accrued rebates(1)
$
1,827
5,335
(5,300
)
1,862
accrued returns
(320
)
accrued promotions
1,853
(1,731
)
subtotal
$
2,622
7,514
(3)
(7,351
)
2,785
reserve for doubtful accounts
(15
)
reserve for cash discounts
(729
)
total
$
2,869
8,279
(8,095
)
3,053
(1)
includes reserve for customer rebates of
$558million, $471 million and $488million, recorded
as a contra asset, at december31, 2006, january1,
2006 and january2, 2005, respectively.
(2)
includes $186million related to previously
estimated performance-based rebate allowances in managed care
contracts.
(3)
includes $170million related to previously
estimated performance-based rebate allowances in managed care
contracts.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section 13 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
date: february16, 2007
johnson & johnson
(registrant)
by
/s/ w. c. weldon
w. c. weldon, chairman, board of directors,
and chief executive officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/ w. c. weldon
w. c. weldon
chairman, board of directors,
chief executive officer, and director (principal executive
officer)
february16, 2007
/s/ r. j. darretta
r. j. darretta
vice chairman, board of directors, and director
february20, 2007
c.a. poon
vice chairman, board of directors, and director
/s/ d.j. caruso
d.j. caruso
chief financial officer (principal financial
officer)
february16, 2007
/s/ s. j. cosgrove
s. j. cosgrove
controller (principal accounting officer)
february14, 2007
/s/ m. s. coleman
m. s. coleman
director
february15, 2007
/s/ j. g. cullen
j. g. cullen
director
february19, 2007
m. m. e. johns
director
a.d. jordan
director
signature
title
date
/s/ a. g. langbo
a. g. langbo
director
february20, 2007
/s/ s. l. lindquist
s. l. lindquist
director
february19, 2007
/s/ l.f. mullin
l.f. mullin
director
february16, 2007
/s/ c. prince
c. prince
director
february16, 2007
/s/ s. s reinemund
s. s reinemund
director
february19, 2007
/s/ d. satcher
d. satcher
director
february19, 2007
report of independent registered public
accounting firm on
financial statement schedule
to the board of directors of
johnson & johnson:
our audits of the consolidated financial
statements, of managements assessment of the effectiveness
of internal control over financial reporting and of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
referred to in our report dated february20, 2007 appearing
in the 2006 annual report to shareholders of johnson &
johnson (which report, consolidated financial statements and
assessment are incorporated by reference in this annual report
on form10-k) also included an audit of the financial
statement schedule listed in item15(a)(2) of this
form10-k. in our opinion, this financial statement
schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the
information set forth therein when read in conjunction with the
related consolidated financial statements.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february20, 2007
exhibit index
reg. s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(a)(i)
restated certificate of incorporation dated
april26, 1990 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit3(a) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december30, 1990.
(a)(ii)
certificate of amendment to the restated
certificate of incorporation of the company dated may20,
1992 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3(a) of the registrants form10-k annual
report for the year ended january3, 1993.
(a)(iii)
certificate of amendment to the restated
certificate of incorporation of the company dated may21,
1996 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3(a)(iii) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 1996.
(a)(iv)
certificate of amendment to the restated
certificate of incorporation of the company effective
may22, 2001 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit3 of the registrants form10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended july1, 2001.
(a)(v)
certificate of amendment to the restated
certificate of incorporation of the company effective
april27, 2006 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit3(i) of the registrants form 10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended april 2, 2006.
(b)
by-laws of the company, as amended effective
june11, 2001 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit99.2 of the registrants form10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended july1, 2001.
(a)
upon the request of the securities and exchange
commission, the registrant will furnish a copy of all
instruments defining the rights of holders of long term debt of
the registrant.
(a)
stock option plan for non-employee
directors incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10(a) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 1996.*
(b)
2000 stock option plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(b) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december29, 2002.*
(c)
1995 stock option plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(b) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended january3, 1999.*
(d)
2000 stock compensation plan
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(e) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december31, 2000.*
(e)
2005 long-term incentive
planincorporated herein by reference to
exhibit4 of the registrants s-8 registration
statement filed with the commission on may10, 2005 (file
no.333-124785).*
(f)
form of stock option certificate and restricted
shares to non-employee directors certificate under the 2005
long-term incentive plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit10.1 of the registrants
form10-q quarterly report for the quarter ended
july3, 2005.*
(g)
form of restricted stock unit certificate under
the 2005 long-term incentive plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10.1 of the
registrants form10-q quarterly report for the
quarter ended october2, 2005.*
(h)
executive bonus plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit4 of the registrants
forms-8 registration statement filed with the commission
on november8, 2005 (file no.333-129542).*
(i)
executive incentive plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(f) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december31, 2000.*
reg. s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(j)
domestic deferred compensation (certificate of
extra compensation) plan (as amended) incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(g) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december28, 2003.*
(k)
deferred fee plan for non-employee directors (as
amended)  incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10(h) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended january2, 2005.*
(l)
executive income deferral plan (as
amended) incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10(i) of the registrants form10-k
annual report for the year ended december28, 2003.*
(m)
excess savings plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(j) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended december29, 1996.*
(n)
supplemental retirement plan  incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit 10(h) of the registrants
form 10-k annual report for the year ended january3, 1993.*
(o)
executive life insurance plan  incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit 10(i)of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
january3, 1993.*
(p)
stock option gain deferral plan
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(m) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended january2, 2000.*
(q)
estate preservation plan incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(n) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year
ended january2, 2000.*
(r)
summary of compensation arrangements for named
executive officers and directors  filed with this
document.*
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to
fixed charges  filed with this document.
pages 38 through 79 of the
companys annual report to shareholders for fiscal year
2006 (only those portions of the annual report incorporated by
reference in this report are deemed filed)
filed with this document.
subsidiaries  filed with this document.
consent of independent registered public
accounting firm filed with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant
to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act filed
with this document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant
to section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act filed
with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant
to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act
furnished with this document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant
to section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act
furnished with this document.
cautionary statement pursuant to private
securities litigation reform act of 1995 safe
harbor for forward-looking statements  filed with
this document.
*
management contract or compensatory plan.
a copy of any of the exhibits listed above will
be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a
written request specifying the desired exhibit(s) to the
secretary at the principal executive offices of the company.
