10-k
y47910e10vk.htm
form 10-k
10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange
commission
washington, d.c.
form
10-k
annual report pursuant to
section 13 of
the securities exchange act of
for the
fiscal year ended december30, 2007
commission file number
1-3215
johnson &
johnson
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
new jersey
22-1024240
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer identification
no.)
one johnson & johnson plaza
new brunswick, new jersey
(address of principal executive
offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code:
(732)
524-0400
securities
registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $1.00
new york stock exchange
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities
act.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to section 13 or section 15(d) of the exchange
act.yesonox
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed
all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of
the exchange act during the preceding 12 months (or for such
shorter period that the registrant was required to file such
reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past 90
days.yesxnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of regulation s-k is not contained
herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this
form10-k or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated
filer, or a smaller reporting company (as defined in
rule12b-2 of the exchange act).
large
accelerated
filerxaccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filerosmaller
reporting
companyo
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
(as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange
act).yesonox
the aggregate market value of the common stock held by
non-affiliates computed by reference to the price at which the
common stock was last sold as of the last business day of the
registrants most recently completed second fiscal quarter
was approximately $178billion.
on february15, 2008 there were 2,832,602,429shares
of common stock outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference
partsi, ii and iii:
portions of registrants annual report to shareholders for
fiscal year 2007 (the annual report).
parts i and iii:
portions of registrants proxy statement for its 2008
annual meeting of shareholders filed within 120 days after the
close of the registrants fiscal year (the proxy
statement).
item
page
parti
1.
business
general
segments of business
geographic areas
raw materials
patents and trademarks
seasonality
competition
research and development
environment
regulation
available information
1a.
risk factors
1b.
unresolved staff comments
2.
properties
3.
legal proceedings
4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
executive officers of the registrant
partii
5.
market for the registrants common equity,
related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity
securities
6.
selected financial data
7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operation
7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
8.
financial statements and supplementary data
9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
9a.
controls and procedures
9b.
other information
partiii
10.
directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
11.
executive compensation
12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management and related stockholder matters
13.
certain relationships and related transactions,
and director independence
14.
principal accounting fees and services
partiv
15.
exhibits, financial statement schedules
scheduleii valuation and
qualifying accounts
signatures
report of independent registered public
accounting firm on financial statement schedule
exhibit index
ex-10.r: summary of compensation arrangements for named executive officers and directors
ex-12: statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
ex-13: pages 36 through 77 of the company's annual report to shareholders
ex-21: subsidiaries
ex-23: consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
ex-31.a: certification
ex-31.b: certification
ex-32.a: certification
ex-32.b: certification
ex-99: cautionary statement
table of contents
part
i
item
1.business
general
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries have
approximately 119,200employees worldwide engaged in the
research and development, manufacture and sale of a broad range
of products in the health care field. johnson&
johnson is a holding company, which has more than 250 operating
companies conducting business in virtually all countries of the
world. johnson& johnsons primary focus has been
on products related to human health and well-being.
johnson& johnson was incorporated in the state of new
jersey in 1887.
the companys structure is based on the principle of
decentralized management. the executive committee of
johnson& johnson is the principal management group
responsible for the operations and allocation of the resources
of the company. this committee oversees and coordinates the
activities of the consumer, pharmaceutical and medical devices
and diagnostics business segments. each subsidiary within the
business segments is, with some exceptions, managed by citizens
of the country where it is located.
segments
of business
johnson& johnsons operating companies are
organized into three business segments: consumer, pharmaceutical
and medical devices and diagnostics. additional information
required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the
narrative and tabular (but not the graphic) descriptions of
segments and operating results under the captions
managements discussion and analysis of results of
operations and financial condition on pages36
through 47 and note11 segments of business and
geographic areas under notes to consolidated
financial statements on page59 of the annual report,
filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
consumer
the consumer segment includes a broad range of products used in
the babycare, skin care, oral care, wound care and
womens health care fields, as well as nutritional and
over-the-counter pharmaceutical products. major brands include
aveeno
skin care products;
band-aid
brand adhesive bandages;
carefree
pantiliners; clean&
clear
teen skin care products;
johnsons
baby and adult lines of products;
listerine
oral care products;
motrin
ib ibuprofen products;
neutrogena
skin and hair care products;
roc
skin care products;
pepcid
ac acid controller from johnson&
johnsonmerck consumer pharmaceuticals co.;
rembrandt
brand of oral care products;
splenda
no calorie sweetener;
stayfree
sanitary protection products;
sudafed
cold, flu and allergy products; the broad family of
tylenol
acetaminophen products and vendme skin care product lines.
these products are marketed principally to the general public
and sold both to wholesalers and directly to independent and
chain retail outlets throughout the world.
pharmaceutical
the pharmaceutical segment includes products in the following
therapeutic areas: anti-infective, antipsychotic,
cardiovascular, contraceptive, dermatology, gastrointestinal,
hematology, immunology, neurology, oncology, pain management,
urology and virology. these products are distributed directly to
retailers, wholesalers and health care professionals for
prescription use by the general public. key products in the
pharmaceutical segment include:
risperdal
oral (risperidone),  a medication that treats the symptoms of
schizophrenia, bipolar mania and irritability associated with
autistic behavior in indicated patients,
risperdal
consta
(risperidone), a long-acting injectable, and
invegatm
(paliperdone) extended-release tablets, for the treatment of
schizophrenia;
remicade
(infliximab), a biologic approved for the treatment of
crohns disease, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis,
psoriatic arthritis, ulcerative colitis, and use in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis;
procrit
(epoetin alfa, sold outside the u.s. as
eprex),
a
biotechnology-derived
product that stimulates red blood cell production;
topamax
(topiramate), approved for adjunctive and monotherapy use in
epilepsy, as well as for the prophylactic treatment of migranes;
levaquin
(levofloxacin) and
floxin
(ofloxacin), both in the anti-infective field;
aciphex/pariet,
a proton pump inhibitor co-marketed with eisai inc.
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal (fentanyl transdermal system, sold outside the u.s.
as
durogesic),
a treatment for chronic pain that offers a novel delivery
system;
concerta
(methylphenidate hcl), a product for the treatment of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder; and ortho
evra
table of contents
(norelgestromin/ethinyl estradiol transdermal system), the first
contraceptive patch approved by the u.s. food and drug
administration (fda).
medical
devices and diagnostics
the medical devices and diagnostics segment includes a broad
range of products distributed to wholesalers, hospitals and
retailers, used principally in the professional fields by
physicians, nurses, therapists, hospitals, diagnostic
laboratories and clinics. these products include cordis
circulatory disease management products; depuys
orthopaedic joint reconstruction and spinal care products;
ethicons wound care and womens health products;
ethicon endo-surgerys minimally invasive surgical
products; lifescans blood glucose monitoring and insulin
delivery products; ortho-clinical diagnostics professional
diagnostic products and vision cares disposable contact
lenses. distribution to these health care professional markets
is done both directly and through surgical supply and other
dealers.
geographic
areas
the international business of johnson & johnson is
conducted by subsidiaries located in 56 countries outside the
united states, which are selling products in virtually all
countries throughout the world. the products made and sold in
the international business include many of those described above
under  segments of business
consumer, pharmaceutical and
medical devices and diagnostics.
however, the principal markets, products and methods of
distribution in the international business vary with the country
and the culture. the products sold in international business
include not only those developed in the united states, but also
those developed by subsidiaries abroad.
investments and activities in some countries outside the united
states are subject to higher risks than comparable u.s.
activities because the investment and commercial climate is
influenced by restrictive economic policies and political
uncertainties.
raw
materials
raw materials essential to johnson & johnsons
operating companies businesses are generally readily
available from multiple sources.
patents
and trademarks
johnson & johnson and its operating companies have made a
practice of obtaining patent protection on their products and
processes where possible. they own or are licensed under a
number of patents relating to its products and manufacturing
processes, which in the aggregate are believed to be of material
importance to johnson & johnson in the operation of its
businesses. sales of the companys two largest products,
risperdal
and
remicade,
accounted for approximately 6% and 5% of johnson &
johnsons total revenues, respectively, for fiscal 2007.
accordingly, the patents related to these products are believed
to be material to johnson& johnson as a whole.
during 2004 through 2006,
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal (fentanyl transdermal system) lost its basic patent
protection and is subject to generic competition in the united
states and certain international markets, and the basic patents
covering
eprex
(epoetin alfa) have expired and increased biosimilar competition
in international markets is expected.
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal sales declined by 10.1% to $1.2billion in 2007
as compared to 2006, due to the impact of generic competition.
combined sales of
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal and
eprex
accounted for approximately 4% of johnson&
johnsons worldwide sales in 2007. the material patents
that expired in 2007 or will expire in 2008 are related to
risperdal,
which expired in the united states in december 2007, and
topamax,
which is scheduled to expire in the united states in september
2008. the company has received a pediatric extension for
risperdal
oral from the fda, which grants market exclusivity in the united
states through june 2008. the company is on target to file for a
pediatric extension for
topamax,
which, if obtained from the fda, would grant market exclusivity
in the united states until march 2009.
table of contents
johnson & johnsons operating companies have made a
practice of selling their products under trademarks and of
obtaining protection for these trademarks by all available
means. these trademarks are protected by registration in the
united states and other countries where such products are
marketed. johnson & johnson considers these trademarks in
the aggregate to be of material importance in the operation of
its businesses.
seasonality
worldwide sales do not reflect any significant degree of
seasonality; however, spending has been heavier in the fourth
quarter of each year than in other quarters. this reflects
increased spending decisions, principally for advertising and
research and development activity.
competition
in all of their product lines, johnson & johnsons
operating companies compete with companies both large and small,
located throughout the world. competition is strong in all
product lines without regard to the number and size of the
competing companies involved. competition in research, involving
the development and the improvement of new and existing products
and processes, is particularly significant. the development of
new and improved products is important to johnson &
johnsons success in all areas of its businesses. this also
includes protecting the companys portfolio of intellectual
property. the competitive environment requires substantial
investments in continuing research and multiple sales forces. in
addition, the development and maintenance of customer acceptance
of the products of johnson & johnsons consumer
businesses involves significant expenditures for advertising and
promotion.
research
and development
research activities represent a significant part of johnson
& johnsons subsidiaries businesses. major
research facilities are located not only in the united states
but also in australia, belgium, brazil, canada, china, france,
germany, india, japan, the netherlands, singapore and the united
kingdom. the costs of worldwide company-sponsored research
activities relating to the development of new products,
improvement of existing products, technical support of products
and compliance with governmental regulations for the protection
of consumers and patients, excluding in-process research and
development charges, amounted to $7,680 million,
$7,125million and $6,462million for fiscal years
2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. these costs are charged
directly to income in the year in which incurred.
environment
johnson & johnsons operating companies are subject to
a variety of federal, state and local environmental protection
measures. johnson & johnson believes that its operations
comply in all material respects with applicable environmental
laws and regulations. johnson & johnsons compliance
with these requirements did not during the past year, and is not
expected to, have a material effect upon its capital
expenditures, cash flows, earnings or competitive position.
regulation
most of johnson & johnsons businesses are subject to
varying degrees of governmental regulation in the countries in
which operations are conducted, and the general trend is toward
increasingly stringent regulation. in the united states, the
drug, device, diagnostics and cosmetic industries have long been
subject to regulation by various federal and state agencies,
primarily as to product safety, efficacy, manufacturing,
advertising, labeling and safety reporting. the exercise of
broad regulatory powers by the fda continues to result in
increases in the amounts of testing and documentation required
for fda clearance of new drugs and devices and a corresponding
increase in the expense of product introduction. similar trends
are also evident in major markets outside of the united states.
the costs of human health care have been and continue to be a
subject of study, investigation and regulation by governmental
agencies and legislative bodies around the world. in the united
states, attention has been focused on drug prices and profits
and programs that encourage doctors to write prescriptions for
particular drugs or recommend, use or purchase particular
medical devices. payers have become a more potent force in the
market
table of contents
place and increased attention is being paid to drug and medical
device pricing, appropriate drug and medical device utilization
and the quality and costs of health care. in the united states,
implementation of the medicare prescription drug, improvement
and modernization act of 2003 and the deficit reduction act of
2005 may cause uncertainty in reimbursement levels in certain
product segments.
the regulatory agencies under whose purview johnson &
johnsons operating companies operate have administrative
powers that may subject those companies to such actions as
product withdrawals, recalls, seizure of products and other
civil and criminal sanctions. in some cases, johnson &
johnsons operating companies may deem it advisable to
initiate product recalls.
in addition, business practices in the health care industry have
come under increased scrutiny, particularly in the united
states, by government agencies and state attorneys general, and
resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of
significant civil and criminal penalties.
available
information
the companys main corporate web site address is
www.jnj.com. copies of johnson & johnsons
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
annual report on
form10-k
and current reports on
form8-k
filed or furnished to the u.s.securities and exchange
commission (the sec), and any amendments to the
foregoing, will be provided without charge to any shareholder
submitting a written request to the secretary at the principal
executive offices of the company or by calling 1-800-328-9033.
all of the companys sec filings are also available on the
companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance.cfm, as soon as
reasonably practicable after having been electronically filed or
furnished to the sec. all sec filings are also available at the
secs web site at www.sec.gov. in addition, the
written charters of the audit committee, the compensation &
benefits committee and the nominating & corporate
governance committee of the board of directors and the
companys principles of corporate governance, policy on
business conduct for employees and code of business conduct
& ethics for members of the board of directors and
executive officers are available at the
www.investor.jnj.com/governance.cfm web site address and
will be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a
written request, as provided above.
item
1a.risk factors
not applicable.
item
1b.unresolved staff comments
not applicable.
item
2.properties
johnson & johnson and its subsidiaries operate 150
manufacturing facilities occupying approximately
21.6million square feet of floor space.
the manufacturing facilities are used by the industry segments
of johnson & johnsons business approximately as
follows:
square feet
(in
segment
thousands)
consumer
7,898
pharmaceutical
6,082
medical devices and diagnostics
7,635
worldwide total
21,615
within the united states, eightfacilities are used by the
consumer segment, 14 by the pharmaceutical segment and 41 by the
medical devices and diagnostics segment. johnson&
johnsons manufacturing operations outside the united
states are often conducted in facilities that serve more than
one business segment.
table of contents
the locations of the manufacturing facilities by major
geographic areas of the world are as follows:
square feet
number of
(in
geographic area
facilities
thousands)
united states
7,846
europe
7,558
western hemisphere, excluding u.s.
2,972
africa, asia and pacific
3,239
worldwide total
21,615
in addition to the manufacturing facilities discussed above,
johnson & johnson and its subsidiaries maintain numerous
office and warehouse facilities throughout the world. research
facilities are also discussed in item 1 under business
research and development.
johnson & johnson and its subsidiaries generally seek to
own their manufacturing facilities, although some, principally
in locations abroad, are leased. office and warehouse facilities
are often leased.
johnson & johnsons properties are maintained in good
operating condition and repair and are well utilized.
for information regarding lease obligations, see note4
rental expense and lease commitments under
notes to consolidated financial statements on
page55 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k. segment information on additions
to property, plant and equipment is contained in note11
segments of business and geographic areas under
notes to consolidated financial statements on
page59 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on form10-k.
item
3.legal proceedings
the information set forth in note 18 legal
proceedings under notes to consolidated financial
statements on pages66 through 72 of the annual
report is incorporated herein by reference and filed as
exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
the company or its subsidiaries are parties to a number of
proceedings brought under the comprehensive environmental
response, compensation and liability act, commonly known as
superfund, and comparable state laws, in which the primary
relief sought is the cost of past and future remediation. while
it is not feasible to predict or determine the outcome of these
proceedings, in the opinion of the company, such proceedings
would not have a material adverse effect on the results of
operations, cash flows or financial position of the company.
item
4.submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
not applicable.
executive
officers of the registrant
listed below are the executive officers of johnson &
johnson as of february15, 2008, each of whom, unless
otherwise indicated below, has been an employee of the company
or its affiliates and held the position indicated during the
past five years. there are no family relationships between any
of the executive officers, and there is no arrangement or
understanding between any executive officer and any other person
pursuant to which the executive officer was selected. at the
annual meeting of the board of directors, the executive officers
are elected by the board to hold office for one year and until
their respective successors are elected and qualified, or until
earlier resignation or removal.
table of contents
information with regard to the directors of the company,
including those of the following executive officers who are
directors, is incorporated herein by reference to the material
captioned election of directors in the proxy
statement.
name
age
position
dominic j. caruso
member, executive committee; vice president, finance; chief
financial officer(a)
donald m. casey, jr.
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman, comprehensive
care group(b)
russell c. deyo
member, executive committee; vice president, general counsel (c)
kaye i. foster-cheek
member, executive committee; vice president, human resources(d)
colleen a. goggins
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman, consumer
group(e)
sherilyn s. mccoy
member, executive committee; worldwide chairman, surgical care
group(f)
christine a. poon
vice chairman, board of directors; member, executive committee;
worldwide chairman, pharmaceuticals group
joseph c. scodari
member, executive committee(g)
nicholas j. valeriani
member, executive committee; vice president, strategy &
growth(h)
william c. weldon
chairman, board of directors; chairman, executive committee;
chief executive officer
(a)
mr.d. j. caruso joined the company in 1999 when the
company acquired centocor, inc. at the time of that acquisition,
he had been senior vice president, finance of centocor.
mr.caruso was named vice president, finance of
ortho-mcneil pharmaceutical, inc. in 2001 and vice president,
group finance of the companys medical devices and
diagnostics group in 2003. in 2005, mr.caruso was named
vice president of the companys group finance organization.
mr.caruso became a member of the executive committee and
vice president, finance and chief financial officer in
january2007.
(b)
mr.d. m. casey,jr., joined the company in 1985 and
held various positions before becoming president of
johnson& johnson  merck consumer
pharmaceuticals co. in 1997. in 2001, he was named president of
personal products company division of johnson&
johnson consumer companies, inc. in 2002, mr.casey became
the group president of johnson& johnson vision care,
inc., and in 2004 was named company group chairman, vision care.
in november 2006, he was named company group chairman of the
lifescan franchise. in january 2008, he became a member of the
executive committee and worldwide chairman, comprehensive care
group.
(c)
mr. r. c. deyo joined the company in 1985 and became associate
general counsel in 1991. he became a member of the executive
committee and vice president, administration in 1996 and vice
president, general counsel in 2004.
(d)
ms.k.i. foster-cheek joined the company in 2003 as
vice president, human resources for the johnson & johnson
consumer products companies. in march 2004, she was named vice
president, human resources for the consumer & personal care
group and was named a member of the human resources leadership
team and the consumer & personal care group operating
committee. ms. foster-cheek became a member of the executive
committee and vice president, human resources for the company in
2005. prior to joining the company, ms.foster-cheek served
in various human resources management positions with pfizer inc.
for 13years, most recently supporting its pharmaceutical
businesses in japan, asia, africa, middle east and latin america.
(e)
ms.c. a. goggins joined the company in 1981 and held
various positions before becoming president of personal products
company in 1994. she was named president of johnson &
johnson consumer companies, inc. in 1995 and company group
chairman, north america, johnson & johnson consumer
products in 1998. ms.goggins became a member of the
executive committee and worldwide chairman, consumer &
personal care group in 2001, now known as the consumer group.
table of contents
(f)
ms.s. s. mccoy joined the company in 1982 as an associate
scientist in research& development for personal
products company. she was named vice president,
research& development for the personal products
worldwide division of mcneil-ppc, inc. in 1995, and vice
president, marketing for its skin care franchise in 2000. in
2002, ms.mccoy became global president for its baby and
wound care franchise. she was named company group chairman and
worldwide franchise chairman of ethicon, inc. in 2005. in
january 2008 she became a member of the executive committee and
worldwide chairman, surgical care group.
(g)
mr.j.c. scodari joined the company in 1999 as
president of centocor, inc. when the company acquired centocor.
at the time of that acquisition, he had been the president and
chief operating officer of centocor and a member of
centocors board of directors since december 1997. in 2001,
he was named company group chairman for the north american
pharmaceutical business, and became a member of the
pharmaceuticals group operating committee. in 2003,
mr.scodari was named company group chairman,
biopharmaceutical businesses. mr.scodari became a member
of the executive committee and worldwide chairman,
pharmaceuticals group in 2005. mr.scodari plans to retire
from the company in march2008.
(h)
mr. n.j. valeriani joined the company in 1978 and held
various positions before becoming president of ethicon
endo-surgery, inc. in 1997. in 2001 he was named company group
chairman for ethicon endo-surgery with additional responsibility
for the johnson& johnson medical products medical
devices and diagnostics business in canada. he became worldwide
franchise chairman for the depuy franchise in 2002.
mr.valeriani became a member of the executive committee
and vice president, human resources in 2003. in 2004 he assumed
additional responsibilities as worldwide chairman, diagnostics.
in 2005, mr.valeriani was appointed worldwide chairman,
cardiovascular devices and diagnostics and relinquished his
human resources responsibilities. he became worldwide chairman,
medical devices and diagnostics group in 2006. in january 2008
mr.valeriani became vice president, strategy & growth.
part
ii
item
5.
market
for the registrants common equity, related stockholder
matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
as of february15, 2008, there were 171,981 record holders
of common stock of the company. additional information called
for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to: the
material under the captions managements discussion
and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition liquidity and capital
resources share repurchase and dividends on
page44;  other
informationcommon stock market prices on
page47; note10 common stock, stock option
plans and stock compensation agreements under notes
to consolidated financial statements on pages57 and
58; and shareholder return performance graphs on
page77 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on
form10-k;
and item12 security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder
matters equity compensation plan information
of this report on
form10-k.
issuer
purchases of equity securities
on july9, 2007, the company announced that its board of
directors approved a stock repurchase program, authorizing the
company to buy back up to $10billion of the companys
common stock. share repurchases will take place on the open
market from time to time based on market conditions.  the
repurchase program has no time limit and may be suspended for
periods or discontinued at any time.  any shares acquired will
be available for general corporate purposes.  the company
intends to fund the share repurchase program through a
combination of available cash and debt. the company does not
expect its triple-a credit rating to be effected by the share
repurchase program.
in addition, common stock purchases on the open market are made
as part of a systematic plan related to the companys
compensation programs.
table of contents
the following table provides information with respect to common
stock purchases by the company during the fiscal fourth quarter
of 2007.
total number
of shares
remaining
purchased as
maximum number
part of
of shares that
total number
avg. price
publicly announced
may yet be purchased
of shares
paid per
plans or
under the plans
period
purchased(1)
share
programs
or
programs(2)
october1, 2007 through october28, 2007
14,421,200
$
65.71
5,981,000
october29, 2007 through november25, 2007
12,120,000
$
65.61
10,021,600
november26, 2007 through december30, 2007
18,979,600
$
67.63
13,536,900
total
45,520,800
29,539,500
94,888,775
(1)
during the fiscal fourth quarter of 2007, the company
repurchased an aggregate of 29,539,500shares of the
companys common stock pursuant to the repurchase program
that was publicly announced on july9, 2007 and an
aggregate of 15,981,300shares in open-market transactions
outside of the program.
(2)
as of december 30, 2007, based on the closing price of the
companys common stock on the new york stock exchange on
december 28, 2007 of $67.38 per share.
item
6.selected financial data
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the caption summary of
operations and statistical data 1997-2007 on page76
of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item
7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operation
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the narrative and tabular (but not the graphic)
material under the caption managements discussion
and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition on pages36 through 47 of the annual
report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item7a.quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the caption
managements discussion and analysis of results of
operations and financial condition liquidity and
capital resources financing and market risk on
page43 and note1 summary of significant
accounting policies financial instruments
under notes to consolidated financial statements on
pages53 and 54 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item
8.financial statements and supplementary
data
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the audited consolidated financial statements
and notes thereto and the material under the caption
report of independent registered public accounting
firm on pages48 through 75 of the annual report,
filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
table of contents
item
9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a.
controls
and procedures
disclosure controls and procedures.at the end
of the period covered by this report, the company evaluated the
effectiveness of the design and operation of its disclosure
controls and procedures. the companys disclosure controls
and procedures are designed to ensure that information required
to be disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or
submits under the exchange act is recorded, processed,
summarized and reported, within the time periods specified in
the secs rules and forms. disclosure controls and
procedures include, without limitation, controls and procedures
designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by
the company in the reports that it files or submits under the
exchange act is accumulated and communicated to the
companys management, including its principal executive and
principal financial officers, or persons performing similar
functions, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding
required disclosure. williamc. weldon, chairman and chief
executive officer, and dominic j. caruso, chief financial
officer, reviewed and participated in this evaluation. based on
this evaluation, messrs.weldon and caruso concluded that,
as of the end of the period covered by this report, the
companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
managements annual report on internal control over
financial reporting.under section 404 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, management is required to assess the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of the end of each fiscal year and
report, based on that assessment, whether the companys
internal control over financial reporting is effective.
management of the company is responsible for establishing and
maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.
the companys internal control over financial reporting is
designed to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability
of the companys financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles.
internal control over financial reporting, no matter how well
designed, has inherent limitations. therefore, internal control
over financial reporting determined to be effective can provide
only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement
preparation and may not prevent or detect all misstatements.
moreover, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to
future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
the companys management has assessed the effectiveness of
the companys internal control over financial reporting as
of december30, 2007. in making this assessment, the
company used the criteria established by the committee of
sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso) in
internal control-integrated framework. these
criteria are in the areas of control environment, risk
assessment, control activities, information and communication,
and monitoring. the companys assessment included extensive
documenting, evaluating and testing the design and operating
effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting.
based on the companys processes and assessment, as
described above, management has concluded that, as of
december30, 2007, the companys internal control over
financial reporting was effective.
the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of december30, 2007 has been
audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered
public accounting firm, as stated in their report, which appears
in the report of independent registered public accounting
firm on page75 of the annual report, which is
incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to
this report on
form10-k.
changes in internal control over financial
reporting.during the fiscal quarter ended
december30, 2007, there were no changes in the
companys internal control over financial reporting
identified in connection with the evaluation of such referred to
above in this item9a that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
item9b.
other
information
not applicable.
table of contents
part
iii
item
10.directors, executive officers and corporate
governance
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the captions election
of directors and stock ownership and section16
compliance section16(b) beneficial ownership
reporting compliance and the discussion of the audit
committee under the caption corporate
governance board committees in the proxy
statement; and the material under the caption executive
officers of the registrant in parti of this report
on
form10-k.
the companys policy on business conduct, which covers all
employees (including the chief executive officer, chief
financial officer and controller), meets the requirements of the
sec rules promulgated under section406 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002. the policy on business conduct is
available on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance/policies.cfm, and copies
are available to shareholders without charge upon written
request to the secretary at the companys principal
executive offices. any substantive amendment to the policy on
business conduct or any waiver of the policy granted to the
chief executive officer, the chief financial officer or the
controller will be posted on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance.cfm
within five business days (and retained on the web site for at
least one year).
in addition, the company has adopted a code of business conduct
& ethics for members of the board of directors and
executive officers. the code of business conduct & ethics
for members of the board of directors and executive officers is
available on the companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance/policies.cfm, and copies
are available to shareholders without charge upon written
request to the secretary at the companys principal
executive offices. any substantive amendment to the code or any
waiver of the code granted to any member of the board of
directors or any executive officer will be posted on the
companys web site at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance within five business days
(and retained on the web site for at least one year).
item
11.executive compensation
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the captions
compensation discussion and analysis,
executive and director compensation and
compensation committee report in the proxy statement.
the material incorporated herein by reference to the material
under the caption compensation committee report in
the proxy statement shall be deemed furnished, and not filed, in
this report on
form10-k
and shall not be deemed incorporated by reference into any
filing under the securities act of 1933, as amended, or the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, as a result of this
furnishing, except to the extent that the registrant
specifically incorporates it by reference.
item
12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
additional information called for by this item is incorporated
herein by reference to the material under the captions
stock ownership and section16 compliance in
the proxy statement and note10 common stock, stock
option plans and stock compensation agreements under
notes to consolidated financial statements on
pages57 and 58 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
equity
compensation plan information
the following table provides certain information as of
december30, 2007 concerning the shares of the
companys common stock that may be issued under existing
equity compensation plans.
table of contents
number of securities to
weighted average
number of securities
be issued upon exercise of
exercise price
remaining available for
outstanding options,
of outstanding, warrants
future issuance under
plan category
warrants and rights
options and rights
equity compensation
plans(4)
equity compensation plans approved by security
holders(1)
240,336,048
$
53.78
194,535,701
equity compensation plans not approved by security
holders(2)(3)
1,952,792
34.96
total
242,288,840
53.63
194,535,701
(1)
included in this category are the following equity compensation
plans, which have been approved by the companys
shareholders: 1995 stock option plan, 2000 stock option plan,
2000 stock compensation plan and 2005 long-term incentive plan.
(2)
included in this category are 1,813,692shares of common
stock of the company issuable under various equity compensation
plans which were assumed by the company upon acquisition of the
following companies: alza corporation, sciosinc.,
innovasive devices,inc., inverness medical
technology,inc. and centocor,inc. 796,241 of the
shares listed as issuable in this category were issued under
plans that were approved by the shareholders of these companies
prior to the acquisition and the assumption of these plans by
the company. at the time of each of these acquisitions, options
to acquire equity of the acquired company were replaced by
options to acquire the common stock of the company. no stock
options or equity awards of any type have been made under any of
these plans since the assumption of these plans by the company,
and no further stock options or other equity awards of any type
will be made under any of these plans in the future.
the shares that are included in this column that were issued
under plans not approved by shareholders of the applicable
acquired company are: 543,094shares issuable under the
1996 scios non-officer stock option plan; 439,186shares
issuable under an alza non-statutory plan; and
35,171shares issuable under warrants under an inverness
medical plan.
(3)
also included in this category are 139,100shares of common
stock of the company issuable upon the exercise of outstanding
stock options under the companys stock option plan for
non-employee directors.
(4)
this column excludes shares reflected under the column
number of securities to be issued upon exercise of
outstanding options, warrants and rights.
item
13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the captions
transactions with related persons and
corporate governance director
independence in the proxy statement.
item
14.principal accounting fees and services
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the caption
ratification of appointment of independent registered
public accounting firm in the proxy statement.
table of contents
part
iv
item
15.exhibits, financial statement schedules
(a)the following documents are filed as part of this
report:
1.financial statements
the following audited consolidated financial statements and
notes thereto and the material under the caption report of
independent registered public accounting firm on
pages48 through 75 of the annual report are incorporated
herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to this report
on
form10-k:
consolidated balance sheets at end of fiscal years 2007 and 2006
consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal years 2007, 2006
and 2005
consolidated statements of equity for fiscal years 2007, 2006
and 2005
consolidated statements of cash flows for fiscal years 2007,
2006 and 2005
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of independent registered public accounting firm
2.financial statement schedules
schedule ii valuation and qualifying accounts
schedules other than those listed above are omitted because they
are not required or are not applicable.
3.exhibits required to be filed by item 60l of
regulation
s-k
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the exhibit index in this report.
table of contents
johnson&
johnson and subsidiaries
scheduleii valuation and
qualifying accounts
fiscal years ended december30, 2007, december31,
2006 and january1, 2006
(dollars in millions)
balance at
balance at
beginning of
end of
period
accruals
payments/ other
period
accrued
rebates(1)
$
1,691
5,243
(5,132
)
1,802
accrued returns
(346
)
accrued promotions
2,908
(2,787
)
subtotal
$
2,747
8,546
(8,265
)
3,028
reserve for doubtful accounts
(9
)
reserve for cash discounts
1,022
(1,013
)
total
$
2,969
9,610
(9,287
)
3,292
accrued
rebates(1)
$
1,565
5,017
(4,891
)
1,691
accrued returns
(146
)
accrued promotions
2,284
(2,215
)
subtotal
$
2,488
7,511
(7,252
)
2,747
reserve for doubtful accounts
(21
)
reserve for cash discounts
(862
)
total
$
2,709
8,395
(8,135
)
2,969
accrued
rebates(1)
$
1,862
5,301
(5,598
)
1,565
accrued returns
(307
)
accrued promotions
2,112
(2,190
)
subtotal
$
2,785
7,798
(2)
(8,095
)
2,488
reserve for doubtful accounts
(61
)
reserve for cash discounts
(866
)
total
$
3,053
8,678
(9,022
)
2,709
(1)
includes reserve for customer rebates of $710million, $558
million and $471million at december30, 2007,
december31, 2006 and january1, 2006, respectively.
(2)
includes $186million related to previously estimated
performance-based rebate allowances in managed care contracts.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section 13 of the securities
exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report
to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
date: february26, 2008
johnson & johnson
(registrant)
by
/s/
w. c. weldon
w. c. weldon, chairman, board of directors,
and chief executive officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of
1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/w.
c. weldon
w.
c. weldon
chairman, board of directors,
chief executive officer, and director (principal executive
officer)
february20, 2008
/s/c.a.
poon
c.a.
poon
vice chairman, board of directors, and director
february20, 2008
/s/d.j.
caruso
d.j.
caruso
chief financial officer (principal financial officer)
february20, 2008
/s/s.
j. cosgrove
s.
j. cosgrove
controller (principal accounting officer)
february20, 2008
/s/m.
s. coleman
m.
s. coleman
director
february20, 2008
/s/j.
g. cullen
j.
g. cullen
director
february20, 2008
/s/m.
m. e. johns
m.
m. e. johns
director
february20, 2008
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/a.
g. langbo
a.
g. langbo
director
february20, 2008
/s/s.
l. lindquist
s.
l. lindquist
director
february20, 2008
/s/l.f.
mullin
l.f.
mullin
director
february20, 2008
/s/w.
d. perez
w.
d. perez
director
february20, 2008
/s/c.
prince
c.
prince
director
february20, 2008
/s/s.
s reinemund
s.
s reinemund
director
february20, 2008
/s/d.
satcher
d.
satcher
director
february20, 2008
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm on
financial statement schedule
to the
shareholders and board of directors of
johnson & johnson:
our audits of the consolidated financial statements and of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
referred to in our report dated february20, 2008 appearing
in the 2007 annual report to shareholders of johnson &
johnson (which report and consolidated financial statements are
incorporated by reference in this annual report on
form10-k)
also included an audit of the financial statement schedule
listed in item15(a)(2) of this
form10-k.
in our opinion, this financial statement schedule presents
fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth
therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated
financial statements.
/s/pricewaterhousecoopers
llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february20, 2008
table of contents
exhibit
index
reg.
s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(a)(i)
restated certificate of incorporation dated april26,
1990 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3(a) of the registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december30, 1990.
(a)(ii)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company dated may20, 1992
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit3(a) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended january3, 1993.
(a)(iii)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company dated may21, 1996
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit3(a)(iii) of
the registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 1996.
(a)(iv)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company effective may22,
2001 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3 of the registrants
form10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended july1, 2001.
(a)(v)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company effective april27,
2006 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3(i) of the registrants form 10-q quarterly
report for the quarter ended april 2, 2006.
(b)
by-laws of the company, as amended effective january14,
2008 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit3.1 the registrants
form8-k
current report filed january15, 2008.
(a)
upon the request of the securities and exchange commission, the
registrant will furnish a copy of all instruments defining the
rights of holders of long term debt of the registrant.
(a)
stock option plan for non-employee directors
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(a) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 1996.*
(b)
2000 stock option plan (as amended) incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(b) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 2002.*
(c)
1995 stock option plan (as amended) incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(b) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended january3, 1999.*
(d)
2000 stock compensation plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit10(e) of the registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december31, 2000.*
(e)
2005 long-term incentive planincorporated
herein by reference to exhibit4 of the registrants
s-8
registration statement filed with the commission on may10,
2005 (file
no.333-124785).*
(f)
form of stock option certificate and restricted shares to
non-employee directors certificate under the 2005 long-term
incentive plan incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit10.1 of the registrants
form10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended july3, 2005.*
(g)
form of restricted stock unit certificate under the 2005
long-term incentive plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit10.1 of the registrants
form10-q
quarterly report for the quarter ended october2, 2005.*
(h)
executive bonus plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit4 of the registrants
forms-8
registration statement filed with the commission on
november8, 2005 (file
no.333-129542).*
(i)
executive incentive plan (as amended) incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit10(f) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december31, 2000.*
(j)
domestic deferred compensation (certificate of extra
compensation) plan (as amended) incorporated herein
by reference to exhibit10(g) of the registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december28, 2003.*
(k)
deferred fee plan for non-employee directors (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(h) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended january2, 2005.*
table of contents
reg.
s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(l)
executive income deferral plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(i) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december28, 2003.*
(m)
excess savings plan incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit10(j) of the registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december29, 1996.*
(n)
supplemental retirement plan  incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 10(h) of the registrants form
10-k annual
report for the year ended january3, 1993.*
(o)
executive life insurance plan  incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 10(i)of the registrants form
10-k annual
report for the year ended january3, 1993.*
(p)
stock option gain deferral plan incorporated herein
by reference to exhibit10(m) of the registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended january2, 2000.*
(q)
estate preservation plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit10(n) of the registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended january2, 2000.*
(r)
summary of compensation arrangements for named executive
officers and directors filed with this
document.*
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
filed with this document.
pages 36 through 77 of the companys annual
report to shareholders for fiscal year 2007 (only those portions
of the annual report incorporated by reference in this report
are deemed filed)  filed with this document.
subsidiaries  filed with this document.
consent of independent registered public accounting
firm filed with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act filed
with this document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to
section302 of the sarbanes-oxley act filed
with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act furnished
with this document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to
section906 of the sarbanes-oxley act furnished
with this document.
cautionary statement pursuant to private securities litigation
reform act of 1995 safe harbor for
forward-looking statements  filed with this document.
*
management contract or compensatory plan.
a copy of any of the exhibits listed above will be provided
without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request
specifying the desired exhibit(s) to the secretary at the
principal executive offices of the company.
