10-k
y86310ke10vk.htm
form 10-k
e10vk
united states
securities and exchange
commission
washington,d.c.
form10-k
annual report pursuant to
section13 of
the securities exchange act of
for
the fiscal year ended january2, 2011
commission file number 1-3215
johnson &
johnson
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
new jersey
22-1024240
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer identification
no.)
one johnson& johnson plaza
new brunswick, new jersey
(address of principal executive
offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code:
(732)524-0400
securities
registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $1.00
new york stock exchange
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities
act.yesnoo
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the
exchange
act.yesono
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed
all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of
the exchange act during the preceding 12months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file
such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing
requirements for the past
90days.yesnoo
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted
electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any,
every interactive data file required to be submitted and posted
pursuant to rule405 of
regulations-t
during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to submit and post such
files).yesnoo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of this
form10-k
or any amendment to this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated
filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of
large accelerated filer, accelerated
filer and smaller reporting company in rule
12b-2 of the
exchange act.
large
accelerated
fileraccelerated
fileronon-accelerated
filerosmaller
reporting
companyo
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company
(as defined in
rule12b-2
of the exchange
act).yesono
the aggregate market value of the common stock held by
non-affiliates computed by reference to the price at which the
common stock was last sold as of the last business day of the
registrants most recently completed second fiscal quarter
was approximately $163billion.
on february15, 2011 there were 2,735,213,719shares
of common stock outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference
partsi,ii and iii:
portions of registrants annual report to shareholders for
fiscal year 2010 (the annual report).
parts i and iii:
portions of registrants proxy statement for its 2011
annual meeting of shareholders filed within 120days after
the close of the registrants fiscal year (the proxy
statement).
item
page
parti
1.
business
general
segments of business
geographic areas
raw materials
patents and trademarks
seasonality
competition
research and development
environment
regulation
available information
1a.
risk factors
1b.
unresolved staff comments
2.
properties
3.
legal proceedings
4.
(removed and reserved)
executive officers of the registrant
partii
5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder
matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
6.
selected financial data
7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition
and results of operation
7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk
8.
financial statements and supplementary data
9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
9a.
controls and procedures
9b.
other information
partiii
10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
11.
executive compensation
12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
and related stockholder matters
13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
14.
principal accountant fees and services
partiv
15.
exhibits and financial statement schedules
scheduleii valuation and qualifying accounts
signatures
report of independent registered public accounting firm on
financial statement schedule
exhibitindex
parti
item1.
business
general
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries have
approximately 114,000employees worldwide engaged in the
research and development, manufacture and sale of a broad range
of products in the health care field. johnson&
johnson is a holding company, which has more than 250 operating
companies conducting business in virtually all countries of the
world. johnson& johnsons primary focus has been
on products related to human health and well-being.
johnson& johnson was incorporated in the state of new
jersey in 1887.
the companys structure is based on the principle of
decentralized management. the executive committee of
johnson& johnson is the principal management group
responsible for the operations and allocation of the resources
of the company. this committee oversees and coordinates the
activities of the consumer, pharmaceutical and medical devices
and diagnostics business segments. each subsidiary within the
business segments is, with some exceptions, managed by citizens
of the country where it is located.
segments
of business
johnson& johnsons operating companies are
organized into three business segments: consumer, pharmaceutical
and medical devices and diagnostics. additional information
required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the
narrative and tabular (but not the graphic) descriptions of
segments and operating results under the captions
managements discussion and analysis of results of
operations and financial condition on pages 30 through 40
and note18 segments of business and geographic
areas under notes to consolidated financial
statements on page61 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
consumer
the consumer segment includes a broad range of products used in
the baby care, skin care, oral care, wound care and womens
health care fields, as well as nutritional and
over-the-counter
pharmaceutical products, and wellness and prevention platforms.
the baby care franchise includes the
johnsons
baby line of products. major brands in the skin care franchise
include the
aveeno;
clean&
clear;
johnsons
adult;
neutrogena;
roc;
lubriderm;
dabaotm;
and vendme product lines. the oral care franchise includes
the
listerine
and
reach
oral care lines of products. the wound care franchise includes
band-aid
brand adhesive bandages and
neosporin
first aid products. major brands in the womens health
franchise are the
carefree
pantiliners;
o.b.
tampons and
stayfree
sanitary protection products. the nutritional and
over-the-counter
lines include
splenda,
no calorie sweetener; the broad family of
tylenol
acetaminophen products;
sudafed
cold, flu and allergy products;
zyrtec
allergy products;
motrin
ib ibuprofen products; and
pepcid
ac acid controller from johnson& johnson  merck
consumer pharmaceuticals co. these products are marketed to the
general public and sold both to retail outlets and distributors
throughout the world.
pharmaceutical
the pharmaceutical segment includes products in the following
areas: anti-infective, antipsychotic, contraceptive,
dermatology, gastrointestinal, hematology, immunology,
neurology, oncology, pain management and virology. these
products are distributed directly to retailers, wholesalers and
health care professionals for prescription use. key products in
the pharmaceutical segment include:
remicade
(infliximab), a treatment for a number of immune mediated
inflammatory diseases;
stelara
(ustekinumab), a treatment for moderate to severe plaque
psoriasis;
simponi
(golimumab), a treatment for adults with moderate to severe
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing
spondylitis;
velcade
(bortezomib), a treatment for multiple myeloma;
prezista
(darunavir) and
intelence
(etravirine), treatments for hiv/aids;
nucynta
(tapentadol), a treatment for moderate to severe acute pain;
invega
sustennatm
(paliperidone palmitate), for the acute and maintenance
treatment of schizophrenia in adults;
risperdal
consta
(risperidone), a treatment for the management of bipolari
disorder and schizophrenia;
procrit
(epoetin alfa, sold outside the u.s.as
eprex),
to stimulate red blood cell production;
levaquin
(levofloxacin) for the treatment of bacterial infections;
concerta
(methylphenidate hcl), a treatment for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder;
aciphex/pariet,
a proton pump inhibitor co-marketed with eisai inc.;
duragesic/fentanyl
transdermal (fentanyl transdermal system, sold outside the
u.s.as
durogesic),
a treatment for chronic pain that offers a novel delivery system.
medical
devices and diagnostics
the medical devices and diagnostics segment includes a broad
range of products distributed to wholesalers, hospitals and
retailers, used principally in the professional fields by
physicians, nurses, therapists, hospitals, diagnostic
laboratories and clinics. these products include biosense
websters electrophysiology products; cordis
circulatory disease management products; depuys
orthopaedic joint reconstruction, spinal care, neurological and
sports medicine products; ethicons surgical care,
aesthetics and womens health products; ethicon
endo-surgerys minimally invasive surgical products and
advanced sterilization products; lifescans blood glucose
monitoring and insulin delivery products; ortho-clinical
diagnostics professional diagnostic products; and
vistakons disposable contact lenses. distribution to these
health care professional markets is done both directly and
through surgical supply and other dealers.
geographic
areas
the business of johnson& johnson is conducted by more
than 250 operating companies located in 60countries,
including the united states, which are selling products in
virtually all countries throughout the world. the products made
and sold in the international business include many of those
described above under segments of
business consumer,
pharmaceutical and
medical devices and diagnostics.
however, the principal markets, products and methods of
distribution in the international business vary with the country
and the culture. the products sold in international business
include not only those developed in the united states, but also
those developed by subsidiaries abroad.
investments and activities in some countries outside the united
states are subject to higher risks than comparable
u.s.activities because the investment and commercial
climate is influenced by restrictive economic policies and
political uncertainties.
raw
materials
raw materials essential to johnson& johnsons
operating companies businesses are generally readily
available from multiple sources.
patents
and trademarks
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries have made a
practice of obtaining patent protection on their products and
processes where possible. they own or are licensed under a
number of patents relating to their products and manufacturing
processes, which in the aggregate are believed to be of material
importance to johnson& johnson in the operation of
its businesses. sales of the companys largest product,
remicade
(infliximab), accounted for approximately 7% of
johnson& johnsons total revenues for fiscal
2010. accordingly, the patents related to this product are
believed to be material to johnson& johnson.
in march of 2009,
topamax
(topiramate) lost basic patent protection and market exclusivity
and became subject to generic competition in the united states
and later in the year in international markets. sales of
topamax
declined by 53.3% and 57.9% in 2010 and 2009, respectively. the
next significant patent that will expire is for
levaquin
(levofloxacin), which accounted for approximately 2% of the
companys 2010 sales. a pediatric extension for
levaquin
was granted by the u.s.food and drug administration
(fda), which extends market exclusivity in the
united states through june20, 2011.
johnson& johnsons operating companies have made
a practice of selling their products under trademarks and of
obtaining protection for these trademarks by all available
means. these trademarks are protected by registration in the
united states and other countries where such products are
marketed. johnson& johnson considers these trademarks
in the aggregate to be of material importance in the operation
of its businesses.
seasonality
worldwide sales do not reflect any significant degree of
seasonality; however, spending has been heavier in the fourth
quarter of each year than in other quarters. this reflects
increased spending decisions, principally for advertising and
research and development activity.
competition
in all of their product lines, johnson&
johnsons operating companies compete with companies both
local and global, located throughout the world. competition
exists in all product lines without regard to the number and
size of the competing companies involved. competition in
research, involving the development and the improvement of new
and existing products and processes, is particularly
significant. the development of new and innovative products is
important to johnson& johnsons success in all
areas of its business. this also includes protecting the
companys portfolio of intellectual property. the
competitive environment requires substantial investments in
continuing research and in maintaining sales forces. in
addition, the development and maintenance of customer demand for
the companys consumer products involves significant
expenditures for advertising and promotion.
research
and development
research activities represent a significant part of
johnson& johnsons subsidiaries
businesses. major research facilities are located not only in
the united states, but also in belgium, brazil, canada, china,
france, germany, india, israel, japan, the netherlands,
singapore and the united kingdom. the costs of worldwide
company-sponsored research activities relating to the
development of new products, improvement of existing products,
technical support of products and compliance with governmental
regulations for the protection of consumers and patients
(excluding purchased in-process research and development charges
for fiscal 2008), amounted to $6.8billion,
$7.0billion and $7.6billion for fiscal years 2010,
2009 and 2008, respectively. these costs are charged directly to
expense, or directly against income, in the year in which
incurred.
environment
johnson& johnsons operating companies are
subject to a variety of u.s.and international
environmental protection measures. johnson& johnson
believes that its operations comply in all material respects
with applicable environmental laws and regulations.
johnson& johnsons compliance with these
requirements did not during the past year, and is not expected
to, have a material effect upon its capital expenditures, cash
flows, earnings or competitive position.
regulation
most of johnson& johnsons businesses are
subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the
countries in which operations are conducted, and the general
trend is toward increasingly stringent regulation. in the united
states, the drug, device, diagnostics and cosmetic industries
have long been subject to regulation by various federal and
state agencies, primarily as to product safety, efficacy,
manufacturing, advertising, labeling and safety reporting. the
exercise of broad regulatory powers by the fda continues to
result in increases in the amounts of testing and documentation
required for fda clearance of new drugs and devices and a
corresponding increase in the expense of product introduction.
similar trends are also evident in major markets outside of the
united states.
the costs of human health care have been and continue to be a
subject of study, investigation and regulation by governmental
agencies and legislative bodies around the world. in the united
states, attention has been focused on drug prices and profits
and programs that encourage doctors to write prescriptions for
particular drugs or recommend, use or purchase particular
medical devices. payers have become a more potent force in the
market place and increased attention is being paid to drug and
medical device pricing, appropriate drug and medical device
utilization and the quality and costs of health care.
the regulatory agencies under whose purview johnson&
johnsons operating companies operate have administrative
powers that may subject those companies to such actions as
product withdrawals, recalls, seizure of products and other
civil and criminal sanctions. in some cases, johnson&
johnsons operating companies may deem it advisable to
initiate product recalls.
in addition, business practices in the health care industry have
come under increased scrutiny, particularly in the united
states, by government agencies and state attorneys general, and
resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of
significant civil and criminal penalties.
available
information
the companys main corporate website address is
www.jnj.com. copies of johnson& johnsons
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
annual report on
form10-k
and current reports on
form8-k
filed or furnished to the u.s.securities and exchange
commission (the sec), and any amendments to the
foregoing, will be provided without charge to any shareholder
submitting a written request to the secretary at the principal
executive offices of the company or by calling
1-800-950-5089.
all of the companys sec filings are also available on the
companys website at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance/materials.cfm, as soon as
reasonably practicable after having been electronically filed or
furnished to the sec. all sec filings are also available at the
secs website at www.sec.gov. in addition, the
written charters of the audit committee, the
compensation& benefits committee and the
nominating& corporate governance committee of the
board of directors and the companys principles of
corporate governance, policy on business conduct for employees
and code of business conduct& ethics for members of
the board of directors and executive officers are available at
the www.investor.jnj.com/governance/materials.cfm website
address and will be provided without charge to any shareholder
submitting a written request, as provided above.
item1a.
risk
factors
some important factors that could cause the companys
actual results to differ from the companys expectations in
any forward-looking statements in this report are set forth in
exhibit99 to this report on
form10-k.
item1b.
unresolved
staff comments
not applicable.
item2.
properties
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries operate 139
manufacturing facilities occupying approximately
21.8million square feet of floor space.
the manufacturing facilities are used by the industry segments
of johnson& johnsons business approximately as
follows:
square feet
(in
segment
thousands)
consumer
6,968
pharmaceutical
6,739
medical devices and diagnostics
8,108
worldwide total
21,815
within the united states, 7 facilities are used by the consumer
segment, 11 by the pharmaceutical segment and 36 by the medical
devices and diagnostics segment. johnson&
johnsons manufacturing operations outside the united
states are often conducted in facilities that serve more than
one business segment.
the locations of the manufacturing facilities by major
geographic areas of the world are as follows:
square feet
number of
(in
geographic area
facilities
thousands)
united states
7,449
europe
7,602
western hemisphere, excluding u.s.
3,380
africa, asia and pacific
3,384
worldwide total
21,815
in addition to the manufacturing facilities discussed above,
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries maintain
numerous office and warehouse facilities throughout the world.
research facilities are also discussed in item1 under
business research and development.
johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries generally seek
to own their manufacturing facilities, although some,
principally in locations abroad, are leased. office and
warehouse facilities are often leased.
johnson& johnson is committed to maintaining all of
its properties in good operating condition and repair, and the
facilities are well utilized.
production at mcneil consumer healthcares
fortwashington, pennsylvania facility was suspended in the
second quarter of 2010. alternate supplies of products are
planned to be available in the latter half of 2011. mcneil
consumer healthcare submitted its comprehensive action plan
(cap) to the u.s.food and drug administration (fda) on
july15, 2010, which encompasses, among other items,
training, resources and capital investments in quality and
manufacturing systems across the mcneil organization. the
company continues to communicate with the fda on remediation
actions and is on schedule with the commitments made in the cap.
for information regarding lease obligations, see note16
rental expense and lease commitments under
notes to consolidated financial statements on
page59 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to
this report on
form10-k.
segment information on additions to property, plant and
equipment is contained in note18 segments of
business and geographic areas under notes to
consolidated financial statements on page61 of the
annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item3.
legal
proceedings
the information set forth in note21 legal
proceedings under notes to consolidated financial
statements on pages 64 through 71 of the annual report is
incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to
this report on
form10-k.
the company or its subsidiaries are parties to a number of
proceedings brought under the comprehensive environmental
response, compensation and liability act, commonly known as
superfund, and comparable state laws, in which the primary
relief sought is the cost of past and future remediation. while
it is not feasible to predict or determine the outcome of these
proceedings, in the opinion of the company, such proceedings
would not have a material adverse effect on the results of
operations, cash flows or financial position of the company.
item4.
(removed
and reserved)
executive
officers of the registrant
listed below are the executive officers of johnson&
johnson as of february15, 2011, each of whom, unless
otherwise indicated below, has been an employee of the company
or its affiliates and held the position indicated during the
past five years. there are no family relationships between any
of the executive officers, and there is no arrangement or
understanding between any executive officer and any other person
pursuant to which the executive officer was selected. at the
annual meeting of the board of directors, the executive officers
are elected by the board to hold office for one year and until
their respective successors are elected and qualified, or until
earlier resignation or removal.
information with regard to the directors of the company,
including information for william c. weldon, is incorporated
herein by reference to the material captioned election of
directors in the proxy statement.
name
age
position
dominic j. caruso
member, executive committee; vice president, finance; chief
financial officer(a)
russell c. deyo
member, executive committee; vice president, general counsel(b)
peter m. fasolo
member, executive committee, vice president, worldwide human
resources(c)
alex gorsky
vice chairman, executive committee(d)
sherilyn s. mccoy
vice chairman, executive committee(e)
william c. weldon
chairman, board of directors; chairman, executive committee;
chief executive officer
(a)
mr.d. j. caruso joined the company in 1999 when the
company acquired centocor, inc. at the time of that acquisition,
he had been senior vice president, finance of centocor.
mr.caruso was named vice president, finance of
ortho-mcneil pharmaceutical, inc., a subsidiary of the company,
in 2001 and vice president, group finance of the companys
medical devices and diagnostics group in 2003. in 2005,
mr.caruso was named vice president of the companys
group finance organization. mr.caruso became a member of
the executive committee and vice president, finance and chief
financial officer in 2007.
(b)
mr.r. c. deyo joined the company in 1985 and became
associate general counsel in 1991. he became a member of the
executive committee and vice president, administration in 1996
and vice president, general counsel in 2004.
(c)
mr.p. m. fasolo joined the company in 2004 as vice
president, worldwide human resources for cordis corporation, a
subsidiary of the company. he was then named vice president,
global talent management for the company. he left
johnson& johnson in 2007 to join kohlberg kravis
roberts& co. as chief talent officer. mr.fasolo
returned to the company in september 2010 as the vice president,
worldwide human resources, and in january 2011, he became a
member of the executive committee.
(d)
mr.a. gorsky joined the company in 2008 as company group
chairman and worldwide franchise chairman for ethicon, inc., a
subsidiary of the company. previously, he was head of the north
american pharmaceuticals business at novartis pharmaceuticals
corporation from 2004 to 2008. prior to novartis,
mr.gorsky served in various management positions at
johnson& johnson, including company group chairman
for the companys pharmaceutical business in europe, middle
east and africa and president of janssen pharmaceutica inc.
(u.s.), a subsidiary of the company. in january 2009, he became
a member of the executive committee and worldwide chairman,
surgical care group, and in september 2009, he became worldwide
chairman, medical devices and diagnostics group. mr.gorsky
was appointed as vice chairman, executive committee in january
2011.
(e)
ms.s. s. mccoy joined the company in 1982 as an associate
scientist in research& development for personal
products company, a subsidiary of the company. she was named
vice president, research& development for the
personal products worldwide division of mcneil-ppc, inc., a
subsidiary of the company, in 1995, and vice president,
marketing for its skin care franchise in 2000. in 2002,
ms.mccoy became global president for its baby and wound
care franchise. she was named company group chairman and
worldwide franchise chairman of ethicon, inc., a subsidiary of
the company, in 2005. in 2008 she became a member of the
executive committee and worldwide chairman, surgical care group.
in 2009, she became worldwide chairman, pharmaceuticals group.
ms.mccoy was appointed as vice chairman, executive
committee in january 2011.
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities
as of february15, 2011, there were 181,232 record holders
of common stock of the company. additional information called
for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to: the
material under the captions managements discussion
and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition liquidity and capital
resources share repurchase and dividends on
page37;  other information common
stock market prices on page39; note17
common stock, stock option plans and stock compensation
agreements under notes to consolidated financial
statements on pages 59 and 60; and shareholder
return performance graphs on page75 of the annual
report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k;
and item12 security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management and related stockholder
matters equity compensation plan information
of this report on
form10-k.
issuer
purchases of equity securities
on july9, 2007, the company announced that its board of
directors approved a stock repurchase program, authorizing the
company to buy back up to $10billion of the companys
common stock. as of january2, 2011, the current stock
repurchase program has been completed. the company repurchased
an aggregate of 158.3million shares of johnson&
johnson common stock at a cost of $10billion. the company
funded the share repurchase program through a combination of
available cash and debt.
in addition, the company has an annual program to repurchase
shares for use in employee stock and incentive plans.
the following table provides information with respect to common
stock purchases by the company during the fiscal fourth quarter
of 2010.
total number
of shares
purchased as
part of
total number
avg. price
publicly announced
of shares
paid per
plans or
period
purchased(1)
share
programs(2)
october4, 2010 through october31, 2010
6,204,032
$
63.28
november1, 2010 through november28, 2010
8,913,651
63.70
2,520,817
november29, 2010 through january2, 2011
5,192,211
62.35
3,372,164
total
20,309,894
5,892,981
(1)
during the fiscal fourth quarter of 2010, the company
repurchased an aggregate of 5,892,981shares of the
companys common stock pursuant to the repurchase program
that was publicly announced on july9, 2007, and an
aggregate of 14,416,913shares in open-market transactions
outside of the program.
(2)
as of january2, 2011, an aggregate of
158,315,129shares were purchased, completing the buyback
program totaling $10billion since the inception of the
repurchase program announced on july9, 2007.
item6.
selected
financial data
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the caption summary of
operations and statistical data
2000-2010
on page74 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13
to this report on
form10-k.
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operation
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the narrative and tabular (but not the graphic)
material under the caption managements discussion
and analysis of results of operations and financial
condition on pages 30 through 40 of the annual report,
filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item7a.
quantitative
and qualitative disclosures about market risk
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the caption
managements discussion and analysis of results of
operations and financial condition liquidity and
capital resources financing and market risk on
pages 36 and 37 and note1 summary of significant
accounting policies financial instruments
under notes to consolidated financial statements on
pages 46 and 47 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13
to this report on
form10-k.
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the audited consolidated financial statements
and notes thereto and the material under the caption
report of independent registered public accounting
firm on pages 41 through 72 of the annual report, filed as
exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a.
controls
and procedures
disclosure controls and procedures.at the end
of the period covered by this report, the company evaluated the
effectiveness of the design and operation of its disclosure
controls and procedures. the companys disclosure controls
and procedures are designed to ensure that information required
to be disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or
submits under the exchange act is recorded, processed,
summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
secs rules and forms. disclosure controls and procedures
include, without limitation, controls and procedures designed to
ensure that information required to be disclosed by the company
in the reports that it files or submits under the exchange act
is accumulated and communicated to the companys
management, including its principal executive and principal
financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, as
appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required
disclosure. william c. weldon, chairman and chief executive
officer, and dominic j. caruso, chief financial officer,
reviewed and participated in this evaluation. based on this
evaluation, messrs.weldon and caruso concluded that, as of
the end of the period covered by this report, the companys
disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
managements report on internal control over financial
reporting.under section404 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002, management is required to assess the
effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of the end of each fiscal year and
report, based on that assessment, whether the companys
internal control over financial reporting is effective.
management of the company is responsible for establishing and
maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.
the companys internal control over financial reporting is
designed to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability
of the companys financial reporting and the preparation of
external financial statements in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
internal control over financial reporting, no matter how well
designed, has inherent limitations. therefore, internal control
over financial reporting determined to be effective can provide
only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement
preparation and may not prevent or detect all misstatements.
moreover, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to
future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
the companys management has assessed the effectiveness of
the companys internal control over financial reporting as
of january2, 2011. in making this assessment, the company
used the criteria established by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso) in
internal control-integrated framework. these
criteria are in the areas of control environment, risk
assessment, control activities, information and communication,
and monitoring. the companys assessment included extensive
documenting, evaluating and testing the design and operating
effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting.
based on the companys processes and assessment, as
described above, management has concluded that, as of
january2, 2011, the companys internal control over
financial reporting was effective.
the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of january2, 2011 has been audited
by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report, which appears in the
report of independent registered public accounting
firm on page72 of the annual report, which is
incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to
this report on
form10-k.
changes in internal control over financial
reporting.during the fiscal quarter ended
january2, 2011, there were no changes in the
companys internal control over financial reporting
identified in connection with the evaluation required under
rules13a-15
and 15d-15
under the exchange act that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys
internal control over financial reporting.
item9b.
other
information
not applicable.
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the captions election
of directors and stock ownership and section16
compliance section16(a) beneficial ownership
reporting compliance and the discussion of the audit
committee under the caption corporate
governance standing board committees in the
proxy statement; and the material under the caption
executive officers of the registrant in parti
of this report on
form10-k.
the companys policy on business conduct, which covers all
employees (including the chief executive officer, chief
financial officer and controller), meets the requirements of the
sec rules promulgated under section406 of the
sarbanes-oxley act of 2002. the policy on business conduct is
available on the companys website at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance/policies.cfm, and copies
are available to shareholders without charge upon written
request to the secretary at the companys principal
executive offices. any substantive amendment to the policy on
business conduct or any waiver of the policy granted to the
chief executive officer, the chief financial officer or the
controller will be posted on the companys website at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance.cfm
within five business days (and retained on the website for
at least one year).
in addition, the company has adopted a code of business
conduct& ethics for members of the board of directors
and executive officers. the code of business conduct&
ethics for members of the board of directors and executive
officers is available on the companys website at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance/policies.cfm, and copies
are available to shareholders without charge upon written
request to the secretary at the companys principal
executive offices. any substantive amendment to the code or any
waiver of the code granted to any member of the board of
directors or any executive officer will be posted on the
companys website at www.investor.jnj.com/governance.cfm
within five business days (and retained on the website for
at least one year).
item11.
executive
compensation
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the captions
compensation discussion and analysis,
executive and director compensation and
compensation committee report in the proxy statement.
the material incorporated herein by reference to the material
under the caption compensation committee report in
the proxy statement shall be deemed furnished, and not filed, in
this report on
form10-k
and shall not be deemed incorporated by reference into any
filing under the securities act of 1933, as amended, or the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended, as a result of this
furnishing, except to the extent that the registrant
specifically incorporates it by reference.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
additional information called for by this item is incorporated
herein by reference to the material under the captions
stock ownership and section16 compliance in
the proxy statement and note17 common stock, stock
option plans and stock compensation agreements under
notes to consolidated financial statements on pages
59 and 60 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this
report on
form10-k.
equity
compensation plan information
the following table provides certain information as of
january2, 2011 concerning the shares of the companys
common stock that may be issued under existing equity
compensation plans.
number of securities to
weighted average
number of securities
be issued upon exercise of
exercise price of
remaining available for
outstanding options
outstanding options
future issuance under
plan category
and rights
and rights
equity compensation
plans(4)
equity compensation plans approved by security
holders(1)
223,164,807
$
51.74
121,322,775
equity compensation plans not approved by security
holders(2)(3)
259,334
46.23
total
223,424,141
$
51.73
121,322,775
(1)
included in this category are the following equity compensation
plans, which have been approved by the companys
shareholders: 2000 stock option plan and 2005 long-term
incentive plan.
(2)
included in this category are 216,584shares of common
stock of the company issuable under various equity compensation
plans which were assumed by the company upon acquisition of the
following companies: alza corporation, scios inc., and inverness
medical technology, inc. 122,629 of the shares listed as
issuable in this category were issued under plans that were
approved by the shareholders of these companies prior to the
acquisition and the assumption of these plans by the company. at
the time of each of these acquisitions, options to acquire
equity of the acquired company were replaced by options to
acquire the common stock of the company. no stock options or
equity awards of any type have been made under any of these
plans since the assumption of these plans by the company, and no
further stock options or other equity awards of any type will be
made under any of these plans in the future.
the shares that are included in this column that were issued
under plans not approved by shareholders of the applicable
acquired company are: 93,955shares issuable under the 1996
scios non-officer stock option plan.
(3)
also included in this category are 42,750shares of common
stock of the company issuable upon the exercise of outstanding
stock options under the companys stock option plan for
non-employee directors. all options outstanding under this plan
have fully vested with an expiration period of ten years from
the date of grant.
(4)
this column excludes shares reflected under the column
number of securities to be issued upon exercise of
outstanding options and rights.
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the captions
transactions with related persons and
corporate governance director
independence in the proxy statement.
item14.
principal
accountant fees and services
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the material under the caption
ratification of appointment of independent registered
public accounting firm in the proxy statement.
partiv
item15.
exhibitsand
financial statement schedules
(a)the following documents are filed as part of this
report:
1.financial statements
the following audited consolidated financial statements and
notes thereto and the material under the caption report of
independent registered public accounting firm on pages 41
through 72 of the annual report are incorporated herein by
reference and filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k:
consolidated balance sheets at end of fiscal years 2010 and 2009
consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal years 2010, 2009
and 2008
consolidated statements of equity for fiscal years 2010, 2009
and 2008
consolidated statements of cash flows for fiscal years 2010,
2009 and 2008
notes to consolidated financial statements
report of independent registered public accounting firm
2.financial statement schedules
scheduleii valuation and qualifying accounts
schedules other than those listed above are omitted because they
are not required or are not applicable.
3.exhibitsrequired to be filed by item60l
of
regulations-k
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein
by reference to the exhibitindex in this report.
schedule ii
schedule of valuation and qualifying accounts disclosure
johnson&
johnson and subsidiaries
scheduleii valuation and
qualifying accounts
fiscal years ended january2, 2011, january3, 2010
and december28, 2008
(dollars in millions)
balance at
balance at
beginning of
end of
period
accruals
payments/other
period
accrued
rebates(1)
$
1,639
7,492
(6,985
)
2,146
accrued returns
(566
)
accrued promotions
2,664
(2,666
)
subtotal
$
2,757
10,673
(10,217
)
3,213
reserve for doubtful accounts
(123
)
reserve for cash discounts
1,112
(1,103
)
total
$
3,191
11,915
(11,443
)
3,663
accrued
rebates(1)
$
1,808
6,584
(6,753
)
1,639
accrued returns
(460
)
accrued promotions
2,446
(2,373
)
subtotal
$
2,958
9,385
(9,586
)
2,757
reserve for doubtful accounts
(44
)
reserve for cash discounts
1,163
(1,141
)
total
$
3,304
10,658
(10,771
)
3,191
accrued
rebates(1)
$
1,802
5,578
(5,572
)
1,808
accrued returns
(256
)
accrued promotions
2,991
(3,213
)
subtotal
$
3,028
8,971
(9,041
)
2,958
reserve for doubtful accounts
(27
)
reserve for cash discounts
(897
)
total
$
3,292
9,977
(2)
(9,965
)
3,304
(1)
includes reserve for customer rebates of $701million,
$729million and $721million at january2, 2011,
january3, 2010 and december28, 2008, respectively.
(2)
includes $171million adjustment related to previously
estimated accrued sales reserve.
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
date: february15, 2011
johnson& johnson
(registrant)
by
/s/w.
c. weldon
w. c. weldon, chairman, board of directors,
and chief executive officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of
1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the
dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/w.
c. weldon
w.
c. weldon
chairman, board of directors,
chief executive officer, and director (principal executive
officer)
february 15, 2011
/s/d.
j. caruso
d.
j. caruso
chief financial officer (principal financial officer)
february 15, 2011
/s/s.
j. cosgrove
s.
j. cosgrove
controller (principal accounting officer)
february 15, 2011
/s/m.
s. coleman
m.
s. coleman
director
february 15, 2011
/s/j.
g. cullen
j.
g. cullen
director
february 15, 2011
/s/i.
e. l. davis
i.
e. l. davis
director
february 15, 2011
/s/m.
m. e. johns
m.
m. e. johns
director
february 15, 2011
signature
title
date
/s/s.
l. lindquist
s.
l. lindquist
director
february 15, 2011
/s/a.
m. mulcahy
a.
m. mulcahy
director
february 15, 2011
/s/l.
f. mullin
l.
f. mullin
director
february 15, 2011
/s/w.
d. perez
w.
d. perez
director
february 15, 2011
/s/c.
prince
c.
prince
director
february 15, 2011
/s/d.
satcher
d.
satcher
director
february 15, 2011
report of
independent registered public accounting firm on
financial statement schedule
to the board of directors of
johnson& johnson:
our audits of the consolidated financial statements and of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
referred to in our report dated february24, 2011 appearing
in the 2010 annual report to shareholders of johnson&
johnson (which report and consolidated financial statements are
incorporated by reference in this annual report on
form10-k)
also included an audit of the financial statement schedule
listed in item15(a)2 of this
form10-k.
in our opinion, this financial statement schedule presents
fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth
therein when read in conjunction with the related consolidated
financial statements.
/s/pricewaterhousecoopers
llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york
february24, 2011
exhibitindex
reg. s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(i)(a)
restated certificate of incorporation dated april 26,
1990 incorporated herein by reference to exhibit
3(a) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the
year ended december 30, 1990.
(i)(b)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company dated may20, 1992
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(a) of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
january 3, 1993.
(i)(c)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company dated may21, 1996
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(a)(iii) of the
registrants
form10-k
annual report for the year ended december 29, 1996.
(i)(d)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company effective may 22, 2001
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3 of the
registrants form 10-q quarterly report for the quarter
ended july 1, 2001.
(i)(e)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of
incorporation of the company effective april 27,
2006 incorporated herein by reference to exhibit
3(i) of the registrants form 10-q quarterly report for the
quarter ended april 2, 2006.
(ii)
by-laws of the company, as amended effective february 9,
2009 incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3.1
the registrants form 8-k current report filed february 13,
2009.
(a)
upon the request of the securities and exchange commission, the
registrant will furnish a copy of all instruments defining the
rights of holders of long-term debt of the registrant.
(a)
stock option plan for non-employee directors
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(a) of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
december 29, 1996.*
(b)
2000 stock option plan (as amended) incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit 10(b) of the registrants
form 10-k annual report for the year ended december 29, 2002.*
(c)
2005 long-term incentive plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 4 of the registrants
s-8
registration statement filed with the commission on may 10, 2005
(file no. 333-124785).*
(d)
form of stock option certificate and restricted shares to
non-employee directors certificate under the 2005 long-term
incentive plan incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit 10.1 of the registrants form 8-k current report
filed august 25, 2005.*
(e)
form of restricted stock unit certificate under the 2005
long-term incentive
plan
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10.1 of the
registrants form 10-q quarterly report for the quarter
ended october 2, 2005.*
(f)
executive bonus plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 4 of the registrants
forms-8
registration statement filed with the commission on november 8,
2005 (file no. 333-129542).*
(g)
executive incentive plan (as amended) incorporated
herein by reference to exhibit 10(f) of the registrants
form 10-k annual report for the year ended december 31, 2000.*
(h)
domestic deferred compensation (certificate of extra
compensation) plan incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit 10(g) of the registrants form 10-k annual
report for the year ended december 28, 2003.*
(i)
amendments to the certificate of extra compensation plan
effective as of january 1, 2009 incorporated herein
by reference to exhibit 10(j) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
(j)
2009 certificates of long-term performance plan
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit10.1 of the
registrants form 10-q quarterly report for the quarter
ended september 27, 2009.*
(k)
deferred fee plan directors (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(h) of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
january 2, 2005.*
(l)
amendments to the deferred fee plan for directors effective as
of january 1, 2009 incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit 10(l) of the registrants form 10-k annual
report for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
(m)
executive income deferral plan (as amended)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(i) of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
december 28, 2003.*
reg. s-k
exhibit table
description
item no.
of exhibit
(n)
amendments to the executive income deferral plan effective as of
january 1, 2009 incorporated herein by reference to
exhibit 10(n) of the registrants form 10-k annual report
for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
(o)
excess savings plan incorporated herein by reference
to exhibit 10(j) of the registrants form 10-k annual
report for the year ended december 29, 1996.*
(p)
amendments to the johnson & johnson excess savings plan
effective as of january 1, 2009 incorporated herein
by reference to exhibit 10(p) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
(q)
excess benefit plan (supplemental retirement plan)
incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(h) of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
january 3, 1993.*
(r)
amendments to the excess benefit plan of johnson & johnson
and affiliated companies effective as of january 1,
2009 incorporated herein by reference to exhibit
10(r) of the registrants form10-k annual report for
the year ended december 28, 2008.*
(s)
executive life insurance plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 10(i) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended january 3, 1993.*
(t)
stock option gain deferral plan incorporated herein
by reference to exhibit 10(m) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended january 2, 2000.*
(u)
estate preservation plan incorporated herein by
reference to exhibit 10(n) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended january 2, 2000.*
(v)
summary of compensation arrangements for named executive
officers and directors filed with this document.*
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed
charges filed with this document.
pages 30 through 75 of the companys annual
report to shareholders for fiscal year 2010 (only those portions
of the annual report incorporated by reference in this report
are deemed filed) filed with this
document.
subsidiaries filed with this document.
consent of independent registered public accounting
firm filed with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302
of the sarbanes-oxley act filed with this document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302
of the sarbanes-oxley act filed with this document.
(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906
of the sarbanes-oxley act furnished with this
document.
(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906
of the sarbanes-oxley act furnished with this
document.
cautionary statement pursuant to private securities litigation
reform act of 1995 safe harbor for
forward-looking statements filed with this document.
xbrl (extensible business reporting language) the following
materials from johnson & johnsons annual report on
form 10-k for the fiscal year-ended january 2, 2011, formatted
in extensive business reporting language (xbrl): (i)
consolidated balance sheets, (ii) consolidated statements of
earnings, (iii) consolidated statements of equity, (iv)
consolidated statements of cash flows,(v)notes to
the consolidated financial statements, and (vi)
scheduleii valuation and qualifying accounts.
*
management contract or compensatory plan.
a copy of any of the exhibits listed above will be provided
without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request
specifying the desired exhibit(s) to the secretary at the
principal executive offices of the company.
