10-k
d281803d10k.htm
form 10-k
form 10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission  washington,d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section13 of  the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended january1, 2012
commission file number 1-3215
johnson& johnson  (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
new jersey
22-1024240
(state of incorporation)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
one johnson& johnson plaza
new brunswick, new jersey
(address of principal executive offices)
(zip code)
registrants telephone number, including area code: (732)524-0400
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the act
title of each class
name of each exchange on which registered
common stock, par value $1.00
new york stock exchange
indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule405 of the securities
act.yesno
indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section13 or section15(d) of the exchange
act.yesno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or 15(d) of the
exchange act during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days.yesno
indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate website, if any, every interactive
data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to rule405 of regulations-t during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such
files).yesno
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of regulations-k is not contained herein, and
will not be contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in partiii of this form10-k or any amendment to this form10-k.  indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer and smaller reporting company in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act.
largeacceleratedfiler
acceleratedfiler
non-accelerated filer
(do not check if a smaller reporting company)
smallerreportingcompany
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule12b-2 of the
exchange act).yesno
the aggregate market value of the common stock held by non-affiliates computed by reference to the price at which the common stock was
last sold as of the last business day of the registrants most recently completed second fiscal quarter was approximately $184 billion.  on february17,2012, there were 2,745,078,671shares of common stock outstanding.
documents
incorporated by reference
partsi,ii and iii:
portions of registrants annual report to shareholders for fiscal year 2011 (the annual report).
parts i and iii:
portions of registrants proxy statement for its 2012 annual meeting of shareholders filed within 120days after the close of the registrants fiscal year (the
proxy statement).
table of contents
item
page
parti
1.business
general
segments of business
geographic areas
raw materials
patents and trademarks
seasonality
competition
research and development
environment
regulation
available information
1a.risk factors
1b.unresolved staff comments
2.properties
3.legalproceedings
4.minesafety disclosures
executive officers of the registrant
partii
5.
marketfor registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
6.selectedfinancial data
7.
managementsdiscussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operation
7a.
quantitativeand qualitative disclosures about market risk
8.
financialstatements and supplementary data
9.
changesin and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
9a.controls and procedures
9b.other information
partiii
10.
directors,executive officers and corporate governance
11.executivecompensation
12.
securityownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
13.
certainrelationships and related transactions, and director independence
14.principalaccountant fees and services
partiv
15.exhibitsand financial statement schedules
scheduleiivaluation and qualifying accounts
signatures
report of independent registered public accounting firm on financial statement schedule
exhibitindex
table of contents
parti
item1.
business
general  johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries (the company) have approximately 117,900employees worldwide engaged in the research and development, manufacture and sale of a broad range of products
in the health care field. johnson& johnson is a holding company, which has more than 250 operating companies conducting business in virtually all countries of the world. johnson& johnsons primary focus has been on products
related to human health and well-being. johnson& johnson was incorporated in the state of new jersey in 1887.  the
companys structure is based on the principle of decentralized management. the executive committee of johnson& johnson is the principal management group responsible for the strategic operations and allocation of the resources of the
company. this committee oversees and coordinates the activities of the consumer, pharmaceutical and medical devices and diagnostics business segments. in line with the principle of decentralized management, senior management groups at u.s. and
international operating companies are each responsible for their own strategic plans, as well as the day-to-day operations of those companies, and each subsidiary within the business segments is, with some exceptions, managed by citizens of the
country where it is located.  segments of business
johnson& johnsons operating companies are organized into three business segments: consumer, pharmaceutical and medical
devices and diagnostics. additional information required by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the narrative and tabular (but not the graphic) descriptions of segments and operating results under the captions managements
discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition on pages 26 through 36and note18 segments of business and geographic areas under notes to consolidated financial statements on
page56of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.  consumer
the consumer segment includes a broad range of products used in the baby care, skin care, oral care, wound care and
womens health fields, as well as nutritional and over-the-counter pharmaceutical products, and wellness and prevention platforms. the baby care franchise includes the johnsons baby line of products. major brands in the skin care franchise include the aveeno; clean& clear;
johnsons adult; neutrogena; roc; lubriderm; dabao; and vendme product lines. the oral care franchise includes the listerine and reach oral care lines of
products. the wound care franchise includes band-aid brand adhesive bandages and neosporin first aid products. major brands in the womens health franchise are the carefree pantiliners; o.b. tampons and stayfree
sanitary protection products. the nutritional and over-the-counter lines include splenda no calorie sweetener;
the broad family of tylenol acetaminophen products; sudafed cold, flu and allergy products;
zyrtec allergy products; motrin ib ibuprofen products; and
pepcid ac acid controller. these products are marketed to the general public and sold both to retail outlets
and distributors throughout the world.  pharmaceutical  the pharmaceutical segment includes products in the following areas: anti-infective, antipsychotic, contraceptive, dermatology, gastrointestinal, hematology, immunology, infectious diseases, neurology,
oncology, pain management, thrombosis and vaccines. these products are distributed directly to retailers, wholesalers and health care professionals for prescription use. key products in the pharmaceutical segment include:
table of contents
remicade (infliximab), a treatment for a number of immune
mediated inflammatory diseases; stelara (ustekinumab), a treatment for moderate to severe plaque psoriasis;
simponi (golimumab), a treatment for adults with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis,
and ankylosing spondylitis; velcade (bortezomib), a treatment for multiple myeloma; zytiga (abiraterone acetate), a treatment for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer; prezista (darunavir), intelence (etravirine) and edurant
(rilpivirine), treatments for hiv/aids; incivo (telaprevir), for the treatment of hepatitis c; nucynta (tapentadol), a treatment for moderate to severe acute pain;
invega sustenna (paliperidone palmitate), for the acute and maintenance treatment of schizophrenia in adults; risperdal consta (risperidone), a
treatment for the management of bipolari disorder and schizophrenia; xarelto (rivaroxaban), a treatment
for the prevention of thrombosis following total hip or knee replacement surgery and for the prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation; procrit (epoetin alfa, sold outside the u.s.as eprex), to stimulate red blood cell production; levaquin (levofloxacin), for the treatment of bacterial infections; concerta (methylphenidate hcl), a treatment for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; aciphex/pariet, a proton pump
inhibitor co-marketed with eisai inc.; and duragesic/fentanyl transdermal (fentanyl transdermal system, sold
outside the u.s.as durogesic), a treatment for chronic pain that offers a novel delivery system.
medical devices and diagnostics  the medical devices and diagnostics segment includes a broad range of products distributed to wholesalers, hospitals and retailers, used principally in the professional fields by physicians, nurses,
therapists, hospitals, diagnostic laboratories and clinics. these products include cardiovascular cares electrophysiology and circulatory disease management products; depuys orthopaedic joint reconstruction, spinal care, neurological and
sports medicine products; diabetes cares blood glucose monitoring and insulin delivery products; ethicons surgical care, aesthetics and womens health products; ethicon endo-surgerys minimally invasive surgical products and
advanced sterilization products; ortho-clinical diagnostics professional diagnostic products; and vision cares disposable contact lenses. distribution to these health care professional markets is done both directly and through surgical
supply and other distributors.  geographic areas
the business of johnson& johnson is conducted by more than 250 operating companies located in 60countries, including the
united states, which sell products in virtually all countries throughout the world. the products made and sold in the international business include many of those described above under segments of businessconsumer,
pharmaceutical and medical devices and diagnostics. however, the principal markets, products and methods of distribution in the international business vary with the country and the culture. the products sold in
international business include not only those developed in the united states, but also those developed by subsidiaries abroad.
investments and activities in some countries outside the united states are subject to higher risks than comparable u.s.activities
because the investment and commercial climate may be influenced by restrictive economic policies and political uncertainties.
raw materials  raw materials essential to the business of johnson& johnsons operating companies are
generally readily available from multiple sources. where there are exceptions, the temporary unavailability of those raw materials would not likely have a material adverse effect on the financial results of the company.
patents and trademarks  johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries have made a practice of obtaining patent protection on their products and processes where possible. they own or are licensed under a number of patents
relating to their products and
table of contents
manufacturing processes, which in the aggregate are believed to be of material importance to johnson& johnson in the operation of its businesses. sales of the companys largest
product, remicade (infliximab), accounted for 8.4% of johnson& johnsons total revenues for
fiscal 2011. accordingly, the patents related to this product are believed to be material to johnson& johnson.  in june of 2011, levaquin lost market exclusivity and became
subject to generic competition in the united states. sales of levaquin declined 54.1% in 2011 as compared to
2010.  johnson& johnsons operating companies have made a practice of selling their products under trademarks
and of obtaining protection for these trademarks by all available means. these trademarks are protected by registration in the united states and other countries where such products are marketed. johnson& johnson considers these trademarks
in the aggregate to be of material importance in the operation of its businesses.  seasonality
worldwide sales do not reflect any significant degree of seasonality; however, spending has been heavier in the fourth quarter of each
year than in other quarters. this reflects increased spending decisions, principally for advertising and research and development activity.
competition  in all of their product lines, johnson& johnsons operating companies compete with companies both locally and globally, throughout the world. competition exists in all product lines without
regard to the number and size of the competing companies involved. competition in research, involving the development and the improvement of new and existing products and processes, is particularly significant. the development of new and innovative
products is important to the companys success in all areas of its business. this also includes protecting the companys portfolio of intellectual property. the competitive environment requires substantial investments in continuing
research and in maintaining sales forces. in addition, the development and maintenance of customer demand for the companys consumer products involves significant expenditures for advertising and promotion.
research and development  research activities represent a significant part of johnson& johnsons subsidiaries businesses. research and development expenditures relate to the processes of discovering, testing
and developing new products, improving existing products, as well as demonstrating product efficacy and regulatory compliance prior to launch. the company remains committed to investing in research and development with the aim of delivering high
quality and innovative products. worldwide costs of research and development activities amounted to $7.5 billion, $6.8billion and $7.0billion for fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. major research facilities are located not
only in the united states, but also in belgium, brazil, canada, china, france, germany, india, israel, japan, the netherlands, singapore and the united kingdom.  environment  johnson& johnsons
operating companies are subject to a variety of u.s.and international environmental protection measures. the company believes that its operations comply in all material respects with applicable environmental laws and regulations. the
companys compliance with these requirements did not during the past year, and is not expected to, have a material effect upon its capital expenditures, cash flows, earnings or competitive position.
regulation  most of johnson& johnsons businesses are subject to varying degrees of governmental regulation in the countries in which operations are conducted, and the general trend is toward
increasingly stringent regulation. in
table of contents
the united states, the drug, device, diagnostics and cosmetic industries have long been subject to regulation by various federal and state agencies, primarily as to product safety, efficacy,
manufacturing, advertising, labeling and safety reporting. the exercise of broad regulatory powers by the u.s. food and drug administration (the fda) continues to result in increases in the amounts of testing and documentation required for fda
clearance of new drugs and devices and a corresponding increase in the expense of product introduction. similar trends are also evident in major markets outside of the united states.
the costs of human health care have been and continue to be a subject of study, investigation and regulation by governmental agencies and
legislative bodies around the world. in the united states, attention has been focused on drug prices and profits and programs that encourage doctors to write prescriptions for particular drugs or recommend, use or purchase particular medical
devices. payers have become a more potent force in the market place and increased attention is being paid to drug and medical device pricing, appropriate drug and medical device utilization and the quality and costs of health care.
the regulatory agencies under whose purview johnson& johnsons operating companies operate have administrative powers that
may subject those companies to actions such as product withdrawals, recalls, seizure of products and other civil and criminal sanctions. in some cases, johnson& johnsons operating companies may deem it advisable to initiate product
recalls.  in addition, business practices in the health care industry have come under increased scrutiny, particularly in the
united states, by government agencies and state attorneys general, and resulting investigations and prosecutions carry the risk of significant civil and criminal penalties.  available information  the companys main
corporate website address is www.jnj.com. copies of johnson& johnsons quarterly reports on form10-q, annual report on form10-k and current reports on form8-k filed or furnished to the u.s.securities and
exchange commission (the sec), and any amendments to the foregoing, will be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request to the secretary at the principal executive offices of the company or by calling
1-800-950-5089. all of the companys sec filings are also available on the companys website at www.investor.jnj.com/governance/materials.cfm, as soon as reasonably practicable after having been electronically filed or furnished to
the sec. all sec filings are also available at the secs website at www.sec.gov. in addition, the written charters of the audit committee, the compensation& benefits committee, the nominating& corporate governance
committee and the science and technology advisory committee of the board of directors and the companys principles of corporate governance, policy on business conduct for employees and code of business conduct& ethics for members of
the board of directors and executive officers are available at the www.investor.jnj.com/governance/materials.cfm website address and will be provided without charge to any shareholder submitting a written request, as provided above.
item1a.
risk factors  some
important factors that could cause the companys actual results to differ from the companys expectations in any forward-looking statements in this report are set forth in exhibit99 to this report on form10-k.
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
not applicable.
item2.
properties
johnson& johnsons subsidiaries operate 139 manufacturing facilities occupying approximately 21.8million square feet
of floor space.
table of contents
the manufacturing facilities are used by the industry segments of johnson&
johnsons business approximately as follows:
segment
squarefeet(inthousands)
consumer
7,216
pharmaceutical
7,606
medical devices and diagnostics
6,955
worldwide total
21,777
within the united states, 8 facilities are used by the consumer segment, 10 by the pharmaceutical segment
and 34 by the medical devices and diagnostics segment. the companys manufacturing operations outside the united states are often conducted in facilities that serve more than one business segment.
the locations of the manufacturing facilities by major geographic areas of the world are as follows:
geographic area
numberoffacilities
squarefeet(inthousands)
united states
6,537
europe
8,137
western hemisphere, excluding u.s.
3,455
africa, asia and pacific
3,648
worldwide total
21,777
in addition to the manufacturing facilities discussed above, johnson& johnson and its
subsidiaries maintain numerous office and warehouse facilities throughout the world. research facilities are also discussed in item1 under businessresearch and development.
johnson& johnsons subsidiaries generally seek to own their manufacturing facilities, although some, principally in
locations abroad, are leased. office and warehouse facilities are often leased.  the company is committed to maintaining all
of its properties in good operating condition and repair, and the facilities are well utilized.  during the first fiscal
quarter of 2011, a consent decree was signed with the fda, which requires mcneil-ppc, inc. to take enhanced measures to remediate certain facilities it operates. mcneil-ppc voluntarily shut down its fort washington, pennsylvania facility in april
2010. this facility will remain shut down until rebuilding is complete, a third-party consultant certifies that its operations will be in compliance with applicable law, and the fda concurs with the third-party certification. a discussion of this
matter can be found under the heading government proceedingsmcneil consumer healthcare in note 21 legal proceedings under notes to the consolidated financial statements on page 63 of the annual report, which
is filed as exhibit 13 to this report on form 10-k. for information regarding lease obligations, see note16 rental
expense and lease commitments under notes to consolidated financial statements on page54 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k. segment information on additions to property, plant and
equipment is contained in note18 segments of business and geographic areas under notes to consolidated financial statements on page 56of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.
table of contents
item3.
legal proceedings  the
information set forth in note21 legal proceedings under notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 58 through 67 of the annual report is incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to this
report on form10-k.  in addition, johnson& johnson and its subsidiaries are from time to time party to
government investigations, inspections or other proceedings relating toenvironmental matters, including their compliance withapplicableenvironmental laws.in connection with aroutine inspection ofa
subsidiarysmanufacturing facility, the california department of toxic substances control (the department)has alleged violation of regulations dealing with the handling of certain wastes.the company believesthat adequate
defenses to those allegations exist and is presently in discussions with the department regarding the validity of such allegations.although the company cannot predict the ultimate outcome of any proceeding that may be brought regarding these
matters,the company expects that this matter will be resolved without significant penalties or other adverse impact to the company.
item4.
mine safety disclosures
not applicable.
executive officers of the registrant  listed below are the executive officers of johnson& johnson as of
february17, 2012, each of whom, unless otherwise indicated below, has been an employee of the company or its affiliates and held the position indicated during the past five years. there are no family relationships between any of the executive
officers, and there is no arrangement or understanding between any executive officer and any other person pursuant to which the executive officer was selected. at the annual meeting of the board of directors, the executive officers are elected by
the board to hold office for one year and until their respective successors are elected and qualified, or until earlier resignation or removal.  information with regard to the directors of the company, including information for william c. weldon, is incorporated herein by reference to the material captioned election of directors in the
proxy statement.
name
age
position
dominic j. caruso
member, executive committee; vice president, finance; chief financial officer(a)
peter m. fasolo
member, executive committee, vice president, global human resources(b)
alex gorsky
vice chairman, executive committee(c)
sherilyn s. mccoy
vice chairman, executive committee(d)
michael h. ullmann
member, executive committee; vice president, general counsel(e)
william c. weldon
chairman, board of directors; chairman, executive committee; chief executive officer
(a)
mr.d. j. caruso joined the company in 1999 when the company acquired centocor, inc. at the time of that acquisition, he had been senior vice president, finance of
centocor. mr.caruso was named vice president, finance of ortho-mcneil pharmaceutical, inc., a subsidiary of the company, in 2001, and vice president, group finance of the companys medical devices and diagnostics group in 2003. in 2005,
mr.caruso was named vice president of the companys group finance organization. mr.caruso became a member of the executive committee and vice president, finance and chief financial officer in 2007.
(b)
mr.p. m. fasolo joined the company in 2004 as vice president, worldwide human resources for cordis corporation, a subsidiary of the company. he was then named
vice president, global talent management for the company. he left johnson& johnson in 2007 to join kohlberg kravis roberts& co. as chief talent officer. mr.fasolo returned to the company in september 2010 as the vice
president, global human resources, and in january 2011, he became a member of the executive committee.
table of contents
(c)
mr.a. gorsky joined the company in 2008 as company group chairman and worldwide franchise chairman for ethicon, inc., a subsidiary of the company. previously, he
was head of the north american pharmaceuticals business at novartis pharmaceuticals corporation from 2004 to 2008. prior to novartis, mr.gorsky served in various management positions at johnson& johnson, including company group
chairman for the companys pharmaceutical business in europe, middle east and africa, and president of janssen pharmaceutica inc. (u.s.), a subsidiary of the company. in january 2009, he became a member of the executive committee and worldwide
chairman, surgical care group, and in september 2009, he became worldwide chairman, medical devices and diagnostics group. mr.gorsky was appointed as vice chairman, executive committee in january 2011. on february 21, 2012, the company
announced that the board of directors named mr. gorsky chief executive officer of the company, effective april 26, 2012. mr. gorsky also has been nominated for election to the board of directors at the 2012 annual meeting of shareholders.
(d)
ms.s. s. mccoy joined the company in 1982 as an associate scientist in research& development for personal products company, a subsidiary of the company.
she was named vice president, research& development for the personal products worldwide division of mcneil-ppc, inc., a subsidiary of the company, in 1995, and vice president, marketing for its skin care franchise in 2000. in 2002,
ms.mccoy became global president for its baby and wound care franchise. she was named company group chairman and worldwide franchise chairman of ethicon, inc., a subsidiary of the company, in 2005. in 2008 she became a member of the executive
committee and worldwide chairman, surgical care group. in 2009, she became worldwide chairman, pharmaceuticals group. ms.mccoy was appointed as vice chairman, executive committee in january 2011.
(e)
mr.m. h. ullmann joined the company in 1989 as a corporate attorney in the law department.he was appointed corporate secretary in 1999 and served in that
role until 2006.during that time, he also held various management positions in the law department.in 2006, he was named general counsel of the medical devices and diagnostics group. mr. ullmann was appointed vice president, general
counsel and a member of the executive committee in january 2012.  partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities
as of february17, 2012, there were 176,293record holders of common stock of the company. additional information called for by
this item is incorporated herein by reference to: the material under the captions managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial conditionliquidity and capital resourcesshare repurchase and
dividends on page33; other informationcommon stock market prices on page36; note17 common stock, stock option plans and stock compensation agreements under notes to consolidated
financial statements on pages 54 and 55; and shareholder return performance graphs on page71 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k; and item12 security ownership of
certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder mattersequity compensation plan information of this report on form10-k.  issuer purchases of equity securities the following table provides
information with respect to common stock purchases by the company during the fiscal fourth quarter of 2011. common stock purchases on the open market are made as part of a systematic plan to meet the needs of the companys compensation
programs.
period
totalnumberof sharespurchased
avg.pricepaidpershare
october3, 2011 through october30, 2011
2,831,300
$
63.05
october31, 2011 through november27, 2011
4,548,380
63.90
november28, 2011 through january1, 2012
6,067,124
63.44
total
13,446,804
table of contents
item6.
selected financial data
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the material under the caption summary of operations
and statistical data 2001-2011 on page70 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operation
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the narrative and tabular (but not the graphic) material
under the caption managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition on pages 26 through 36 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk  the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the material under the caption managements discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial
conditionliquidity and capital resourcesfinancing and market risk on pages 32 and 33 and note1 summary of significant accounting policiesfinancial instruments under notes to consolidated financial
statements on page 42 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data  the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto and the material under the caption report of
independent registered public accounting firm on pages 37 through 68 of the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
not applicable.
item9a.
controls and procedures
disclosure controls and procedures.at the end of the period covered by this report, the company evaluated the effectiveness
of the design and operation of its disclosure controls and procedures. the companys disclosure controls and procedures are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or submits
under the exchange act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the secs rules and forms. disclosure controls and procedures include, without limitation, controls and procedures designed to ensure
that information required to be disclosed by the company in the reports that it files or submits under the exchange act is accumulated and communicated to the companys management, including its principal executive and principal financial
officers, or persons performing similar functions, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. william c. weldon, chairman and chief executive officer, and dominic j. caruso, chief financial officer, reviewed and
participated in this evaluation. based on this evaluation, messrs.weldon and caruso concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this report, the companys disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
managements report on internal control over financial reporting.under section404 of the sarbanes-oxley act of
2002, management is required to assess the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting as of the end of each fiscal year and report, based on that assessment, whether the companys internal control over
financial reporting is effective.
table of contents
management of the company is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal
control over financial reporting. the companys internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of the companys financial reporting and the preparation of external financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.  internal control over financial reporting, no matter
how well designed, has inherent limitations. therefore, internal control over financial reporting determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement preparation and may not prevent or detect all
misstatements. moreover, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures
may deteriorate.  the companys management has assessed the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting as of january1, 2012. in making this assessment, the company used the criteria established by the committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission (coso) in internal control-integrated framework.
these criteria are in the areas of control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. the companys assessment included extensive documenting, evaluating and testing the design and operating
effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting.  based on the companys processes and assessment, as
described above, management has concluded that, as of january1, 2012, the companys internal control over financial reporting was effective.  the effectiveness of the companys internal control over financial reporting as of january1, 2012 has been audited by pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public accounting
firm, as stated in their report, which appears in the report of independent registered public accounting firm on page68 of the annual report, which is incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to this report on
form10-k.  changes in internal control over financial reporting.during the fiscal quarter ended
january1, 2012, there were no changes in the companys internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation required under rules13a-15 and 15d-15 under the exchange act that have materially
affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the companys internal control over financial reporting.
item9b.
other information  not
applicable. part iii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance  the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the material under the captions election of directors and stock ownership and section16
compliancesection16(a) beneficial ownership reporting compliance and the discussion of the audit committee under the caption corporate governance standing board committees in the proxy statement; and the material
under the caption executive officers of the registrant in parti of this report on form10-k.  the
companys policy on business conduct, which covers all employees (including the chief executive officer, chief financial officer and controller), meets the requirements of the sec rules promulgated under section406 of the sarbanes-oxley
act of 2002. the policy on business conduct is available on the companys website at www.investor.jnj.com/governance/policies.cfm, and copies are available to shareholders without charge upon written request to the secretary at the
companys principal executive offices. any substantive
table of contents
amendment to the policy on business conduct or any waiver of the policy granted to the chief executive officer, the chief financial officer or the controller will be posted on the companys
website at www.investor.jnj.com/governance.cfm within five business days (and retained on the website for at least one year).  in addition, the company has adopted a code of business conduct& ethics for members of the board of directors and executive officers. the code of business conduct& ethics for members
of the board of directors and executive officers is available on the companys website at www.investor.jnj.com/governance/policies.cfm, and copies are available to shareholders without charge upon written request to the secretary at the
companys principal executive offices. any substantive amendment to the code or any waiver of the code granted to any member of the board of directors or any executive officer will be posted on the companys website at
www.investor.jnj.com/governance.cfm within five business days (and retained on the website for at least one year).
item11.
executive compensation
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the material under the captions director
compensation2011, compensation committee report, compensation discussion and analysis, and executive compensation in the proxy statement.
the material incorporated herein by reference to the material under the caption compensation committee report in the proxy
statement shall be deemed furnished, and not filed, in this report on form10-k and shall not be deemed incorporated by reference into any filing under the securities act of 1933, as amended, or the securities exchange act of 1934, as amended,
as a result of this furnishing, except to the extent that the registrant specifically incorporates it by reference.
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters
additional information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the material under the captions stock
ownership and section16 compliance in the proxy statement and note17 common stock, stock option plans and stock compensation agreements under notes to consolidated financial statements on pages 54 and 55 of
the annual report, filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k.
table of contents
equity compensation plan information
the following table provides certain information as of january1, 2012 concerning the shares of the companys common stock that
may be issued under existing equity compensation plans.
plan category
number ofsecurities tobeissueduponexercise ofoutstandingoptions
andrights
weightedaverageexercise price ofoutstandingoptions andrights
numberofsecuritiesremainingavailableforfutureissuanceunder
equitycompensation plans(4)
equity compensation plans approved by security holders(1)
210,441,904
$
51.24
104,900,116
equity compensation plans not approved by security holders(2)(3)
43,178
46.60
total
210,485,082
$
51.24
104,900,116
(1)
included in this
category are the following equity compensation plans, which have been approved by the companys shareholders: 2000 stock option plan and 2005 long-term incentive plan.
(2)
included in this category are 38,428shares of common stock of the company issuable under one equity compensation plan assumed by the company upon
acquisition of scios inc. at the time of the acquisition, options to acquire equity of the acquired company were replaced by options to acquire the common stock of the company. no stock options or equity awards of any type have been made under this
plan since the assumption of the plan by the company, and no further stock options or other equity awards of any type will be made under this plan in the future.
the shares were issued under a plan not approved by shareholders of scios under the 1996 scios non-officer stock option plan.
(3)
also included in this category are 4,750shares of common stock of the company issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock options under the
companys stock option plan for non-employee directors. all options outstanding under this plan have fully vested with an expiration period of ten years from the date of grant.
(4)
this column excludes shares reflected under the column number of securities to be issued upon exercise of outstanding options and rights.
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence  the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the material under the captions transactions with related persons and corporate governancedirector
independence in the proxy statement.
item14.
principal accountant fees and services  the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the material under the caption ratification of appointment of independent registered public accounting firm in
the proxy statement.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibitsand financial statement schedules  (a)the following documents are filed as part of this report:
1.financial statements  the following audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto and the material under the caption report of independent registered public accounting firm on pages 37 through 68 of
the annual report are incorporated herein by reference and filed as exhibit13 to this report on form10-k:
consolidated balance sheets at end of fiscal years 2011 and 2010  consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009
consolidated statements of equity for fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009
consolidated statements of cash flows for fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009
notes to consolidated financial statements  report of independent registered public accounting firm  2.financial
statement schedules  scheduleiivaluation and qualifying accounts
schedules other than those listed above are omitted because they are not required or are not applicable.
3.exhibitsrequired to be filed by item60l of regulations-k
the information called for by this item is incorporated herein by reference to the exhibitindex in this report.
table of contents
johnson& johnson and subsidiaries
schedule
valuation and qualifying accounts
scheduleiivaluation and qualifying accounts
fiscal years ended january1, 2012, january2, 2011 and january3, 2010
(dollars in millions)
balanceatbeginningofperiod
accruals
payments/credits
balanceatend ofperiod
accrued rebates(1)
$
2,146
8,331
(8,262
)
2,215
accrued returns
(518
)
accrued promotions
1,774
(1,805
)
subtotal
$
3,213
10,665
(10,585
)
3,293
reserve for doubtful accounts
(56
)
reserve for cash discounts
(971
)
total
$
3,663
11,702
(11,612
)
3,753
accrued rebates(1)(2)
$
1,639
8,400
(7,893
)
2,146
accrued returns
(566
)
accrued promotions
2,664
(2,666
)
subtotal
$
2,757
11,581
(11,125
)
3,213
reserve for doubtful accounts
(123
)
reserve for cash discounts
1,112
(1,103
)
total
$
3,191
12,823
(12,351
)
3,663
accrued rebates(1)(2)
$
1,808
7,418
(7,587
)
1,639
accrued returns
(460
)
accrued promotions
2,446
(2,373
)
subtotal
$
2,958
10,219
(10,420
)
2,757
reserve for doubtful accounts
(44
)
reserve for cash discounts
1,163
(1,141
)
total
$
3,304
11,492
(11,605
)
3,191
(1)
includes reserve
for customer rebates of $656 million, $701million and $729million at january1, 2012, january2, 2011 and january3, 2010, respectively.
(2)
accruals and payments/credits for 2010 have been revised by $908 million, and for 2009 by $834 million, to appropriately reflect non-cash
credits/adjustments, consistent with current year presentation related to the ethicon franchise, previously reported net in the accruals column. this revision is not considered material to the previously issued financial statements.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.  date: february23,2012
johnson& johnson
(registrant)
by
/s/w. c. weldon
w. c. weldon, chairman, board of directors,and chief executive officer
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
signature
title
date
/s/w. c.
weldon w. c. weldon
chairman, board of directors, chief executive officer, and director (principal executive officer)
february23, 2012
/s/d. j.
caruso d. j. caruso
chief financial officer (principal financial officer)
february23, 2012
/s/s. j.
cosgrove s. j. cosgrove
controller (principal accounting officer)
february23, 2012
/s/m. s.
coleman m. s. coleman
director
february23, 2012
/s/j. g.
cullen j. g. cullen
director
february23, 2012
i. e. l. davis
director
/s/m. m. e.
johns m. m. e. johns
director
february23, 2012
/s/s. l.
lindquist s. l. lindquist
director
february23, 2012
/s/a. m.
mulcahy a. m. mulcahy
director
february23, 2012
l. f. mullin
director
table of contents
signature
title
date
/s/w. d.
perez w. d. perez
director
february23, 2012
/s/c.
prince c. prince
director
february23, 2012
/s/d.
satcher d. satcher
director
february23, 2012
/s/r. a.
williams r. a. williams
director
february23, 2012
table of contents
report of independent registered public accounting firm on
financial statement schedule  to the board of directors of  johnson& johnson:
our audits of the consolidated financial statements and of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting referred to in
our report dated february23, 2012 appearing in the 2011 annual report to shareholders of johnson& johnson (which report and consolidated financial statements are incorporated by reference in this annual report on form10-k) also
included an audit of the financial statement schedule listed in item15(a)2 of this form10-k. in our opinion, this financial statement schedule presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein when read in
conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
/s/ pricewaterhousecoopers llp
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
new york, new york  february23, 2012
table of contents
exhibit index
reg.s-kexhibittableitem no.
description of exhibit
3(i)(a)
restated certificate of incorporation dated april 26, 1990incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(a) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended
december 30, 1990.
3(i)(b)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation of the company dated may20, 1992incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(a) of the
registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended january 3, 1993.
3(i)(c)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation of the company dated may21, 1996incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(a)(iii) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year ended december 29, 1996.
3(i)(d)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation of the company effective may 22, 2001incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3 of the
registrants form 10-q quarterly report for the quarter ended july 1, 2001.
3(i)(e)
certificate of amendment to the restated certificate of incorporation of the company effective april 27, 2006incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3(i) of the
registrants form 10-q quarterly report for the quarter ended april 2, 2006.
3(ii)
by-laws of the company, as amended effective february 9, 2009incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 3.1 the registrants form 8-k current report filed february 13,
2009.
4(a)
upon the request of the securities and exchange commission, the registrant will furnish a copy of all instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the
registrant.
10(a)
stock option plan for non-employee directorsincorporated herein by reference to exhibit10(a) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended december
29, 1996.*
10(b)
2000 stock option plan (as amended)filed with this document.*
10(c)
2005 long-term incentive planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4 of the registrants s-8 registration statement filed with the commission on may 10, 2005 (file
no. 333-124785).*
10(d)
form of restricted shares to non-employee directors certificate under the 2005 long-term incentive planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10.1 of the
registrants form 8-k current report filed august 25, 2005.*
10(e)
form of stock option certificate, restricted share unit certificate and performance share unit certificate under the 2005 long-term incentive planincorporated herein by
reference to exhibits 10.1, 10.2 and 10.3 of the registrants form 8-k current report filed january 13, 2012.*
10(f)
executive bonus planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 4 of the registrants forms-8 registration statement filed with the commission on november 8, 2005
(file no. 333-129542).*
10(g)
executive incentive plan (as amended)incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(f) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended december 31,
2000.*
10(h)
domestic deferred compensation (certificate of extra compensation) planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(g) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for
the year ended december 28, 2003.*
10(i)
amendments to the certificate of extra compensation plan effective as of january 1, 2009incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(j) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
10(j)
2009 certificates of long-term performance planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit10.1 of the registrants form 10-q quarterly report for the quarter ended
september 27, 2009.*
10(k)
amended and restated deferred fee plan for directorsfiled with this document.*
10(l)
amendments to the deferred fee plan for directors effective as of january 1, 2009incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(l) of the registrants form 10-k annual
report for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
table of contents
reg.s-kexhibittableitem no.
description of exhibit
10(m)
executive income deferral plan (as amended)incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(i) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended december 28,
2003.*
10(n)
amendments to the executive income deferral plan effective as of january1, 2009incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(n) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended december28, 2008.*
10(o)
excess savings planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(j) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended december 29, 1996.*
10(p)
amendments to the johnson & johnson excess savings plan effective as of january 1, 2009incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(p) of the registrants form 10-k
annual report for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
10(q)
excess benefit plan (supplemental retirement plan)incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(h) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended january
3, 1993.*
10(r)
amendments to the excess benefit plan of johnson & johnson and affiliated companies effective as of january 1, 2009incorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(r) of the
registrants form10-k annual report for the year ended december 28, 2008.*
10(s)
executive life insurance planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(i) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended january 3,
1993.*
10(t)
stock option gain deferral planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(m) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended january 2,
2000.*
10(u)
estate preservation planincorporated herein by reference to exhibit 10(n) of the registrants form 10-k annual report for the year ended january 2,
2000.*
10(v)
summary of compensation arrangements for named executive officers and directorsfiled with this document.*
statement of computation of ratio of earnings to fixed chargesfiled with this document.
pages 25 through 71 of the companys annual report to shareholders for fiscal year 2011 (only those portions of the annual report incorporated by reference in this report
are deemed filed)filed with this document.
subsidiariesfiled with this document.
consent of independent registered public accounting firmfiled with this document.
31(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley actfiled with this document.
31(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley actfiled with this document.
32(a)
certification of chief executive officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley actfurnished with this document.
32(b)
certification of chief financial officer pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley actfurnished with this document.
cautionary statement pursuant to private securities litigation reform act of 1995safe harbor for forward-looking statementsfiled with this
document.
xbrl (extensible business reporting language) the following materials from johnson & johnsons annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year-ended january 1, 2012,
formatted in extensive business reporting language (xbrl): (i) consolidated balance sheets, (ii) consolidated statements of earnings, (iii) consolidated statements of equity, (iv) consolidated statements of cash flows,(v)notes to the
consolidated financial statements, and (vi) scheduleiivaluation and qualifying accounts.
*
management contract or compensatory plan.
