10-k
w57038e10-k.htm
form 10-k e. i. du pont de nemours and company
e10-k
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington, d.c. 20549
form10-k
annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the year ended december31,2001
commission file number 1-815
e. i. du pont de nemours
and company
(exact name of registrant as specified in its
charter)
delaware
51-0014090
(state or other jurisdiction of incorporation
or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification no.)
1007 market street
wilmington, delaware 19898
(address of principal executive
offices)
registrants telephone number, including
area code: 302774-1000
securities registered pursuant to
section12(b) of the act
(each class is registered on the new york
stock exchange, inc.):
title of each class
common stock ($.30 par value)
preferred stock
(without par value-cumulative)
$4.50 series
$3.50 series
no securities are registered pursuant to
section12(g) of the act.
indicate by check mark if disclosure of
delinquent filers pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k is not contained herein, and will not be
contained, to the best of registrants knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by
reference in part iii of this form10-k or any amendment to
this
form10-k.o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant
(1)has filed all reports required to be filed by
section13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934
during the preceding 12months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and
(2)has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past
90days.yesnoo
aggregate market value of voting stock held by
nonaffiliates of the registrant (excludes outstanding shares
beneficially owned by directors and officers and treasury
shares) as of march7, 2002, was approximately
$46.6billion. as of such date, 992,953,510 shares
(excludes 87,041,427 shares of treasury stock) of the
companys common stock, $.30 par value, were
outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference
(specific pages incorporated are indicated
under the applicable item herein):
incorporated
by reference
in part no.
the companys 2001 annual report to
stockholders
i, ii, and iv
the companys proxy statement, dated
march21, 2002, in connection with the annual meeting of
stockholders to be held on april24, 2002
iii
table of contents
part i
item 1. business
item 2. properties
item 3. legal proceedings
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders
part ii
item 5. market for registrants common equity and related stockholder matters
item 9. changes in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item 10. directors and executive officers of the registrant
item 11. executive compensation
item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management
item 14. exhibits, financial statement schedules, and reports on form 8-k
signatures
form 10-k e. i. du pont de nemours and company
company's supplemental retirement income plan
company's pension restoration plan
company's 1997 corporate sharing plan
statement re calculation of earnings per share
statement re computation of the ratio of earnings
management's discussion and analysis
subsidiaries of the registrant
consent of independent accountants
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
the terms dupont or the
company as used herein refer to e. i. du pont de
nemours and company and its consolidated subsidiaries (which are
wholly owned or majority-owned), or to e. i. du pont de nemours
and company, as the context may indicate.
table of contents
page(s)
part i
item1.
business
3-9
item2.
properties
item3.
legal proceedings
10-11
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security
holders
executive officers of the registrant
part ii
item5.
market for registrants common equity and
related stockholder matters
item6.
selected financial data
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of
operations
13-14
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants on
accounting and financial disclosure
part iii
item10.
directors and executive officers of the registrant
item11.
executive compensation
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial owners
and management
item13.
certain relationships and related transactions
part iv
item14.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form8-k
16-17
signatures
note on incorporation by reference
throughout this report, various information and
data are incorporated by reference to portions of the
companys 2001 annual report to stockholders (those
portions are hereinafter referred to as exhibit13). any
reference in this report to disclosures in exhibit13 shall
constitute incorporation by reference of that specific material
into this form10-k.
table of contents
part i
item1.business
dupont was founded in 1802 and was incorporated
in delaware in 1915. dupont is a world leader in science and
technology in a range of disciplines including high-performance
materials, synthetic fibers, electronics, specialty chemicals,
agriculture and biotechnology. the company operates globally
through some 22 strategic business units. within the strategic
business units, a wide range of products are manufactured for
distribution and sale to many different markets, including the
transportation, textile, construction, motor vehicle,
agricultural, home furnishings, medical, packaging, electronics
and the nutrition and health markets.
the companys strategic business units are
aggregated into eight reportable segments
agriculture & nutrition, nylon, performance coatings &
polymers, pharmaceuticals, pigments & chemicals, polyester,
specialty fibers, and specialty polymers. the following pages,
including those pages of exhibit13 specifically
incorporated herein, provide perspective on these eight
segments. the companys nonaligned businesses and embryonic
businesses are grouped under other. these businesses
represent approximately 1percent of total 2001 segment
sales and are discussed on page29 of exhibit13.
financial data for the segments is provided in note32,
segment information, on pages71
through74 of exhibit13.
the company and its subsidiaries have operations
in about 75 countries worldwide and, as a result, about
50percent of consolidated sales are made to customers
outside the united states. subsidiaries and affiliates of dupont
conduct manufacturing, seed production, or selling activities,
and some are distributors of products manufactured by the
company. total worldwide employment at year-end 2001 was about
79,000 people.
in february2002, the company announced the
realignment of its businesses into five market- and
technology-focused growth platforms and its plans for the
creation of a textiles and interiors subsidiary. the growth
platforms are: dupont electronic & communication
technologies; dupont performance materials; dupont coatings
& color technologies; dupont safety & protection; and
dupont agriculture & nutrition. dupont will consider a full
range of options to separate dupont textiles & interiors
from the company by year-end 2003, market conditions permitting.
the disclosures contained in this report and incorporated by
reference to exhibit13 reflect the companys
organizational structure that existed at december31, 2001.
sale of dupont pharmaceuticals
on october1, 2001, dupont pharmaceuticals
was sold to the bristol-myers squibb company. dupont retained
its interest in cozaar (losartan potassium) and
hyzaar (losartan potassium, hydrochlorothiazide) brands.
these antihypertensive drugs were discovered by dupont and
developed in collaboration with merck&co. inc.
dupont has exclusively licensed marketing rights for
cozaar and hyzaar to merck and in conjunction with
the sale, bristol-myers squibb has agreed to continue to
manufacture cozaar and hyzaar for dupont at the
former dupont pharmaceuticals manufacturing site at garden city,
new york. effective with the fourth quarter 2001 results, the
pharmaceuticals segment reflects only duponts share of the
financial results of this onging collaboration.
discontinued operations
on september28, 1998, the company announced
that the board of directors had approved a plan to divest the
companys 100percent-owned petroleum business, conoco
inc. on october21, 1998, the companys interest in
conoco was reduced to 69.5percent following an initial
public offering of conoco classa common stock. on
august6, 1999, the company completed the planned
divestiture through a tax-free split off whereby the company
exchanged its 436,543,573 shares of conoco classb common
stock for 147,980,872 shares of dupont common stock. the
companys consolidated financial statements and notes
report its former petroleum business as discontinued operations.
table of contents
the following information describing the business
of the company can be found on the indicated pages of
exhibit13:
item
page(s)
segment reviews:
business discussions, principal products and
principal markets
introduction
17-18
agriculture & nutrition
18-20
nylon
20-21
performance coatings & polymers
21-22
pharmaceuticals
22-23
pigments & chemicals
23-24
polyester
24-25
specialty fibers
25-27
specialty polymers
27-29
total segment sales, intersegment transfers,
after-tax operating income, and segment
net assets for 2001, 2000, and 1999
71-74
geographic information:
net sales and net property 2001, 2000, and 1999
sources of supply
the company utilizes numerous firms as well as
internal sources to supply a wide range of raw materials,
energy, supplies, services and equipment. to assure
availability, the company maintains multiple sources for fuels
and most raw materials, including hydrocarbon feedstocks. large
volume purchases are generally procured under competitively
priced supply contracts.
excluding pioneer hi-bred international inc. and
the nutrition & health businesses, which are part of the
agriculture & nutrition segment, a substantial portion of
the production and sales in the segments businesses is
dependent upon the availability of hydrocarbon feedstocks.
current hydrocarbon feedstock requirements are met by purchases
from major petrochemical companies. dupont participates in a
joint venture with equistar chemicals, lp, which manufactures
and supplies a significant portion of the companys
requirements for ethylene glycol, a hydrocarbon feedstock.
pioneer, which is in the hybrid seed industry,
has seed production facilities located throughout the world, in
both the northern and southern hemispheres. in the production of
its parent and commercial seed, pioneer generally provides the
seed stock, detasseling and roguing labor, and certain other
production inputs. the balance of the labor, equipment, and
inputs are supplied by independent growers. pioneer believes the
availability of growers, parent seed stock, and other inputs
necessary to produce its commercial seed is adequate for planned
production levels. the principal risk in the production of seed
is the environment, with weather being the single largest
variant. pioneer lessens this risk by distributing production
across many locations around the world. due to its global
presence, the company can engage in seed production year-round.
production in the nutrition & health businesses is primarily
dependent upon the availability of soy flake, which is readily
available from many sources.
the major purchased commodities, raw materials,
and supplies for the companys reportable segments in 2001
that manufacture products are listed below:
agriculture
& nutrition:
acetaldoxime; carbamic acid, (3-((dimethylamino)
carbonyl)-2-pyridinyl-sulfonyl-phenyl ester; carbamic acid,
(chlorocarbonyl) [4-(trifluoromethoxy) phenyl]-, methylester;
cyanamide; dichlorophenol isocyanate; methyl mercaptan; soy
flake; 5-choroindanone, methylester
table of contents
nylon:
adipic acid; ammonia; butadiene; cyclohexane;
natural gas
performance
coatings & polymers:
adipic acid; butadiene; caustic soda; chlorine;
cyclohexane; ethylene; fiberglass; hydrocarbon solvents;
isocyanate resins; melamine resins; methanol; pigments;
polyethylene; propylene; ultra violet light stabilizer
pigments
& chemicals:
ammonia; benzene; caustic soda; chlorine; coke;
methanol; propylene; sodium hydroxide; titanium ore
polyester:
acetic acid; dimethyl terephthalate; ethylene
glycol; paraxylene; terephthalic acid
specialty
fibers:
acetylene; high density polyethylene;
isophthaloyl chloride; metaphenylenediamine;
paraphenylenediamine; polyester; terephthaloyl chloride; wood
pulp
specialty
polymers:
acetic acid; alumina trihydrate; ethane;
methacrylic acid; polyethylene; natural gas; block co-polymers;
oxydianiline; 4g7 plasticizer
in addition, during 2001, the company consumed
substantial amounts of electricity and natural gas for energy.
dupont has contracted with computer sciences
corporation (csc) and accenture llp to provide certain services
for the company. csc operates a majority of duponts global
information systems and technology infrastructures and provides
selected applications and software services. accenture llp
provides information systems solutions designed to enhance
duponts manufacturing, marketing, distribution and
customer service.
patents and trademarks
the company believes that its patent and
trademark estate provides it with an important competitive
advantage and has established a global network of attorneys and
licensing professionals to procure, maintain and protect its
estate.
the company owns and is licensed under various
patents, which expire from time to time, covering many products,
processes and product uses. these patents protect many aspects
of the companys significant research program and the
proprietary goods and services it sells. the actual protection
afforded by these patents varies from country to country and
depends upon the scope of coverage of each individual patent as
well as the availability of legal remedies in each country. the
company owns over 20,000 worldwide patents and over 14,000
worldwide patent applications. in 2001, the company was granted
almost 500 u.s. patents and over 1,800 international patents.
the companys rights under its patents and licenses, as
well as the products made and sold under them, are important to
the company as a whole and, to varying degrees, important to
each reportable segment.
the u.s. patents covering cozaar (losartan
potassium) and hyzaar (losartan potassium,
hydrochlorothiazide) compounds, pharmaceutical formulation and
methods for use for treatment of hypertension expire in 2009.
the company has exclusively licensed marketing rights for the
cozaar and hyzaar brands to merck& co.
inc. as part of its collaborative effort with merck on the
development of these products. in october 2001, dupont
pharmaceuticals was sold to the bristol-myers squibb company.
table of contents
however, dupont retained its interests in
cozaar and hyzaar. effective with fourth quarter
2001 results, the pharmaceuticals segment reflects only the
financial results of the licensing agreement and the ongoing
collaborative effort with merck.
the environment in which pioneer and the rest of
the companies within the seed industry compete is increasingly
affected by new patents, patent positions, patent lawsuits and
the status of various intellectual property rights. ownership of
and access to intellectual property rights, particularly those
relating to biotechnology, are important to the pioneer business
and its competitors. no single patent owned by pioneer is
vitally important to its business. however, pioneers
ability to compete in the future may be affected by its
competitors intellectual rights, especially those relating
to genetically engineered crops, particularly if those rights
withstand legal challenges, and competitors do not offer
licenses on commercially reasonable terms. see the agriculture
& nutrition segment review on pages13-14 of this
report and as incorporated by reference on page4 of this
report to pages18 to20 of exhibit13.
the company has over 2,100 unique trademarks for
its products and services and has over 23,000 worldwide
registrations and applications for these trademarks. ownership
rights in trademarks do not expire if the trademarks are
continued in use and properly protected. the company has a
number of trademarks that have significant recognition at the
consumer retail level, including duponttm and the
dupont oval; lycra brand premium stretch fibers;
stainmaster carpets; teflon fluoropolymers, films,
fabric protectors, fibers, and dispersions; corian
surfaces; cordura nylon; coolmax fibers;
tactel nylon; tyvek and kevlar brands
protective material; and pioneer brand seeds. the company
is actively pursuing licensing opportunities for selected
trademarks. for example, the teflon trademark has been
extended through brand licensing to personal care products,
automotive car care products, automotive wiper blades, eye glass
lenses and home care products.
seasonality
sales of the companys products in the
agriculture& nutrition and the performance
coatings& polymers segments and, to a certain extent,
the nylon segment, are affected by seasonality. the
agriculture& nutrition segment performance is
strongest in the first half of the year. pioneer generally
operates at a loss during the third and fourth quarters of the
year, and due to the seasonal nature of the seed business,
pioneers inventory is at its highest level at the end of
the calendar year and is sold down in the first and second
quarters. trade receivables in the agriculture&
nutrition segment are at a low point at year-end and increase
through the selling season to peak at the end of the second
quarter. performance coatings & polymers sales reflect
seasonal patterns related to motor vehicle builds and
after-market refinishing, and nylons flooring businesses
are somewhat affected by the seasonality of the construction
industry, which experiences its highest level of activity during
the summer months.
in general, businesses in the remaining segments
are not materially affected by seasonal factors.
marketing
with the exception of the pioneer business, most
products are marketed primarily through duponts sales
force, although in some regions, more emphasis is placed on
sales through distributors. in north america, the majority of
pioneer brand seed is marketed through independent sales
representatives. in areas outside the traditional corn belt,
seed products are often marketed through dealers and
distributors who handle other agricultural supplies. pioneer
products are marketed outside north america through a network of
subsidiaries, joint ventures, and independent
producer-distributors.
major customers
the companys sales are not materially
dependent on a single customer or small group of customers. the
nylon, polyester, and performance coatings& polymers
segments, however, have several large customers in their
respective industries that are important to these segments
operating results.
table of contents
competition
businesses in duponts eight reportable
segments compete on a variety of factors such as price, product
quality or specifications, continuity of supply, customer
service and breadth of product line, depending on the
characteristics of the particular market involved.
principal competitors for all segments include
major chemical companies based in the united states, europe and
asia, principally japan, china and korea. competitors offer a
comparable range of products from agricultural, commodity and
specialty chemicals to plastics and fibers products. the company
also competes in certain product markets with smaller, more
specialized firms and with petrochemical operations in
oil-producing countries.
in addition to providing crop protection
chemicals, the agriculture& nutrition segment also
sells hybrid seeds through pioneer, principally for the global
production of corn and soybeans, and thus directly competes with
other hybrid seed suppliers. agriculture& nutrition
also provides soy-based food ingredients and food safety
equipment in competition with other major grain and food
processors.
research and development
the company conducts research in the united
states at over 40sites in 18states at either
dedicated research facilities or manufacturing plants. the
highest concentration of research is carried out at several of
the companys large research centers in and around
wilmington, delaware. among these, the experimental station
laboratories engage in exploratory and applied research, the
chestnut run laboratories focus on applications research, and
the stine-haskell research center conducts agricultural product
research and toxicological research on company products to
assure they are safe for manufacture and use. in addition,
pioneer carries out research and development to develop hybrids
of corn, sorghum and sunflower, and varieties of soybean,
alfalfa, wheat, and canola for worldwide markets. pioneer
operates more than 90 primary research locations, with its
largest center in johnston, iowa. hybrids and varieties are
developed at these primary research locations and tested at
thousands of other locations.
dupont also operates a number of research
facilities at locations outside the unitedstates in
countries such as belgium, canada, france, germany, japan,
luxembourg, mexico, the netherlands, spain, switzerland and the
united kingdom, reflecting the companys global interests.
the objectives of the companys research and
development programs are to discover new products, processes and
business opportunities in relevant fields and to improve
existing products and processes. each strategic business unit of
the company funds research and development activities to support
its business mission.
the central research laboratories are responsible
for assuring that leading-edge science and engineering concepts
are identified and diffused throughout the dupont technical
community. all research and development activities are
coordinated by senior research and development management
through a corporate technology council to ensure that technical
activities are consistent with business and corporate plans, and
that the core technical competencies underlying duponts
current and future businesses remain healthy and continue to
provide competitive advantages.
annual research and development expense and such
expense shown as percent of sales for the five years
1997 through 2001 are included under the heading
general of the five-year financial review on
page77 of exhibit13.
environmental matters
information relating to environmental matters is
included in two areas of exhibit13:
(1)managements discussion and analysis
on pages38-40, and (2)notes1 and25 to
the financial statements on pages47-50 and 62-63,
respectively.
table of contents
cautionary statements under the private
securities litigation reform act of 1995
forward-looking
statements
this report contains forward-looking statements
which may be identified by their use of words like
plans, expects, will,
anticipates, intends,
projects, estimates or other words of
similar meaning. all statements that address expectations or
projections about the future, including statements about the
companys strategy for growth, product development, market
position, expenditures and financial results, are
forward-looking statements.
forward-looking statements are based on certain
assumptions and expectations of future events. the company
cannot guarantee that these assumptions and expectations are
accurate or will be realized. in addition to the factors
discussed in this report and in managements discussion and
analysis in the companys latest annual report, the
following are some of the important factors that could cause the
companys actual results to differ materially from those
projected in any such forward-looking statements:
the company operates in approximately
75countries worldwide and derives about half of its
revenues from sales inside the unitedstates and about half
from sales outside the unitedstates. therefore,
governmental and quasi-governmental activities, including
changes in the laws or policies of any country in which the
company operates, could affect the companys business and
profitability in that country. also, the companys business
and profitability in a particular country could be affected by
political or economic repercussions on a domestic, country
specific or global level from terrorist activities and the
response to such activities. in addition, economic factors
(including a decline in u.s. or european sales from slowing
economic growth in those regions, inflation or fluctuations in
interest and foreign currency exchange rates) and competitive
factors (such as greater price competition or expiration of
patent protection) in those countries could affect the
companys revenues, expenses and results of operations.
the companys ability to grow earnings will
be affected by increases in the cost of raw materials,
particularly oil, natural gas and products derived from oil and
natural gas. the company may not be able to fully offset the
effects of higher raw material costs through price increases or
productivity improvements.
the companys growth objectives are largely
dependent on its ability to renew its pipeline of new products
and to bring those products to market. this ability may be
adversely affected by difficulties or delays in product
development such as the inability to: identify viable new
products; successfully complete research and development; obtain
relevant regulatory approvals; obtain adequate intellectual
property protection; or gain market acceptance of the new
products.
as part of its strategy for growth, the company
has made and may continue to make acquisitions and divestitures
and form strategic alliances. there can be no assurance that
these will be completed or beneficial to the company.
to a significant degree, results in the
companys agriculture& nutrition segment reflect
changes in agricultural conditions, including weather and
government programs. these results also reflect the seasonality
of sales of agricultural products; highest sales in the united
states occur in the first half of the year. in addition, demand
for products produced in these segments may be affected by
market acceptance of genetically enhanced products.
the company has undertaken and may continue to
undertake productivity initiatives, including organizational
restructurings and six sigma productivity improvement projects,
to improve performance and generate cost savings. there can be
no assurance that these will be completed or beneficial to the
company. also there can be no assurance that any estimated cost
savings from such activities will be realized.
the companys facilities are subject to a
broad array of environmental laws and regulations. the costs of
complying with complex environmental laws and regulations, as
well as internal voluntary programs, are significant and will
continue to be so for the foreseeable future. the companys
accruals
table of contents
for such costs and liabilities may not be
adequate since the estimates on which the accruals are based
depend on a number of factors including the nature of the
allegation, the complexity of the site, the nature of the
remedy, the outcome of discussions with regulatory agencies and
other potentially responsible parties (prps) at multiparty
sites, and the number and financial viability of other prps.
the companys results of operations could be
affected by significant litigation adverse to the company
including product liability claims, patent infringement claims
and antitrust claims.
the foregoing list of important factors is not
inclusive, or necessarily in order of importance.
item2.properties
the company owns and operates manufacturing,
processing, production, marketing, and research and development
facilities worldwide.
duponts corporate headquarters is located
in wilmington, delaware. in addition, the company operates sales
offices, regional purchasing offices, distribution centers, and
various other specialized service locations.
further information regarding properties is
included in exhibit13 in the segment reviews on
pages17-29. information regarding research and development
facilities is incorporated by reference to item1,
business research and development on page7 of
this report. additional information with respect to the
companys property, plant and equipment, and leases is
contained in notes15 and25 to the companys
consolidated financial statements on pages59 and 62-63,
respectively, in exhibit13.
the companys investment in property, plant
and equipment in the united states and puerto rico related to
operations is located at some 80sites, the principal of
which are as follows:
texas
delaware
virginia
west virginia
bayport
beaumont
corpus christi
laporte
orange
victoria
edge moor
newark
seaford
wilmington
front royal
hopewell
richmond
waynesboro
belle
martinsburg
parkersburg
tennessee
north carolina
new jersey
south carolina
chattanooga
memphis
new johnsonville
old hickory
fayetteville
kinston
researchtriangle park
deepwater
parlin
camden
charleston
florence
new york
michigan
iowa
puerto rico
buffalo
niagara falls
mt. clemens
troy
clinton
fort madison
johnston
manati
property, plant and equipment outside the
unitedstates and puertorico is located at about
100sites, principally in the unitedkingdom, canada,
germany, thenetherlands, taiwan, spain, singapore,
luxembourg, france, mexico, brazil, belgium, china, argentina,
japan and the republic of korea.
the companys plants and equipment are well
maintained and in good operating condition. sales as a percent
of capacity were 78percent in 2001, 81percent in
2000 and 83percent in 1999. these properties are directly
owned by the company except for some auxiliary facilities and
miscellaneous properties, such as certain buildings and
transportation equipment, which are leased. although no title
examination of the properties has been made for the purpose of
this report, the company knows of no material defects in title
to any of these properties.
table of contents
item3.legal
proceedings
in 1991, dupont began receiving claims by growers
that use of benlate 50df fungicide had caused crop
damage. dupont since has been served with several hundred
lawsuits, most of which were disposed of by trial, dismissal or
settlement. approximately 110 cases are pending. some of these
lawsuits were filed by growers who allege plant damage from
using benlate 50df and, in some cases,
benlatewp. some include claims for alleged damage to
shrimping operations from benlateod, and a smaller
number of cases include claims for alleged personal injuries.
also, many of these cases include allegations of fraud and
misconduct, as well as violations of federal and state
racketeering laws. in august2001, a florida jury found
dupont liable under floridas racketeering statute and for
product defect involving alleged crop damage. plaintiffs are
seeking to have judgment entered for about $88.5million.
the court is considering post-trial motions; dupont will appeal.
in addition, a securities fraud class action was
filed in september1995 by a shareholder in federal
district court in florida against the company and the
then-chairman. this action is still pending. the plaintiff in
this case alleges that dupont made false and misleading
statements and omissions about benlate 50 df, with the
alleged effect of inflating the price of duponts stock
between june19, 1993 and january27, 1995. the
district court has certified the case as a class action, and
discovery is proceeding.
certain plaintiffs who had previously settled
with the company have filed cases alleging fraud and other
misconduct relating to the litigation and settlement of
benlate 50 df claims. approximately 47 such cases were
filed. recently, the florida federal court dismissed the lead
case of 25 cases pending before it. the plaintiffs have
appealed. the remaining cases are in various stages of
development in trial and appellate courts in florida and hawaii.
a shareholder derivative action was filed in
august of 2001 in florida. the suit alleged that the board of
directors breached various duties in connection with the
benlate litigation and asserted claims under the federal
and state racketeering laws. this case has been dismissed by the
plaintiff.
twenty-eight cases are pending against the
company in state court in broward county, florida. these cases
were brought by ecuadorian shrimp farmers alleging that
benlate od applied to banana plantations in ecuador
ran-off and was deposited in plaintiffs shrimp farms,
causing massive numbers of shrimp to die. two cases were tried
in the fall of 2000 and in early 2001, and resulted in adverse
judgments of approximately $14million and
$16million, respectively. the company has appealed both
cases. dupont contends that the injuries alleged are
attributable to a virus, taura syndrome virus, and in no way
involved benlate od. the untried cases are on hold
awaiting resolution by the appellate court of the case tried in
2000.
dupont believes that benlate did not cause
the damages alleged in these cases and denies the allegations of
fraud and misconduct. dupont continues to defend itself in
ongoing matters. dupont discontinued the manufacture and sale of
benlate fungicide in all its forms in 2001. the ultimate
liabilities from the benlate lawsuits discussed above may
be significant to the companys results of operations in
the period recognized, but management does not anticipate that
they will have a material adverse effect on the companys
consolidated financial position or liquidity.
the companys balance sheets reflect
accruals for estimated costs associated with this matter.
adverse changes in estimates for such liabilities could result
in additional future charges.
environmental proceedings
on may19, 1997, approximately 11,500 pounds
of a hydrogen fluoride (hf)/tar mixture was released from
duponts louisville, kentucky, fluoroproducts facility.
this release lasted about forty minutes. there were no on-site
injuries, and only one off-site person reported any exposure. no
toxic tort suits were filed as a result of this release.
duponts incident investigation concluded that an
inadequate valve stem design was a key factor contributing to
the release (the valve stem twisted and the valve indicated it
was in a closed position, when it was actually open).
duponts process isolation procedures were also reviewed
and modified as a result of this incident. the department of
justice (doj)proposed a settlement prior to filing its
action for $1,700,000. subsequently, by letter dated
july13, 1999, the doj provided formal notice to dupont,
that
table of contents
due to the may1997 hf release, the doj
intended to bring a federal court action against dupont under
the caa section112(r) general duty clause.
dupont contested the proposed $1,700,000 fine as excessive and
unreasonable because there was no environmental harm or human
health impacts associated with the may 1997 incident. dupont
presented a settlement offer to the doj and the environmental
protection agency (epa) in december 2000. dupont has recently
reached an agreement with doj and epa to settle this matter for
$1,102,000. this settlement consists of $552,000 in supplemental
environmental projects supporting local louisville governmental
and nongovernmental environmental agencies and $550,000 as a
cash penalty. the doj has prepared a consent decree and
complaint that dupont is currently reviewing. settlement is
expected to be completed sometime in the second quarter of 2002.
the indiana departments of natural resources and
environmental management and the united states department of
interior are in the process of conducting a natural resource
damage assessment of the grand calumet river and the indiana
harbor canal system under the comprehensive environmental
response, compensation and liability act (cercla) and the oil
pollution act. the companys plant in east chicago,
indiana, which discharges industrial wastewater into these
waterways, was identified as one of seventeen potentially
responsible parties (prps) for the cost of the assessment and
any determined natural resource damages. the trustees recently
indicated that their preferred remedy is to dredge the entire
grand cal/ indiana harbor system. dupont has joined with eight
other prps to contest the remedy. a settlement offer has been
tendered to the trustees and negotiations are ongoing.
on october31, 2001, the secretary of the
department of natural resources and environmental control (the
secretary), an administrative agency of the state of delaware,
filed a complaint alleging that the dupont edgemoor facility had
(1)improperly operated storage ponds without a permit,
(2)improperly operated a staging pile with out a permit,
(3)allowed the discharge of an air contaminant without a
permit, and (4)allowed the discharge of a water pollutant
to surface water without a permit. the secretary sought civil
penalties under 7del.c.6005(b)(1) for $1,000
to $10,000 per day for each day of violation of counts 2-4 and
under 7del.c.6309(b) for $1,000 to $25,000 per
day of violation of the other counts. dupont denied the
allegations but acknowledged that there were environmental
concerns associated with these activities and agreed to cease
and desist and to take appropriate remedial action. therefore,
concurrent with the filing of the complaint in the delaware
superior court, the secretary filed a consent order in which the
parties agreed that dupont will (1)close the surface
impoundments in a manner protective of human health and the
environment, (2)conduct a facility wide corrective action,
(3)enter into a voluntary clean-up program to close the
staging pile, (4)investigate and mitigate any impacts to
human health and the environment resulting from offsite uses of
the staging material and (5)submit a payment of $7,000 per
year for oversight expenses during the life of the consent
order. the approximate cost of these activities is estimated at
$12,400,000 and reserves were established at december31,
2001 to cover these costs. since the consent order resolves the
complaint, dupont is not subject to the civil penalties sought
in the latter.
item4.submission
of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
table of contents
executive officers of the registrant
the following is a list, as of march7,
2002, of the companys executive officers. these officers
serve as members of the companys office of the chief
executive.
executive
officer
age
since
chairman of the board of directors and chief
executive officer:
charles o. holliday, jr.(1)
other executive officers:
thomas m. connelly, senior vice president and
chief science and technology officer
richard r. goodmanson, executive vice president
and chief operating officer
john c. hodgson, executive vice president
stacey j. mobley, senior vice president and chief
administrative officer and general counsel
gary m. pfeiffer, senior vice president and chief
financial officer
dennis zeleny, senior vice president
global human resources
(1)
member of the board of directors.
the companys executive officers are elected
or appointed for the ensuing year or for an indefinite term, and
until their successors are elected or appointed.
messrs.holliday and mobley have each been employed by
dupont in executive officer positions for more than the past
five years.
thomas m. connelly joined dupont in 1977 as a
research engineer. since then, mr.connelly has served in
various research and plant technical leadership roles, as well
as product management and business director roles. prior to his
promotion to senior vice president and chief science and
technology officer, mr.connelly served as vice president
and general manager dupont fluoroproducts from 1999
until september1, 2000 when he was named to his current
position.
richardr. goodmanson joined dupont in 1999
as executive vice president and chief operating officer. prior
to joining dupont, mr.goodmanson was president and chief
executive officer of america west airlines from 1996 to 1999. he
was senior vice president of operations for frito-lay inc. from
1992-1996, and he was a principal at mckinsey & company,
inc. from 1980 to 1992.
john c. hodgson joined dupont in 1966. since
then, mr.hodgson has held various sales and product
management positions and has served in several business director
roles. in 1996, he was named vice president and general manager
of photopolymer & electronic materials. prior to his
promotion to executive vice president with responsibility for
the companys five newly formed growth platforms,
mr.hodgson served as group vice president and general
manager dupont itechnologies from
february2000 until he was named to his current position in
february2002.
garym. pfeiffer joined the company in 1974
and has held a succession of tax and financial and business
analysis positions. mr.pfeiffer has also served in several
director roles and prior to his promotion to senior vice
president and chief financial officer, mr.pfeiffer served
as vice president and general manager, dupont nylon
north america from 1994 until october1997 when he was
named to his current position.
dennis zeleny joined dupont in 2001 as senior
vice president global human resources. prior to
joining dupont, mr.zeleny was vice president, worldwide
human resources for honeywell, a position he held since 2000,
following the merger of allied signal with honeywell. from 1995
to 2000, mr.zeleny served as vice president, human
resources in several capacities for allied signal, and from 1978
to 1995, mr.zeleny held a number of human resources
positions at pepsico.
table of contents
part ii
information with respect to the following items
can be found on the indicated pages of exhibit13 if not
otherwise included herein.
item5.
market for registrants common equity and
related stockholder matters
the companys common stock is listed on the
new york stock exchange, inc. (symbol dd) and certain non-u.s.
exchanges. the number of record holders of common stock was
126,718 at december31, 2001, and 125,473 at march7,
2002.
page(s)
quarterly financial data:
dividends per share of common stock
market price of common stock (high/low)
item6.selected
financial data
five-year financial review:
summary of operations
financial position at year end
general
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations
managements discussion and analysis:
analysis of continuing operations
14-17
discontinued operations
segment reviews
17-29
further to the agriculture & nutrition
segment discussion in exhibit13 on pages18-20:
glyphosate tolerant soybeans
in december1999, the monsanto company filed
suit in the u.s. district court for the eastern district of
missouri against pioneer claiming that its merger with dupont
breached a 1992 license agreement granting pioneer the right to
produce and market roundup ready glyphosate tolerant
soybeans. monsanto asked for damages for the breach and
termination of the license. monsantos complaint also
alleged claims for patent infringement and trade secret
misappropriation if the license were terminated. on
march20, 2001, the court, on motions for summary judgment,
found that duponts acquisition of pioneer terminated the
agreement. the court found no breach of contract and therefore,
awarded no damages on this claim. it held that any claim for
damages or other relief monsanto seeks will have to wait until
the next phase of the litigation, which involves monsantos
patent infringement and trade secret allegations.
table of contents
the court found that its determination involved
controlling questions of law as to which there is a substantial
difference of opinion and that an immediate appeal would advance
the ultimate determination of this litigation. those questions
involve whether federal common law or state merger law should
control the transferability of patent licenses. the court has
certified its decision for immediate appeal to the u.s. court of
appeals for the federal circuit. pioneer has filed an appeal.
the company believes that the appellate court will ultimately
find that state merger law rather than federal common law
controls in merger situations and, therefore, that no prohibited
license transfer took place when dupont acquired pioneer. the
district court has stayed all other proceedings regarding patent
infringement and trade secret claims pending the outcome of the
appeal. a favorable decision for pioneer on appeal will
reinstate the license and preclude all other claims. the appeal
was heard on february5, 2002. a decision is not expected
until later in 2002.
on october1, 1999, the company acquired the
approximately 80percent of pioneer not previously owned
for $7,684 million. an intangible asset has been recorded to
recognize the value of the 1992 license agreement. should the
ultimate outcome of this lawsuit be adverse to the company, the
value of this intangible asset may become impaired, resulting in
a one-time noncash charge to earnings.
management does not anticipate that the ultimate
outcome of this lawsuit will have a material adverse effect on
the companys consolidated financial position, liquidity or
results of operations, although it could be significant to the
results of operations of the agriculture & nutrition segment
in the period recognized.
liquidity and capital resources
29-32
purchased in-process research and development
33-37
financial instruments
37-38
environmental matters
38-40
forward-looking statements
40-41
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk
managements discussion and analysis:
financial instruments
derivatives and other hedging instruments
foreign currency risk
interest rate risk
37-38
commodity price risk
value at risk
table of contents
item 8.
financial statements and supplementary
data
page(s)
financial statements:
report of independent accountants
consolidated income statement for 2001, 2000, and
consolidated balance sheet as of
december31, 2001 and december31, 2000
consolidated statement of stockholders
equity for 2001, 2000 and 1999
consolidated statement of cash flows for 2001,
2000 and 1999
notes to financial statements
47-75
quarterly financial data and related notes for
the following items for the quarters in the two years ended
december31, 2001 and 2000:
sales
cost of goods sold and other expenses
income before cumulative effect of a change in
accounting principle
net income (loss)
basic earnings (loss)per share of common
stock before cumulative effect of a change in accounting
principle
basic earnings (loss)per share of common
stock
diluted earnings (loss)per share of common
stock before cumulative effect of a change in accounting
principle
diluted earnings (loss)per share of common
stock
dividends per share of common stock
market price of common stock
item9.
changes in and disagreements with accountants
on accounting and financial disclosure
none.
part iii
information with respect to the following items
is incorporated by reference to the pages indicated in the
companys 2001 annual meeting proxy statement dated
march21, 2002, filed in connection with the annual meeting
of stockholders to be held april24, 2002. however,
information regarding executive officers is contained in
parti of this report (page12) pursuant to general
instructiong of this form.
item10.
directors and executive officers of the
registrant
election of directors
8-11
compliance with the securities exchange act
item11.
executive compensation
compensation of directors
6-7
compensation and stock option information
17-19
retirement benefits
item12.
security ownership of certain beneficial
owners and management
beneficial ownership of securities
11-13
item13.
certain relationships and related
transactions
election of directors
8-11
table of contents
part iv
item14.
exhibits, financial statement schedules, and
reports on form 8-k
(a)financial statements, financial
statement schedules and exhibits:
1.financial
statements. (see listing at part ii, item 8 of this report
regarding financial statements, which are incorporated by
reference to exhibit13.)
2.financial
statement schedules none required.
the following should be read in conjunction with
the previously referenced financial statements:
financial statement schedules listed under sec
rules but not included in this report are omitted because they
are not applicable or the required information is shown in the
consolidated financial statements or notes thereto incorporated
by reference.
condensed financial information of the parent
company is omitted because restricted net assets of consolidated
subsidiaries do not exceed 25percent of consolidated net
assets. footnote disclosure of restrictions on the ability of
subsidiaries and affiliates to transfer funds is omitted because
the restricted net assets of subsidiaries combined with the
companys equity in the undistributed earnings of
affiliated companies does not exceed 25percent of
consolidated net assets at december31, 2001.
separate financial statements of affiliated
companies accounted for by the equity method are omitted because
no such affiliate individually constitutes a 20percent
significant subsidiary.
3.exhibits
the following list of exhibits includes both
exhibits submitted with this form10-k as filed with the
sec and those incorporated by reference to other filings:
exhibit
number
description
3.1
companys restated certificate of
incorporation, filed may29, 1997 (incorporated by
reference to the companys filing on form8-k on
june13, 1997).
3.2
companys bylaws, as last revised
january1, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3.2 of the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1998).
the company agrees to provide the commission, on
request, copies of instruments defining the rights of holders of
long-term debt of the company and its subsidiaries.
10.2
the dupont stock accumulation and deferred
compensation plan, as last amended april29, 1998
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.3 of the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the period
ended march31, 1998).
10.3
*
companys supplemental retirement income
plan, as last amended effective june4, 1996.
10.4
*
companys pension restoration plan, as last
amended effective june4, 1996.
10.5
*
companys stock performance plan, as last
amended effective january28, 1998 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.1 of the companys quarterly
report on form10-q for the period ended march31,
1998).
10.6
*
companys variable compensation plan, as
last amended effective april30, 1997 (incorporated by
reference to pagesa1-a3 of the companys annual
meeting proxy statement dated march21, 2002).
10.7
*
companys salary deferral & savings
restoration plan effective april26, 1994, as last amended
effective january1, 2000 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.7 of the companys quarterly report on
form10-q for the quarter ended march31, 2001).
*management contract or compensatory
plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this
form10-k.
table of contents
exhibit
number
description
10.8
*
companys 1995 corporate sharing plan,
adopted by the board of directors on january25, 1995
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.8 of the
companys annual report on form10-k for the year
ended december31, 1999).
10.9
*
companys 1997 corporate sharing plan,
adopted by the board of directors on january29, 1997.
10.10
*
companys retirement income plan for
directors, as last amended august1995 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.12 of the companys quarterly
report on form10-q for the quarter ended march31,
1997).
10.11
*
letter agreement and employee agreement, dated as
of april22, 1999, between this company and
r.r.goodmanson (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.11 of the companys annual report on
form10-k for the year ended december31, 1999).
10.13
companys purchase agreement dated
june7, 2001, by and among the company dupont pharma, inc.,
dupont pharmaceuticals company, dupont electronic materials,
inc., dupont diagnostics, inc., and bristol-myers squibb company
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.13 of the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended june30, 2001).
10.14
amendment to purchase agreement, dated as of
october1, 2001, to the purchase agreement, dated
june7, 2001, by and among e.i.dupont
denemours and company, dupont pharma, inc., dupont
pharmaceuticals company, dupont electronic materials, inc.,
dupont diagnostics, inc., and bristol- myers squibb company
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.14 of the
companys quarterly report on form10-q for the
quarter ended september30, 2001).
statement re calculation of earnings per share.
statement re computation of the ratio of earnings
to fixed charges.
managements discussion and analysis and
financial information section of the annual report to
shareholders for the year ended december31, 2001, which
are furnished to the commission for information only, and not
filed except as expressly incorporated by reference in this
report.
subsidiaries of the registrant.
consent of independent accountants.
*
management contract or compensatory plan or
arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this
form10-k.
(b)reports on form8-k:
1.on
october24, 2001, a current report on form8-k,
pursuant to regulationfd, was filed in connection with
debt and/or equity securities that may be offered on a delayed
or continuous basis under its registration statements on
forms-3 (no.33-53327, no.33-61339, no.
33-60069, and no.333-86363). under item5,
other events, the registrant filed a news release
entitled dupont reports third quarter 2001 earnings.
2.on
january23, 2002, a current report on form8-k,
pursuant to regulationfd, was filed in connection with
debt and/or equity securities that may be offered on a delayed
or continuous basis under its registration statements on
forms-3 (no.33-53327, no.33-61339,
no.33-60069 and no.333-86363). under item5,
other events, the registrant filed a news release
entitled dupont reports fourth quarter and full-year 2001
earnings.
3.on
february11, 2002, a current report on form8-k was
filed in connection with debt and/or equity securities that may
be offered on a delayed or continuous basis under its
registration statements on forms-3 (no.33-53327,
no.33-61339, no.33-60069 and no.333-86363).
under item 5, other events, the registrant filed a
news release entitled dupont aligns businesses by markets,
technologies; forms textiles& interiors
subsidiary.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of
section13 of the securities exchange act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized and in the
capacities indicated, as of the 21stday of
march2002.
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
(registrant)
by:
/s/g. m. pfeiffer
g. m. pfeiffer
senior vice president and
chief financial officer
(principal financial and accounting
officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities
exchange act of 1934, this report has been signed as of the
21stday of march2002 by the following persons on
behalf of the registrant in the capacities indicated:
chairman of the board and chief executive
officer
and director:
(principal executive officer):
/s/ c. o. holliday, jr.
c. o. holliday, jr.
directors:
/s/ a. j. p. belda
/s/ l. d. juliber
a. j. p. belda
l. d. juliber
/s/ r. h. brown
/s/ g. lindahl
r. h. brown
g. lindahl
/s/ c. j. crawford
/s/ m. naitoh
c. j. crawford
m. naitoh
/s/ l. c. duemling
/s/ w. k. reilly
l. c. duemling
w. k. reilly
/s/ e. b. du pont
/s/ h. r. sharp, iii
e. b. du pont
h. r. sharp, iii
/s/ d. c. hopkins
/s/ c. m. vest
d. c. hopkins
c. m. vest
