10-k
w26090e10vk.htm
form 10-k
e10vk
table of contents
united states
securities and exchange commission
washington,d.c.
form10-k
mark one
x
annual report pursuant to section13 or 15(d)of
the securities exchange act of 1934
for the fiscal year ended december31, 2006
o
transition report pursuant to section13 or 15(d) of the
securities exchange act of 1934
commission file number 1-815
e. i. du pont de nemours
and company
(exact name of registrant as
specified in its charter)
delaware
51-0014090
(state or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(i.r.s. employer identification
no.)
1007 market street
wilmington, delaware 19898
(address of principal executive
offices)
registrants telephone number, including area code: 302
774-1000
securities registered pursuant to section12(b) of the
act
(each class is registered on the
new york stock exchange, inc.):
title of each class
common stock ($.30par value)
preferred stock
(without par value-cumulative)
$4.50 series
$3.50 series
no securities are registered pursuant to section12(g)
of the act.
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a well-known
seasoned issuer (as defined in rule405 of the securities
act). yes xno
o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is not required
to file reports pursuant to section13 or
section15(d) of the act. yes
o no
x
indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)has
filed all reports required to be filed by section13 or
15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the
preceding 12months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)has
been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90days. yes x
noo
indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers
pursuant to item405 of
regulations-k
is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best
of registrants knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in
partiii of this
form10-k
or any amendment to this
form10-k.
o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large
accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated
filer. see definition of accelerated filer and large
accelerated filer in
rule12b-2
of the exchange act.
largeaccelerated filer
xaccelerated filer
onon-accelerated filer
o
indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell
company (as defined in
rule12b-2
of the
act).yesonox
the aggregate market value of voting stock held by
nonaffiliates of the registrant (excludes outstanding shares
beneficially owned by directors and officers and treasury
shares) as of june30, 2006, was approximately
$38.0billion.
as of january31, 2007, 924,125,197shares
(excludes 87,041,427shares of treasury stock) of the
companys common stock, $.30par value, were
outstanding.
documents incorporated by reference
(specific pages incorporated are
indicated under the applicable item herein):
incorporated
by reference
in part no.
the companys proxy statement
in connection with the annual meeting of stockholders to be held
on
april25, 2007
iii
e. i. du
pont de nemours and company
form10-k
table of
contents
the terms dupont or the company as used
herein refer to e. i. du pont de nemours and company and its
consolidated subsidiaries, or to e. i. du pont de nemours and
company, as the context may indicate.
page
parti
item1.
business
item1a.
risk
factors
item1b.
unresolved staff
comments
item2.
properties
item3.
legal
proceedings
item4.
submission of
matters to a vote of security holders
partii
item5.
market for
registrants common equity, related stockholder matters and
issuer purchases of equity securities
item6.
selected financial
data
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
item7a.
quantitative and
qualitative disclosures about market risk
item8.
financial
statements and supplementary data
item9.
changes in and
disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure
item9a.
control and
procedures
item9b.
other
information
partiii
item10.
directors,
executive officers and corporate governance
item11.
executive
compensation
item12.
security ownership
of certain beneficial owners and management and related
stockholder matters
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions, and director
independence
item14.
principal
accounting fees and services
partiv
item15.
exhibits and
financial statement schedules
signatures
supplemental retirement income plan
company's salary deferral & savings restoration plan, as last amended effective january 1, 2007
company's retirement savings restoration plan adopted effective january 1, 2007
1997 corporate sharing plan
computation of ratio of earnings to fixed charges
subsidiaries of the registrant
consent of pricewaterhousecoopers llp
rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of the company's principal executive officer
rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) certification of the company's principal financial officer
section 1350 certification of the company's principal executive officer
section 1350 certification of the company's principal financial officer
note on
incorporation by reference
information pertaining to certain items in partiii of this
report is incorporated by reference to portions of the
companys definitive 2007 annual meeting proxy statement to
be filed within 120days after the end of the year covered
by this annual report on
form10-k,
pursuant to regulation14a (the proxy).
table of contents
part
i
item 1.
business
dupont was founded in 1802 and was incorporated in delaware in
1915. dupont is a world leader in science and technology in a
range of disciplines, including biotechnology, electronics,
materials science, safety and security and synthetic fibers. the
company operates globally, manufacturing a wide range of
products for distribution and sale to many different markets,
including the transportation, safety and protection,
construction, motor vehicle, agriculture, home furnishings,
medical, electronics, communications, protective apparel and the
nutrition and health markets. total worldwide employment at
december31, 2006, was approximately 59,000people.
the company is strategically aligned into five market- and
technology-focused growth platforms consisting of
agriculture& nutrition; coatings& color
technologies; electronic& communication technologies;
performance materials; and safety& protection. in
addition to the five growth platforms, the companys
reportable segments include pharmaceuticals. the company
includes developmental businesses, such as bio-based materials
and nonaligned businesses in other.
in 2004, the company sold the majority of the net assets of the
then textiles& interiors segment (invista) to
subsidiaries of koch industries, inc. (koch). beginning in 2005,
any activities related to the remaining assets of
textiles& interiors are included in other. in january
2006, the company completed the sale of its interest in an
equity affiliate to its equity partner thereby completing the
sale of all of the net assets of textiles& interiors.
information describing the business of the company can be found
on the indicated pages of this report:
item
page
segment reviews
introduction
agriculture& nutrition
coatings& color
technologies
electronic&
communication technologies
performance materials
pharmaceuticals
safety& protection
textiles& interiors
(2004 only)
other
segment sales, net sales, pretax
operating income and segment net assets for 2006, 2005 and 2004
f-54
geographic information
net sales and net property for
2006, 2005 and 2004
f-53
the company has operations in approximately 80 countries
worldwide and about 60percent of consolidated net sales
are made to customers outside the united states of america
(u.s.). subsidiaries and affiliates of dupont conduct
manufacturing, seed production, or selling activities and some
are distributors of products manufactured by the company.
sources
of supply
the company utilizes numerous firms as well as internal sources
to supply a wide range of raw materials, energy, supplies,
services and equipment. to ensure availability, the company
maintains multiple sources for fuels and most raw materials,
including hydrocarbon feedstocks. large volume purchases are
generally procured under competitively priced supply contracts.
a substantial portion of the production and sales in performance
materials is dependent upon the availability of hydrocarbon and
hydrocarbon derivative feedstocks. current hydrocarbon feedstock
requirements are met by
table of contents
parti
item 1. business, continued
purchases from major energy and petrochemical companies. in
addition, the company obtains adipic acid and
hexamethylenediamine from koch under a long-term supply contract.
within agriculture& nutrition, the companys
wholly-owned subsidiary, pioneer hi-bred international, inc.
(pioneer), operates in the seed industry and has seed production
facilities located throughout the world. seed production is
performed directly by the company or contracted with independent
growers and conditioners. the companys ability to produce
seeds primarily depends upon weather conditions, grower contract
terms and the availability of preferred hybrids with desired
traits.
the major commodities, raw materials and supplies for the
companys reportable segments in 2006 include the following:
agriculture&
nutrition:
carbamic acid related intermediates; insect control products;
natural gas; polyethylene; soybeans; soy flake; soy lecithin;
sulfonamides
coatings&
color technologies:
butyl acetate; chlorine; hdi based poly aliphatic isocyanates;
industrial gases; titanium ore; pigments
electronic&
communication technologies:
block co-polymers; chloroform; fluorspar; hydrofluoric acid;
copper; hydroxylamine; oxydianiline; perchloroethylene;
polyester film; precious metals; pyromellitic dianhydride
performance
materials:
adipic acid; butanediol; dimethyl terephthalate (dmt); ethane;
ethylene glycol; fiberglass; hexamethylenediamine (hmd); natural
gas; purified terephthalic acid; methanol; butadiene
safety&
protection:
alumina hydroxide; ammonia; benzene; high density polyethylene;
isophthaloyl chloride; metaphenylenediamine; methyl
methacrylate; natural gas; paraphenylenediamine; polyester
fiber; propylene; terephthaloyl chloride; wood pulp
no commodities or raw materials are purchased for the
pharmaceutical segment. this segments revenues arise from
licensing arrangements for
cozaar
and
hyzaar
antihypertensive drugs, which are manufactured and distributed
by merck& co. (merck).
since 1997, dupont has contracted with computer sciences
corporation (csc) and accenture llp (accenture) to provide
certain services for the company. csc operates a majority of the
companys global information systems and technology
infrastructures and provides selected applications and software
services. in december 2005, dupont entered into a new contract
with csc to provide these services through december 2014.
accenture provides selected applications, software services and
enterprise resource planning solutions designed to enhance the
companys manufacturing, marketing, distribution and
customer service. accenture is contracted to provide these
services through december 2008.
in november 2005, dupont contracted with convergys corporation
to provide the company with global human resources transactional
services including employee development, workforce planning,
compensation management, benefits administration and payroll.
the full scope of these services is scheduled to be operating by
the end of 2008. convergys corporation is contracted to provide
services through 2018.
table of contents
parti
item 1. business, continued
backlog
the company does not consider backlog to be a significant
indicator of the level of future sales activity. in general, the
company does not manufacture its products against a backlog of
orders. production and inventory levels are based on the level
of incoming orders as well as projections of future demand.
therefore, the company believes that backlog information is not
material to understanding its overall business and should not be
considered a reliable indicator of the companys ability to
achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance.
patents
and trademarks
the company believes that its patent and trademark estate
provides it with an important competitive advantage. it has
established a global network of attorneys, as well as branding,
advertising and licensing professionals, to procure, maintain,
protect, enhance and gain value from this estate.
the company owns and is licensed under various patents, which
expire from time to time, covering many products, processes and
product uses. these patents protect many aspects of the
companys significant research programs and the goods and
services it sells. the actual protection afforded by these
patents varies from country to country and depends upon the
scope of coverage of each individual patent as well as the
availability of legal remedies in each country. the company owns
approximately 21,000 worldwide patents and approximately 15,000
worldwide patent applications. in 2006, the company was granted
about 500 u.s.patents and about 1,900 international
patents. the companys rights under its patents and
licenses, as well as the products made and sold under them, are
important to the company as a whole, and to varying degrees,
important to each reportable segment. for a discussion of the
importance of patents to pharmaceuticals, see the segment
discussion on page37 of this report.
the environment in which pioneer and the rest of the companies
within the seed industry compete is increasingly affected by new
patents, patent positions, patent lawsuits and the status of
various intellectual property rights. ownership of and access to
intellectual property rights, particularly those relating to
biotechnology and germplasm, are important to pioneer and its
competitors. no single patent owned by pioneer or its
competitors is essential to pioneers ability to compete.
however, pioneer will continue to address freedom to operate
issues by enforcing its own intellectual property rights,
challenging claims made by others and, where appropriate,
obtaining licenses to important technologies on commercially
reasonable terms.
the company has approximately 1,900 unique trademarks for its
products and services and approximately 17,000 worldwide
registrations and applications for these trademarks. ownership
rights in trademarks do not expire if the trademarks are
continued in use and properly protected. the company has many
trademarks that have significant recognition at the consumer
retail level
and/or
business to business level. significant trademarks at the
consumer retail level include the dupont oval and
duponttm
(the dupont brand trademarks);
pioneer
brand seeds;
teflon
fluoropolymers, films, fabric protectors, fibers and
dispersions;
corian
surfaces;
kevlar
high strength material; and
tyvek
protective material. the company is actively pursuing licensing
opportunities for selected trademarks at the retail level. for
example, the dupont brand trademarks have been licensed for hard
surface flooring, automotive appearance products, air
filtration, water filtration and lubricants. in addition, the
teflon
trademark has been extended through licensing to personal care
products, automotive care products, automotive wiper blades, eye
glass lenses, home care products, lubricants, paint, paint
accessories, cookware and small appliances.
as part of the sale of invista to koch in 2004, dupont
transferred certain patents and patent applications as well as
certain trademarks and their related registrations and
applications. in addition to this transfer, koch and dupont have
entered into agreements regarding intellectual property rights,
including patent and trademark licenses.
table of contents
parti
item 1. business, continued
seasonality
sales of the companys products in agriculture&
nutrition are affected by seasonal patterns.
agriculture& nutritions performance is strongest
in the first half of the year. the segment generally operates at
a loss during the third and fourth quarters of the year. as a
result of the seasonal nature of its seed business,
agriculture& nutritions inventory is at its
highest level at the end of the calendar year and is sold down
in the first and second quarters. trade receivables in
agriculture& nutrition are at a low point at year-end
and increase through the selling season to peak at the end of
the second quarter.
in general, businesses in the remaining segments are not
significantly affected by seasonal factors.
marketing
with the exception of
pioneer
brand seeds and
solae
soy proteins, most products are marketed primarily through
duponts sales force, although in some regions, more
emphasis is placed on sales through distributors.
pioneer
brand products are aggressively promoted through multiple
marketing channels in north america. in the high corn and
soybean concentration markets of the u.s.corn belt,
products are sold through a specialized force of independent
sales representatives. in more diverse cropping areas,
pioneer
products are marketed through distributors and crop input
retailers.
pioneer
products outside of north america are marketed through a network
of subsidiaries, joint ventures and independent
producer-distributors.
solae
isolated and functional soy proteins are marketed using a
combination of outside distributors, joint ventures and direct
sales.
major
customers
the companys sales are not materially dependent on a
single customer or small group of customers. however,
collectively, coatings& color technologies and
performance materials have several large customers, primarily in
the automotive original equipment manufacturer (oem) industry.
the company has long-standing relationships with these customers
and they are considered to be important to the segments
operating results.
competition
the company competes on a variety of factors such as price,
product quality and performance or specifications, continuity of
supply, customer service and breadth of product line, depending
on the characteristics of the particular market involved and the
product or service provided.
major competitors include diversified industrial companies
principally based in the u.s., western europe, japan, china and
korea. in the aggregate, these competitors offer a wide range of
products from agricultural, commodity and specialty chemicals to
plastics, fibers and advanced materials. the company also
competes in certain markets with smaller, more specialized firms
who offer a narrow range of products or converted products that
functionally compete with the companys offerings.
agriculture& nutrition sells advanced plant genetics
through pioneer, principally for the global production of corn
and soybeans and thus directly competes with other seed and
plant biotechnology companies. agriculture& nutrition
also provides food safety equipment and soy-based food
ingredients in competition with other major grain and food
processors.
research
and development
the company conducts research in the u.s.at over 30 sites
in 14states at either dedicated research facilities or
manufacturing plants. the highest concentration of research is
in the wilmington, delaware area at several large research
centers. among these, the experimental station laboratories
engage in investigative and applied research, the chestnut run
laboratories focus on applications research and the
stine-haskell research center
table of contents
parti
item 1. business, continued
conducts agricultural product research and toxicological
research to assure the safe manufacture, handling and use of
products.
other major research locations in the u.s.include marshall
lab in philadelphia, pennsylvania and mt. clemens in mt.
clemens, michigan, both dedicated to coatings research; pioneer
research facilities in johnston, iowa; the solae company
facilities in st.louis, missouri; polymer research
facilities in richmond, virginia and parkersburg, west virginia;
and electronic technology research facilities in research
triangle park, north carolina, towanda, pennsylvania and
santabarbara, california.
dupont, reflecting the companys global interests, operates
more than 30 additional research and development facilities at
locations outside the u.s.in belgium, canada, china,
france, germany, japan, luxembourg, mexico, the netherlands,
spain and switzerland. a new research and development facility
was opened in taiwan in 2006 to better serve the integrated
circuit market.
the objectives of the companys research and development
programs are to create new technologies, processes and business
opportunities in relevant fields, as well as to improve existing
products and processes. each segment of the company funds
research and development activities that support its business
mission. in 2006, the company broadened its sustainability
commitments beyond environmental footprint reduction to include
market-driven targets for research and development investment.
the company will expand its offerings addressing safety,
environment, energy and climate challenges in the global
marketplace by developing and commercializing renewable,
bio-based materials; advanced biofuels; energy-efficient
technologies; enhanced safety and protection products; and
alternative energy products and technologies. the goals are tied
directly to business growth, specifically to the development of
safer and environmentally improved new products that enhance the
environmental profile of its traditional businesses for
duponts key global markets, including transportation,
building and construction, agriculture and food and
communications.
the corporate research laboratories are responsible for
conducting research programs aligned with corporate strategy as
provided by the growth platforms. all research and development
activities are administered by senior research and development
management to ensure consistency with the business and corporate
strategy. the future of the company is not dependent upon the
outcome of any single research program.
additional information with respect to research and development,
including the amount incurred during each of the last three
fiscal years, is included in item7, managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations, on page24 of this report.
facility
security
dupont recognizes that the security and safety of its operations
are critical to its employees, neighbors and, indeed, to the
future of the company. as such, dupont has merged chemical site
security into its safety core value where it serves as an
integral part of its long standing safety culture. physical
security measures have been combined with process safety
measures (including the use of inherently safer technology),
administrative procedures and emergency response preparedness
into an integrated security plan. the company has conducted
vulnerability assessments at operating facilities in the u.s.
and high priority sites worldwide and identified and implemented
appropriate measures to protect these facilities from physical
or cyber attacks. dupont is partnering with carriers, including
railroad, shipping and trucking companies, to secure chemicals
in transit.
environmental
matters
information related to environmental matters is included in
several areas of this report: (1)environmental proceedings
on page13, (2)managements discussion and
analysis of financial condition and results of operations on
pages28 and
48-50 and
(3)notes1 and 20 to the consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
parti
item 1. business, continued
available
information
the company is subject to the reporting requirements under the
securities exchange act of 1934. consequently, the company is
required to file reports and information with the securities
exchange commission (sec), including reports on the following
forms: annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k,
and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
section13(a) or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of
1934.
the public may read and copy any materials the company files
with the sec at the secs public reference room at 100 f
street, ne, washington, dc 20549. the public may obtain
information on the operation of the public reference room by
calling the sec at
1-800-sec-0330.
the sec also maintains an internet site at
http://www.sec.gov that contains reports, proxy and information
statements, and other information regarding issuers that file
electronically with the sec.
the companys annual report on
form10-k,
quarterly reports on
form10-q,
current reports on
form8-k
and amendments to those reports are also accessible on the
companys website at http://www.dupont.com by clicking on
the tab labeled investor center and then on
sec filings. these reports are made available,
without charge, as soon as is reasonably practicable after the
company files or furnishes them electronically with the
securities and exchange commission.
table of contents
parti
item1a.
risk factors
the companys operations could be affected by various
risks, many of which are beyond its control. based on current
information, the company believes that the following identifies
the most significant risk factors that could affect its
businesses. however, the risks and uncertainties the company
faces are not limited to those discussed below. additional risks
and uncertainties not presently known to the company or that the
company currently believes to be immaterial also could affect
its businesses. past financial performance may not be a reliable
indicator of future performance and historical trends should not
be used to anticipate results or trends in future periods.
price
increases for energy costs and raw materials could have a
significant impact on the companys ability to sustain and
grow earnings.
the companys manufacturing processes consume significant
amounts of energy and raw materials, the costs of which are
subject to worldwide supply and demand as well as other factors
beyond the control of the company. significant variations in the
cost of energy, which primarily reflect market prices for oil
and natural gas and raw materials affect the companys
operating results from period to period. when possible, the
company purchases raw materials through negotiated long-term
contracts to minimize the impact of price fluctuations. the
company has taken actions to offset the effects of higher energy
and raw material costs through selling price increases,
productivity improvements and cost reduction programs. success
in offsetting higher raw material costs with price increases is
largely influenced by competitive and economic conditions and
could vary significantly depending on the market served. if the
company is not able to fully offset the effects of higher energy
and raw material costs, it could have a significant impact on
the companys financial results.
failure to develop and market new products could impact the
companys competitive position and have an adverse effect
on the companys financial results.
the companys operating results are largely dependent on
its ability to renew its pipeline of new products and services
and to bring those products and services to market. this ability
could be adversely affected by difficulties or delays in product
development such as the inability to identify viable new
products, successfully complete research and development, obtain
relevant regulatory approvals, obtain intellectual property
protection, or gain market acceptance of new products and
services. because of the lengthy development process,
technological challenges and intense competition, there can be
no assurance that any of the products the company is currently
developing, or could begin to develop in the future, will
achieve substantial commercial success. sales of the
companys new products could replace sales of some of its
current products, offsetting the benefit of even a successful
product introduction.
the companys results of operations could be adversely
affected by litigation and other commitments and
contingencies.
the company faces risks arising from various unasserted and
asserted litigation matters, including, but not limited to,
product liability claims, patent infringement claims and
antitrust claims. the company has noted a nationwide trend in
purported class actions against chemical manufacturers generally
seeking relief such as medical monitoring, property damages,
off-site remediation and punitive damages arising from alleged
environmental torts without claiming present personal injuries.
various factors or developments can lead to changes in current
estimates of liabilities such as a final adverse judgment,
significant settlement or changes in applicable law. a future
adverse ruling or unfavorable development could result in future
charges that could have a material adverse effect on the
company. an adverse outcome in any one or more of these matters
could be material to the companys financial results.
table of contents
parti
item 1a. risk factors, continued
in the ordinary course of business, the company may make certain
commitments, including representations, warranties and
indemnities relating to current and past operations, including
those related to divested businesses and issue guarantees of
third party obligations. if the company were required to make
payments as a result, they could exceed the amounts accrued,
thereby adversely affecting the companys results of
operations.
as a result of the companys current and past
operations, including operations related to divested businesses,
the company could incur significant environmental
liabilities.
the company is subject to various laws and regulations around
the world governing the environment, including the discharge of
pollutants and the management and disposal of hazardous
substances. as a result of its operations, including its past
operations and operations of divested businesses, the company
could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs,
third-party property damage or personal injury claims. the costs
of complying with complex environmental laws and regulations, as
well as internal voluntary programs, are significant and will
continue to be so for the foreseeable future. the ultimate costs
under environmental laws and the timing of these costs are
difficult to predict. the companys accruals for such costs
and liabilities may not be adequate because the estimates on
which the accruals are based depend on a number of factors
including the nature of the allegation, the complexity of the
site, site geology, the nature and extent of contamination, the
type of remedy, the outcome of discussions with regulatory
agencies and other potentially responsible parties (prps) at
multi-party sites and the number and financial viability of
other prps.
the companys ability to generate sales from genetically
enhanced products, particularly seeds and other agricultural
products, could be adversely affected by market acceptance,
government policies, rules or regulations and competition.
the company is using biotechnology to create and improve
products, particularly in its agriculture& nutrition
segment. demand for these products could be affected by market
acceptance of genetically modified products as well as
governmental policies, laws and regulations that affect the
development, manufacture and distribution of products, including
the testing and planting of seeds containing biotechnology
traits and the import of crops grown from those seeds.
the company competes with major global companies that have
strong intellectual property estates supporting the use of
biotechnology to enhance products, particularly in the
agricultural products and production markets. speed in
discovering and protecting new technologies and bringing
products based on them to market is a significant competitive
advantage. failure to predict and respond effectively to this
competition could cause the companys existing or candidate
products to become less competitive, adversely affecting sales.
changes in government policies and laws or worldwide economic
conditions could adversely affect the companys financial
results.
sales outside the u.s.constitute more than half of the
companys revenue. the company anticipates that
international sales will continue to represent a substantial
portion of its total sales and that continued growth and
profitability will require further international expansion. the
companys financial results could be affected by changes in
trade, monetary and fiscal policies, laws and regulations, or
other activities of u.s. and
non-u.s.governments,
agencies and similar organizations. these conditions include but
are not limited to changes in a countrys or regions
economic or political conditions, trade regulations affecting
production, pricing and marketing of products, local labor
conditions and regulations, reduced protection of intellectual
property rights in some countries, changes in the regulatory or
legal environment, restrictions on currency exchange activities,
burdensome taxes and tariffs and other trade barriers.
international risks and uncertainties, including changing social
and economic conditions as well as terrorism, political
hostilities and war, could lead to reduced international sales
and reduced profitability associated with such sales.
table of contents
parti
item 1a. risk factors, continued
economic factors, including inflation and fluctuations in
currency exchange rates, interest rates and commodity prices
could affect the companys financial results.
the company is exposed to fluctuations in currency exchange
rates, interest rates and commodity prices. because the company
has significant international operations, there are a large
number of currency transactions that result from international
sales, purchases, investments and borrowings. the company
actively manages currency exposures that are associated with
monetary asset positions, committed currency purchases and sales
and other assets and liabilities created in the normal course of
business. failure to successfully manage these risks could have
an adverse impact on the companys financial position,
results of operations and cash flows.
business disruptions could seriously impact the
companys future revenue and financial condition and
increase costs and expenses.
business disruptions, including supply disruptions, increasing
costs for energy, temporary plant
and/or power
outages and information technology system and network
disruptions, could seriously harm the companys operations
as well as the operations of its customers and suppliers.
although it is impossible to predict the occurrences or
consequences of any such events, they could result in reduced
demand for the companys products, make it difficult or
impossible for the company to deliver products to its customers
or to receive raw materials from suppliers, create delays and
inefficiencies in the supply chain and result in the need to
impose employee travel restrictions. the company actively
manages the risks within its control that could cause business
disruptions to mitigate any potential impact from business
disruptions regardless of cause including acts of terrorism or
war, natural disasters and severe weather events. despite these
efforts, the impact from business disruptions could
significantly increase the cost of doing business or otherwise
adversely impact the companys financial performance.
inability to protect and enforce the companys
intellectual property rights could adversely affect the
companys financial results.
intellectual property rights are important to the companys
business. the company attempts to protect its intellectual
property rights in jurisdictions in which its products are
produced or used and in jurisdictions into which its products
are imported. however, the company may be unable to obtain
protection for its intellectual property in key jurisdictions.
additionally, the company has designed and implemented internal
controls to restrict access to and distribution of its
intellectual property, including confidential information and
trade secrets. despite these precautions, it is possible that
unauthorized parties may access and use such property. when
misappropriation is discovered, the company reports such
situations to the appropriate governmental authorities for
investigation and takes measures to mitigate any potential
impact.
item1b.
unresolved staff comments
none.
item2.
properties
the companys corporate headquarters are located in
wilmington, delaware. the companys manufacturing,
processing, marketing and research and development facilities,
as well as regional purchasing offices and distribution centers
are located throughout the world.
table of contents
parti
item 2. properties, continued
information regarding research and development facilities is
incorporated by reference to item1, business-research and
development. additional information with respect to the
companys property, plant and equipment and leases is
contained in notes11 and 26 to the consolidated financial
statements.
the company has investments in property, plant and equipment
related to manufacturing operations in the u.s. and puerto rico
at over 100 sites. some of these sites and their applicable
segment(s) are set forth below:
delaware:
edgemoor(2)
and
newark(4)
florida:
starke(2)
georgia:
valdosta(1)
illinois:
elpaso(1)
iowa:
fortmadison(2,3)
and
johnston(1)
louisiana:
laplace(4,5)
michigan: mt.
clemens(2)
mississippi:
delisle(2)
and
pascagoula(5)
new jersey:
deepwater(3,4,5)
and
parlin(3)
new york:
buffalo(3,5)
and niagara
falls(5)
north carolina:
fayetteville(3,4)
and research triangle
park(3)
ohio:
circleville(3,4)
pennsylvania:
towanda(3)
south carolina:
charleston(4)
and
florence(4)
tennessee:
chattanooga(4),
memphis(5),
new
johnsonville(2)
and old
hickory(4,5)
texas:
bayport(3),
beaumont(4,5),
corpus
christi(3),
laporte(1,3,4),
orange(4)
and
victoria(4)
virginia: front
royal(2),
hopewell(4)
and
richmond(4,5)
west virginia:
belle(1,5)
and
parkersburg(3,4)
puerto rico:
manati(1,3)
in addition, the company has investments in property, plant and
equipment related to manufacturing operations outside the u.s.
and puerto rico at over 100 sites. some of these sites and their
applicable segment(s) are set forth below:
asia pacific:
guangzhou,
china(5);
shenzhen,
china(3,4);
chiba,
japan(3,4);
gifu,
japan(4);
ibaraki,
japan(4);
shimizu,
japan(3);
tokai,
japan(3);
utsunomiya,
japan(4);
ulsan, republic of
korea(4,5)
singapore(4);
kuan yin,
taiwan(2);
and taoyuan,
taiwan(3)
europe:
mechelen,
belgium(2,3,4);
cernay,
france(1);
neu isenberg,
germany(3);
uentrop,
germany(4);
wuppertal,
germany(2);
luxembourg(3,4,5);
asturias,
spain(1,5);
dordrecht,
thenetherlands(3,4);
and maydown, united
kingdom(5)
canada:
kingston,
canada(4);
and thetford mines,
canada(5)
latin america:
camacari,
brazil(1);
sao paulo,
brazil(2);
and altamira,
mexico(2)
(1)
agriculture& nutrition
(2)
coatings& color
technologies
(3)
electronic& communication
technologies
(4)
performance materials
(5)
safety& protection
the companys plants and equipment are well maintained and
in good operating condition. sales as a percent of capacity were
84percent in 2006, 82percent in 2005, and
84percent in 2004. properties are primarily directly owned
by the company; however, certain properties are leased. no title
examination of the properties has been made for the purpose of
this report and certain properties are shared with other tenants
under
long-term
leases.
table of contents
parti
item3.
legal proceedings
litigation
benlate
information related to this matter is included in note20
to the consolidated financial statements under the heading
benlate.
pfoa:
environmental and litigation proceedings
for purposes of this report, the term pfoa means collectively
perfluorooctanoic acid and its salts, including the ammonium
salt and does not distinguish between the two forms. information
related to this matter is included in note20 to the
consolidated financial statements under the heading pfoa.
elastomers
antitrust matters
information related to this matter is included in note20
to the consolidated financial statements under the heading
elastomers antitrust matters.
environmental
proceedings
acid
plants new source review enforcement action
in 2003, the u.s.environmental protection agency (epa)
issued a notice of violation and finding of
violation for the companys forthill sulfuric
acid plant in north bend, ohio. the epa conducted a review of
capital projects at the plant over the past twenty years. based
on its review, the epa believes that two of the projects
triggered a requirement to meet the new source performance
standards for sulfuric acid plants and that the company should
have sought a permit under the new source review requirements of
the clean air act (caa). in july 2004, the epa issued a notice
of violation for the james river sulfuric acid plant with
similar allegations. the company disagrees with the epas
findings because the epa continues to change its interpretation
of these rules and requirements without going through the
required process to amend them. the courts are split on these
interpretations. the company has a total of four sulfuric acid
plants that use similar technology.
in october 2006, the epa, several states and the company reached
an agreement in principle to settle this matter under which the
company will pay a total of $4,125,000 in civil penalties to the
u.s.federal government and the states. depending on which
plants the company elects to retrofit, the company may incur
capital expenditures in the range of about $35million to
$70million. the agreement is subject to the parties
negotiation of acceptable written terms and to various
governmental approvals.
sabine
river works, orange, texas
on november19, 2004, the company received a notice of
enforcement action (noe) from the texas commission on
environmental quality (tceq) regarding its sabine river works
facility located in orange, texas. the notice contained 45
allegations relating to reportable and non-reportable emission
events from 2002 through 2004 and sought an administrative
penalty of $134,852. in addition to this noe, the company had
received 6 other noes raising allegations of air, water and
monitoring violations dating back to 2001. the company has
reached an agreement with the tceq combining all of these
enforcement actions and settling the allegations for a total
penalty of $176,575. as a condition of the agreement, the
company did not agree to the allegations and the allegations
remain in dispute. under the agreement, $88,288 will be paid as
a penalty to the tceq with the remaining balance being paid to a
local supplemental environmental project.
table of contents
parti
item 3. legal proceedings, continued
gibson
city, illinois
the epa has alleged that the solae company violated the
caas new source review regulations and certain prevention
of significant deterioration requirements at its plant in gibson
city, illinois. the solae company, a majority-owned venture with
bunge limited, was formed in 2003. the epa has proposed a
settlement of this matter that would include sites located in
indiana, ohio, oklahoma and tennessee, some of which are wholly
owned by dupont, in addition to the gibson city site. the
epas proposed settlement includes a penalty of $350,000
and supplemental environmental projects involving expenditures
of at least $500,000. the company and the solae company are
negotiating with the epa and u.s.department of justice
(doj).
item4.
submission of matters to a vote of security holders
none.
executive
officers of the registrant
the following is a list, as of february23, 2007, of the
companys executive officers:
executive
age
officer since
chairman of the board of
directors and chief executive officer:
charles o. holliday,jr.
other executive
officers:
james c. borel,
senior vice president global human resources
thomas m. connelly,jr.,
executive vice president and chief innovation officer, and
electronic& communication technologies
richard r. goodmanson,
executive vice president and chief operating officer
jeffrey l. keefer,
executive vice president and chief financial officer
ellen j. kullman,
executive vice president safety&
protection and coatings& color technologies
stacey j. mobley,
senior vice president and chief administrative officer and
general counsel
the companys executive officers are elected or appointed
for the ensuing year or for an indefinite term and until their
successors are elected or appointed.
charles o. holliday,jr. joined dupont in 1970, and has
advanced through various manufacturing and supervisory
assignments in product planning and marketing. he is a former
president, executive vice president, president and
chairman-dupont asia pacific. mr.holliday became an
executive officer in 1992 when he was appointed senior vice
president. he became chief executive officer on february1,
1998, and chairman of the board of directors on january1,
1999.
james c. borel joined dupont in 1978, and held a variety of
product and sales management positions for agricultural
products. in 1993, he transferred to tokyo, japan with
agricultural products as regional manager, north asia and was
appointed regional director, asia pacific in 1994. in 1997, he
was appointed regional
table of contents
parti
item 4. submission of matters to a vote of security holders,
continued
director, north america and was appointed vice president and
general manager-dupont crop protection later that year. in
january 2004, he was named to his current position, senior vice
president-dupont global human resources.
thomas m. connelly,jr. joined dupont in 1977 as a research
engineer. since then, mr.connelly has served in various
research and plant technical leadership roles, as well as
product management and business director roles.
mr.connelly served as vice president and general
manager-dupont fluoroproducts from 1999 until 2001, when he was
named senior vice president and chief science and technology
officer. in june 2006, mr.connelly was named executive
vice president and chief innovation officer and given the added
responsibility for dupont electronic& communication
technologies in october 2006.
richard r. goodmanson joined dupont in 1999 as executive vice
president and chief operating officer. prior to joining dupont,
mr.goodmanson was president and chief executive officer of
america west airlines from 1996 to 1999. he was senior vice
president of operations for frito-lay inc. from 1992 to 1996,
and he was a principal at mckinsey& company, inc. from
1980 to 1992.
jeffrey l. keefer joined dupont in 1976 as a financial analyst
in the titanium dioxide business. in 1982, he accepted a field
sales assignment and was appointed customer service manager in
1985. he advanced through various sales and management
assignments and in february 1999 he was named vice president and
general manager dupont titanium technologies. in
january 2004, he was named group vice president
dupont performance materials. in june 2006, he was named
executive vice president dupont finance and chief
financial officer.
ellen j. kullman joined dupont in 1988 as marketing manager and
progressed through various roles as global business director and
was named vice president and general manager of white
pigment& mineral products in 1995. in 2000,
ms.kullman was named group vice president and general
manager of several businesses and new business development. she
became group vice president-dupont safety& protection
in 2002. in june 2006, ms.kullman was named executive vice
president dupont safety& protection and dupont
coatings& color technologies and assumed leadership of
marketing& sales along with safety and sustainability.
staceyj. mobley joined duponts legal department in
1972. he was named director of federal affairs in the
companys washington,d.c. office in 1983, and was
promoted to vice president-federal affairs in 1986. he returned
to the companys wilmington, delaware headquarters in march
1992 as vice president communications in external
affairs and was promoted to senior vice president in may 1992.
he was named chief administrative officer in may 1999 and
general counsel in november 1999.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market
for registrants common equity, related stockholder matters
and issuer purchases of equity securities
market
for registrants common equity and related stockholder
matters
the companys common stock is listed on the new york stock
exchange, inc. (symbol dd)and certain
non-u.s.exchanges.
the number of record holders of common stock was 84,240 at
december31, 2006, and 83,821 at january31, 2007.
holders of the companys common stock are entitled to
receive dividends when they are declared by the board of
directors. while it is not a guarantee of future conduct, the
company has continuously paid a quarterly dividend since the
fourth quarter 1904. dividends on common stock and preferred
stock are usually declared in january, april, july and october.
when dividends on common stock are declared, they are usually
paid mid march, june, september and december. preferred
dividends are paid on or about the 25thof january, april,
july and october. the stock transfer agent and registrar is
computershare trust company, n.a. (formerly equiserve trust
company, n.a.).
the companys quarterly high and low trading stock prices
and dividends per common share for 2006 and 2005 are shown below.
market prices
per share
high
low
dividend declared
first quarter
$
43.50
$
38.52
$
0.37
second quarter
45.75
39.53
0.37
third quarter
43.49
38.82
0.37
fourth quarter
49.68
42.48
0.37
first quarter
$
54.90
$
45.74
$
0.35
second quarter
51.88
42.76
0.37
third quarter
44.75
37.87
0.37
fourth quarter
43.81
37.60
0.37
issuer
purchases of equity securities
there were no purchases of the companys common stock
during the three months ended december31, 2006.
table of contents
partii
item5.
market for registrants common equity, related
stockholder matters and issuer purchases of equity securities,
continued
stock
performance graph
the following graph presents the cumulative five-year total
return for the companys common stock compared with the
s&p 500 stock index and a self-constructed peer group of
companies. the peer group companies are alcoa inc.; basf
corporation; the dow chemical company; eastman kodak company;
ford motor company; general electric company; hewlett-packard
company; minnesota mining and manufacturing company; monsanto
company; motorola, inc.; ppg industries, inc.; rohm and haas
company; and united technologies corporation.
stock
performance graph
12/31/2001
12/31/2002
12/31/2003
12/31/2004
12/31/2005
12/31/2006
dupont
$
$
$
$
$
$
s&p 500
$
$
$
$
$
$
industry peer group
$
$
$
$
$
$
the graph assumes that the value of dupont common stock, the
s&p 500 stock index and the peer group of companies was each
$100 on december31, 2001 and that all dividends were
reinvested. the peer group is weighted by market capitalization.
table of contents
partii
item6.
selected financial data
(dollars in millions, except
per share)
summary of operations
net sales
$
27,421
$
26,639
$
27,340
$
26,996
$
24,006
income before income taxes and
minority interests
$
3,329
$
3,563
$
1,442
$
$
2,124
provision for (benefit from)
income taxes
$
$
1,470
$
(329
)
$
(930
)
$
income before cumulative effect of
changes in accounting principles
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
$
1,002
$
1,841
net income (loss)
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
$
$
(1,103
)3
basic earnings (loss) per share of
common stock
income before cumulative effect of
changes in accounting principles
$
3.41
$
2.08
$
1.78
$
1.00
$
1.84
net income (loss)
$
3.41
$
2.08
$
1.78
$
0.97
$
(1.12
)3
diluted earnings (loss) per share
of common stock
income before cumulative effect of
changes in accounting principles
$
3.38
$
2.07
$
1.77
$
0.99
$
1.84
net income (loss)
$
3.38
$
2.07
$
1.77
$
0.96
$
(1.11
)3
financial position at
year-end
working capital
$
4,930
$
4,986
$
7,272
$
5,419
$
6,363
total assets
$
31,777
$
33,291
$
35,632
$
37,039
$
34,621
borrowings and capital lease
obligations
short-term
$
1,517
$
1,397
$
$
6,017
$
1,185
long-term
$
6,013
$
6,783
$
5,548
$
4,462
$
5,647
stockholders equity
$
9,422
$
8,962
$
11,377
$
9,781
$
9,063
general
for the year
purchases of property,
plant& equipment and investments in affiliates
$
1,563
$
1,406
$
1,298
$
1,784
$
1,416
depreciation
$
1,157
$
1,128
$
1,124
$
1,355
$
1,297
research and development (r&d)
expense
$
1,302
$
1,336
$
1,333
$
1,349
$
1,264
average number of common shares
outstanding (millions)
basic
diluted
1,003
1,000
dividends per common share
$
1.48
$
1.46
$
1.40
$
1.40
$
1.40
at year-end
employees (thousands)
closing stock price
$
48.71
$
42.50
$
49.05
$
45.89
$
42.40
common stockholders of record
(thousands)
in the fourth quarter 2006, the
company adopted fsp aug air-1, accounting for planned
major maintenance activities, and retrospectively applied
these provisions effective january1, 2005. the effects of
the accounting change on the companys results of
operations and financial position for the year ended
december31, 2005 were not material. see note 1 to the
consolidated financial statements.
includes a cumulative effect of a
change in accounting principle charge of $29million or
$0.03per share, basic and diluted, relating to the
adoption of statement of financial accounting standards (sfas)
no.143, accounting for asset retirement
obligations.
includes a cumulative effect of a
change in accounting principle charge of $2,944million or
$2.96 (basic) and $2.95 (diluted) per share, relating to the
adoption of sfasno.142, goodwill and other
intangible assets (sfas142).
on december31, 2006, the
company adopted statement of financial accounting standards
(sfas) no.158, employers accounting for
defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans, an
amendment of fasb statements no.87, 88, 106 and
132(r). total assets and stockholders equity were
reduced by $2,159million and $1,555million,
respectively, as a result of such adoption.
includes borrowings and capital
lease obligations classified as liabilities held for sale.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements
discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of
operations
cautionary
statements about forward-looking statements
this report contains forward-looking statements which may be
identified by their use of words like plans,
expects, will, anticipates,
intends, projects, estimates
or other words of similar meaning. all statements that address
expectations or projections about the future, including
statements about the companys strategy for growth, product
development, market position, expenditures and financial results
are forward-looking statements.
forward-looking statements are based on certain assumptions and
expectations of future events. the company cannot guarantee that
these assumptions and expectations are accurate or will be
realized. for some of the important factors that could cause the
companys actual results to differ materially from those
projected in any such forward-looking statements see the risk
factors discussion set forth under parti, item1a
beginning on page9.
overview
dupont continues to successfully employ its three growth
strategies putting science to work,
leveraging the power of one dupont and going where the
growth is by leveraging resources through its
five growth platforms: agriculture& nutrition,
coatings& color technologies, electronic&
communication technologies, performance materials and
safety& protection. the companys sixth
reportable segment, pharmaceuticals, continues to receive
substantial income from two anti-hypertension (aiia) drugs,
cozaar
and
hyzaar,
developed by dupont and licensed to merck.
by successfully executing its three growth strategies, dupont
expects to achieve over the long term, annual financial targets
of 6percent revenue growth, 10percent earnings
growth in earnings per share and 1percentage point
improvement in return on invested capital (roic). in 2006, sales
increased 3percent, diluted earnings per share increased
63percent and roic increased 7percentage points.
putting science to work science is the
basis for the capabilities, offerings and competitive advantages
of the companys businesses. the companys research
and development programs are focused on creating new
technologies, processes and business opportunities in relevant
fields, as well as improving existing products and processes.
market-driven innovation, which relies on the voice of the
customer and concrete market opportunities, is central to the
companys research efforts. in 2006 over 1,000 new products
were commercialized, 1,800 new u.s.patent applications
were filed and more than one third of 2006 sales were derived
from products introduced in the last 5years. the company
is focused on prioritizing deployment of research resources to
the most promising opportunities and is aggressively filing
patent applications to protect the intellectual property created
by that research. the company has identified the top 75
technology projects expected to generate commercial success and
continues to prioritize programs for faster and larger payoffs.
leveraging the power of one dupont the
companys strategy is to increase productivity and leverage
market access, capabilities and customers, with a single focus,
thereby creating wider opportunities for its businesses. in late
2005, management committed to intensify cost and capital
productivity efforts by adjusting capital and resources
allocation among its businesses. by doing so, management expects
to reduce fixed costs as a percentage of sales and increase
roic. target reductions of $1billion in costs and
$1billion in working capital savings over a three year
period starting in 2006, were set to partially offset cost
increases from inflation and desired growth investments.
management exceeded its goal for fixed cost savings in 2006 by
reducing fixed costs by approximately $170million, or
approximately 2percentage points as a percentage of sales.
in addition, the company continued to take actions to
standardize and simplify its supply chains and support functions
globally and improve its sales effectiveness.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
going where the growth is the company
has achieved significant growth in emerging markets by
increasing its direct presence and sales efforts including
extending the companys science, products, brands and
market position into new applications and uses. the company has
a strong presence in the fastest-growing emerging markets and
continues to leverage resources and market position to realize
new growth. sales outside of north america, the united kingdom,
germany, france, italy and japan have increased to
36percent of total company sales in 2006 from
33percent in 2004.
analysis
of operations
during 2006, the company maintained a leading position in
biotechnology, safety and protection and crop yield improvement
and continued to execute its growth strategies, while overcoming
record-high energy costs. management estimates that year over
year cost increases for raw materials in 2006 exceeded
$800million, principally reflecting higher market prices
for oil, natural gas and hydrocarbon feedstock and overall tight
supply in certain raw materials. the company took actions to
increase pricing and improve productivity to offset these cost
increases, particularly in the agriculture& nutrition
and coatings& color technologies platforms where the
company initiated restructuring actions to streamline operations
and further reduce fixed costs. the companys operations
have completely recovered from hurricane disruptions of 2005.
the most significant damage was to the companys delisle,
mississippi, titanium dioxide plant which remained shut down
from august 2005 until production began a phased-in restart in
january 2006. normal operations resumed by the end of the second
quarter 2006. in 2006, the company received $204million in
insurance recoveries related to losses suffered from hurricane
katrina and asbestos settlements; $128million is recorded
in cost of goods sold and other operating charges and
$76million is recorded in other income, net.
the company adopted a dual approach to quantifying materiality
and elected to refine the accounting related to the following
existing cutoff practices. for certain of the companys
sales transactions, ownership title transfers when goods are
received by the customers. historically, the company recorded
these sales when shipped and monitored the impact of this
difference. additionally, some accruals were historically
recorded on a month-lag basis. the impacts of these sales and
accrual cutoff practices were considered to be immaterial in
every interim and annual period. during the fourth quarter of
2006, the company chose to change its practices to record these
sales when received by customers and to record certain accruals
without a lag. as a result, sales of $107million were not
recorded as of december31, 2006 that historically would
have been. if the company had applied this new practice
throughout 2006, sales would have been $81million higher
than reported. incremental accruals of $24million were
also recorded at december31, 2006, that would not have
been recorded under prior practices. the after-tax impact on the
2006 income statement of these changes was $39million.
(dollars in millions)
net sales
$
27,421
$
26,639
$
27,340
2006 versus 2005consolidated net sales
for 2006 were $27.4billion, up 3percent. the
increase reflects 2percent higher local selling prices and
2percent higher net volume partially offset by a
1percent reduction in worldwide sales attributable to the
transfer of certain elastomers assets in 2005. local selling
prices increased across all regions. during 2006, significant
volume increases in key growth regions, particularly asia
pacific and latin america, along with modest growth in europe,
more than offset lower u.s.volume. volume declines in the
u.s.are largely attributable to lower demand in motor
vehicle and residential housing related markets. these declines
more than offset the recovery in the u.s.of titanium
dioxide, industrial chemical and packaging polymer sales lost in
2005 due to hurricane business interruption.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
the table below shows a regional breakdown of 2006 consolidated
net sales based on location of customers and percentage
variances from prior year:
percent
percent change due to:
change vs.
currency
(dollars in billions)
net sales
local price
effect
volume
other1
worldwide
$
27.4
(1)
united states
11.1
(1
)
(2)
europe
7.9
(1
)
(1)
asia pacific
4.8
(2
)
(3)
canada& latin america
3.6
percentage change due to the
absence in 2006 of sales from elastomers businesses transferred
to dow on june30, 2005. sales attributable to the
transferred assets were $386million in 2005.
2005 versus 2004consolidated net sales
for 2005 were $26.6billion, down 3percent. the 2004
sale of invista resulted in a $2.1billion or
8percent reduction in net sales. this reduction was partly
offset by a 6percent increase in sales resulting from
5percent higher local selling prices and 1percent
favorable currency effect. in 2005, growth in key markets,
particularly those in asia pacific and latin america, helped
offset the reduction in u.s.volumes. volume declines in
the u.s. and europe were related to lower demand in motor
vehicle and production agriculture markets and the impact of the
2005 hurricanes.
the table below shows a regional breakdown of 2005 consolidated
net sales based on location of customers and percentage
variances from prior year:
percent
percent change due to:
change vs.
currency
(dollars in billions)
net sales
local price
effect
volume
other1
worldwide
$
26.6
(3
)
(1
)
(8
)
united states
11.1
(4
)
(2
)
(8
)
europe
7.7
(4
)
(3
)
(6
)
asia pacific
4.5
(4
)
(12
)
canada& latin america
3.3
(5
)
percentage changes in sales due to
the absence of $2.1billion in sales attributable to the
divested textiles& interiors business in 2004.
sales related to elastomers
businesses transferred to dow on june30, 2005, were
$386million and $467million in 2005 and 2004,
respectively, primarily in the u.s. and asia pacific. excluding
these sales, the companys worldwide sales were
$26.2billion in 2005, down 2percent from 2004 with
volume essentially flat.
(dollars in millions)
other income, net
$
1,561
$
1,852
$
2006 versus 2005other income decreased
$291million versus 2005. this reduction is primarily due
to a $407million decrease in net pretax exchange gains
(see page54 for a discussion of the companys program
to manage currency risk and note3 to the consolidated
financial statements). the company records royalty income
related to its licenses for
cozaar/hyzaar
in other income. licensing income related to these products was
$815million and $747million in 2006 and 2005,
respectively.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
in 2006, the company recorded $76million of insurance
recoveries in other income from its insurance carriers. of this
amount, $61million related to costs, including outside
counsel fees and expenses and settlements paid over the past
twenty years as part of asbestos litigation matters. during this
twenty year period, dupont has been served with thousands of
lawsuits alleging injury from exposure to asbestos on dupont
premises. most of these claims have been disposed of through
trial, dismissal or settlement. management believes it is remote
that the outcome of remaining or future asbestos litigation
matters will have material adverse effect on the companys
consolidated financial position or liquidity. these asbestos
related insurance recoveries are reflected in cash provided by
operating activities within the companys statements of
cash flows. the remaining $15million is part of a total
recovery of $143million relating to insurance recoveries
associated with damages to the companys facilities
suffered as a result of hurricane katrina in 2005. the majority
of the hurricane katrina recovery is included in cost of goods
sold and other operating charges in the consolidated income
statement; additional recoveries are not expected to be
material. no amounts are expected to be received from insurance
carriers for damages suffered by the company as a result of
hurricane rita.
2005 versus 2004other income increased
$1,197million versus 2004. the increase is primarily due
to net pretax exchange gains in 2005 of $423million
compared to losses in 2004 of $391million (see
page54 for a discussion of the companys program to
manage currency risk and note3 to the consolidated
financial statements). royalty income related to the licenses
for
cozaar/hyzaar
was $747million and $675million in 2005 and 2004,
respectively. equity in the earnings of affiliates increased
$147million over 2004, primarily due to the absence of a
$150million elastomers antitrust litigation charge in the
dupont dow elastomers llc (dde) joint venture recorded in 2004
(discussed in detail in note20 to the consolidated
financial statements).
(dollars in millions)
cost of goods sold and other
operating charges
$
20,440
$
19,683
$
20,827
as a percent of net sales
75%
74%
76%
2006 versus 2005cost of goods sold and
other operating charges (cogs) for the year 2006 were
$20.4billion, versus $19.7billion in 2005, up
4percent. cogs was 75percent of sales versus
74percent in the prior year. the 1percentage point
increase in cogs as a percent of sales principally reflects
higher raw material costs not entirely covered by selling price
increases and higher costs for restructuring plans discussed
below.
in 2006, the company recorded a benefit to cogs for
$128million for insurance recoveries related to the
property damage suffered as a result of hurricane katrina in
2005. in 2005, the company recorded a charge of
$160million related to the
clean-up and
restoration of manufacturing operations, as well as the
write-off of inventory and plant assets that were destroyed by
two major hurricanes in the u.s.hurricane charges reduced
segment earnings as follows: coatings& color
technologies $116million; performance
materials $17million; and safety&
protection $27million.
in 2006, restructuring plans were introduced within the
coatings& color technologies and the
agriculture& nutrition segments. these programs
include the elimination of approximately 3,200 positions and
redeployment of about 400 employees in excess positions to the
extent possible. the company recorded a net charge of
$326million in 2006 related to employee separation costs
and asset impairment charges. this included $184million to
provide severance benefits for approximately 2,800 employees
involved in manufacturing, marketing and sales, administrative
and technical activities. the company also recorded a benefit of
$6million in 2006 resulting from changes in estimates for
prior years restructuring programs. additional details
related to these programs are contained in the individual
segment reviews and in note5 to the consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
payments from operating cash flows to terminated employees as a
result of the 2006 plans total about $28million during the
current year. the remainder will be substantially paid during
2007. annual pretax cost savings of about $135million per
year are associated with the coatings& color
technologies program. approximately 35percent was realized
in 2006. an additional 50percent is expected in 2007, with
the remainder expected to be realized in 2008. a substantial
portion of the agriculture& nutrition program involves
reinvestment in research and development activities so cost
savings are largely neutral under this plan.
in 2005, the company evaluated capital investment requirements
at its louisville, kentucky facility and the declining demand
for the neoprene products produced at the facility. as a result,
the company has made plans to consolidate neoprene production at
its upgraded facility in laplace, louisiana, which is now
expected to be completed by the end of 2007. a charge of
$34million was recorded in 2005 reflecting severance and
related costs for approximately 275 employees, principally at
the louisville site. additionally, a benefit of $13million
was recorded in 2005 to reflect changes in estimates related to
employee separations that were implemented in earlier years.
2005 versus 2004cogs for the year 2005
was $19.7billion, a decrease of $1,144million from
the prior year. 2005 cogs includes a $160million hurricane
charge, a $34million charge and a $13million benefit
related to employee separations discussed above. 2004 cogs
included a $108million litigation charge related to pfoa
and a charge of $118million related to elastomers
antitrust litigation (see note20 to the consolidated
financial statements). cogs also included employee separation
costs and asset impairment charges in 2004 of $411million
as described below. as a percent of sales, cogs was
74percent in 2005 versus 76percent in 2004. the
improvement principally reflects the changes in employee
separation costs and the sale of invista, which had higher cogs
in relation to sales than the rest of the company, partly offset
by raw material costs that escalated at a higher rate than the
increases in selling prices. a modestly favorable effect of
currency translation offset a small decrease in sales volumes.
cogs in 2004 includes a net charge of $411million in 2004
related to employee separation costs and asset impairment
charges as a result of actions taken in that year to ensure the
companys global competitiveness as a more focused,
science-based company. this included $302million to
provide severance benefits for approximately 2,700 employees
involved in manufacturing, marketing and sales, administrative
and technical activities. essentially all of these employees
were separated as of december31, 2005. these staff
reductions affected essentially all segments. the company also
recorded a benefit of $12million in 2004 resulting from
changes in estimates for prior years restructuring
programs. in addition, the company recorded impairment charges
of $121million in 2004 which included: $27million to
reflect an other than temporary decline in the value of an
investment security; $23million related to the shutdown of
u.s.manufacturing assets; $42million related to the
write down of certain european manufacturing assets; and
$29million to write off abandoned technology.
payments from operating cash flows to terminated employees as a
result of the 2004 plan total about $300million.
approximately 44percent of these cash outlays were made in
2004, 45percent were made in 2005 and the remainder in
2006 and thereafter. annual pretax cost savings of about
$225million per year are associated with the 2004
restructuring plan. about 40percent was realized in 2004
and essentially all the remaining savings in payroll costs were
realized in 2005. over 50percent of the savings associated
with the staff reductions are reflected in selling, general and
administrative expenses, approximately 30percent in cogs
and other operating charges and the balance in research and
development expense.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
(dollars in millions)
selling, general and
administrative expenses
$
3,224
$
3,223
$
3,141
as a percent of net sales
12%
12%
11%
selling, general and administrative (sg&a) expenses
increased $1million and remained constant as a percent of
sales in 2006 as compared to 2005. in 2005, sg&a expenses
increased $82million. the 1percentage point increase
as a percent of sales primarily reflects the absence of invista
in 2005, which had lower selling expenses as a percent of sales
compared to the rest of the company.
(dollars in millions)
research and development
expense
$
1,302
$
1,336
$
1,333
as a percent of net sales
5%
5%
5%
research and development expense as a percent of sales remained
constant over the three-year period. expenditures in 2006 were
consistent with spending by segment in 2005 and reflect
concentration in expansion of seed traits, breeding advancement
and product development within agriculture& nutrition,
as well as activities to support the growth platforms. spending
in 2005 reflects increases across most segments, offset by the
absence of spending in textiles& interiors after
april30, 2004. the company continues to support a strong
commitment to research and development as a source of
sustainable growth and expects research and development funding
to increase modestly in 2007.
(dollars in millions)
interest expense
$
$
$
interest expense decreased $58million in 2006 compared to
2005 primarily due to lower average borrowing level partially
offset by higher average rates. an increase in the average
interest rates from 3.46percent to 4.60percent and a
3percent higher average borrowing level resulted in the
increase in interest expense for 2005 as compared to 2004.
(dollars in millions)
separation
activities textiles& interiors
$
(62
)
$
on april30, 2004, the company sold a majority of the net
assets of textiles& interiors, referred to as invista,
to koch. in january 2006, the company sold its interest in a
textiles& interiors equity affiliate to its equity
partner for proceeds of $14million thereby completing the
sale of all of the net assets of textiles& interiors.
during 2005, the company sold its investments in three
affiliated companies to koch and its investment in a fourth
affiliated company to its equity partner. the divestiture
activities resulted in a net benefit of $62million and the
transfer of the companys interest in the affiliates to
koch resulted in a gain of $35million. the sale of two of
these affiliates had been delayed until the company received
approval from its equity partners. although the transfer of
these affiliates completed the sale to koch, the company will
have significant continuing involvement with invista as a result
of long-term purchase and supply contracts and a long-term
contract manufacturing agreement in which invista will
manufacture and supply certain products for the company. in
addition, the company indemnified koch against certain
liabilities, primarily related to taxes, legal matters,
environmental matters and representations and warranties (see
note20 to the consolidated
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
financial statements). the companys total indemnification
obligation for the majority of the representations and
warranties can not exceed approximately $1.4billion. the
company also recorded a gain of $29million in 2005 related
to the sale of the companys investment in another equity
affiliate and $2million of other charges associated with
the separation. net cash proceeds from these transactions
totaled $135million. see note6 to the consolidated
financial statements for information regarding the charges that
were recorded in 2004.
(dollars in millions)
provision for (benefit from)
income taxes
$
$
1,470
$
(329
)
effective income tax rate
5.9%
41.3%
(22.8)%
in 2006, the company recorded a tax provision of
$196million which included a benefit of $272million
related to tax settlements and a $186million benefit for
reversal of tax valuation allowances related to the net deferred
tax assets of certain foreign subsidiaries due to the sustained
improved business performance in these subsidiaries. these tax
benefits were offset by net tax expense in other operating
results (see note7 to the companys consolidated
financial statements).
in 2005, the company recorded a tax provision of
$1,470million which included $483million of tax
expense on exchange gains associated with the companys
policy of hedging the foreign currency denominated monetary
assets and liabilities of its operations and $292million
of tax expense related to the repatriation of $9.1billion
under the american jobs creation act of 2004 (ajca). ajca
created a temporary incentive for u.s.corporations to
repatriate accumulated income earned abroad by providing an
85percent dividends received deduction for certain
dividends from controlled foreign corporations provided that
repatriated cash from such accumulated earnings is reinvested in
the u.s.pursuant to a domestic reinvestment plan.
in 2004, the company recorded significant tax benefits which
principally included $360million on exchange losses in
connection with the companys foreign currency hedging
program, $320million related to the separation of
textiles& interiors, $160million primarily
related to agreement on certain prior year audit issues
previously reserved and $137million resulting from
recording deferred tax assets in two european subsidiaries for
tax basis investment losses recognized on local tax returns.
these tax benefits were partly offset by net tax expense on
other operating results.
the companys current estimate of the 2007 effective income
tax rate is about 27percent, excluding tax effects of
exchange gains and losses which cannot be reasonably estimated
at this time. see note7 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional detail on items that significantly
impact the companys effective tax rates. in the past three
years, these items have generally included a lower effective tax
rate on international operations, tax settlements and valuation
allowance releases.
(dollars in millions)
minority interests in earnings
(losses) of consolidated subsidiaries
$
(15
)
$
$
(9
)
minority interests in losses of consolidated subsidiaries in
2006 reflects losses incurred by solae, primarily as a result of
restructuring charges, and the absence of minority interests in
dde. minority interests in earnings of consolidated subsidiaries
in 2005 reflects earnings in the first half of 2005 for dde and
the absence of minority interests in subsidiaries transferred to
koch. minority interests in losses of consolidated subsidiaries
in 2004 reflect the consolidation of dde as a variable interest
entity (vie) in april 2004.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
(dollars in millions)
net income
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
2006 versus 2005net income for 2006
increased 53percent versus 2005, reflecting higher selling
prices, higher sales volumes, lower fixed costs and an increase
in other income, partly offset by higher raw material costs.
selling prices increased year over year in each quarter of 2006
and were higher for each region for the full year. net income
also includes benefits from tax settlements, reversals of tax
valuation allowances and insurance recoveries. these benefits
were partly offset by charges for restructuring and asset
impairments. 2005 results include significant hurricane related
charges as well as tax expenses associated with the repatriation
of cash under ajca. earnings per share were $3.38 in 2006 versus
$2.07 in 2005, a 63percent increase. this increase
includes a 10percentage point benefit from lower shares
outstanding resulting from shares purchased by the company under
its accelerated share repurchase program.
2005 versus 2004net income for 2005
increased 16percent over 2004. 2005 net income reflects
higher selling prices which essentially offset record increases
in raw material costs and higher fixed costs. in addition, 2005
results include significant hurricane related charges as well as
tax expenses associated with the repatriation of cash under the
ajca. in contrast, 2004 results were adversely affected by even
greater charges resulting from a corporate restructuring
program, losses on the separation of textiles&
interiors and charges for certain elastomers antitrust matters
and litigation related to pfoa. earnings per share were $2.07 in
2005 versus $1.77 in 2004, a 17percent increase. this
includes a 2percentage point benefit in 2006 from lower
shares outstanding resulting from the accelerated share
repurchase program.
corporate
outlook
overall, economic conditions are expected to be less favorable
in 2007 than in 2006, with growth expected to slow in every
region of the world. gross domestic product (gdp) growth in
developed countries is forecast to slow to below-trend rates,
while growth in the developing world will be near trend with
about 5percent growth in south america to 9percent
in china. global industrial production, which is considered a
reliable indicator of demand for the companys products and
services, is forecast to expand about 3percent in 2007
versus about 4.5percent in 2006 and will exhibit a
regional trend similar to gdp. sales volume is expected to be up
across the growth platforms, with the largest increases in
electronic& communication technologies,
safety& protection and agriculture&
nutrition. the 2007 average value of the u.s.dollar is
forecast to be slightly weaker than the 2006 average. this
should have a beneficial impact on sales and income from
operations outside of the u.s. and increase demand for the
companys exported products. raw material costs are
expected to remain relatively consistent with 2006. while prices
for both oil and natural gas moderated somewhat during the
second half of 2006, futures markets indicate increases in both
during 2007 averaging somewhat higher than 2006 prices. fixed
costs as a percent of sales are expected to be lower than in
2006, reflecting the companys continued strong
productivity efforts. other income is forecast to be lower in
2007 reflecting reduced income from pharmaceuticals and lower
licensing income in agriculture& nutrition. based on
these expectations, management estimates that earnings per share
will be about $3.15 in 2007, with net sales of about
$29billion.
accounting
standards issued not yet adopted
in june 2006, the financial accounting standards board (fasb)
issued fasb interpretation no.48 (fin48),
accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, an
interpretation of fasb statement no.109 (sfas109),
accounting for income taxes. fin48 clarifies
the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in
financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and
measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition
and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken
in a tax return. fin48 will be adopted by the company on
january1, 2007. prior to the adoption of fin48, the
company used a
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
different measurement attribute to account for uncertainty in
income taxes. while the company is still evaluating the impact
of adoption of fin48 on its consolidated financial
statements, it believes that adoption of fin48 will
decrease the liabilities accrued for uncertainty in income taxes
at december31, 2006, by $100million to
$125million with a corresponding increase in reinvested
earnings at january1, 2007.
in september 2006, the fasb issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.157 (sfas157), fair
value measurements, which addresses how companies should
measure fair value when required for recognition or disclosure
purposes under generally accepted accounting principles in the
u.s.(gaap). the standards provisions will be applied
to existing accounting measurements and related disclosures,
that are based on fair value. sfas157 does not require any
new fair value measurements. the standard applies a common
definition of fair value to be used throughout gaap, with
emphasis on fair value as a market-based measurement
versus an entity-specific measurement and establishes a
hierarchy of fair value measurement methods. the disclosure
requirements are expanded to include the extent to which
companies use fair value measurements, the methods and
assumptions used to measure fair value and the effect of fair
value measurements on earnings. sfas157 is effective for
fiscal years beginning after november15, 2007. the new
standards provisions applicable to the company will be
applied prospectively and the company is currently evaluating
the impact of adoption on its consolidated financial statements.
critical
accounting estimates
the companys significant accounting policies are more
fully described in note1 to the consolidated financial
statements. management believes that the application of these
policies on a consistent basis enables the company to provide
the users of the financial statements with useful and reliable
information about the companys operating results and
financial condition.
the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in
conformity with gaap requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts, including, but not
limited to, receivable and inventory valuations, impairment of
tangible and intangible assets, pension and other postretirement
benefit obligations, income taxes, restructuring reserves,
environmental matters and litigation. managements
estimates are based on historical experience, facts and
circumstances available at the time and various other
assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. the company
reviews these matters and reflects changes in estimates as
appropriate. management believes that the following represents
some of the more critical judgment areas in the application of
the companys accounting policies which could have a
material effect on the companys financial position,
liquidity or results of operations.
pension
and other postretirement benefits
accounting for employee benefit plans involves numerous
assumptions and estimates. discount rate and expected return on
plan assets are two critical assumptions in measuring the cost
and benefit obligation of the companys pension and other
postretirement benefit plans. management reviews these two key
assumptions at least annually. these and other assumptions are
updated periodically to reflect the actual experience and
expectations on a plan specific basis as appropriate. as
permitted by gaap, actual results that differ from the
assumptions are accumulated on a plan by plan basis and to the
extent that such differences exceed 10percent of the
greater of the plan obligations or the applicable plan assets,
the excess is amortized over the average remaining working life
of current employees.
about 80percent of the companys benefit obligation
for pensions and essentially all of the companys other
postretirement benefit obligations are attributable to the
benefit plans in the u.s.the company utilizes published
long-term high quality bond indices to determine the discount
rate at the balance sheet date. where commonly available, the
company considers indices of various durations to reflect the
timing of future benefit payments.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
within the u.s., the company establishes strategic asset
allocation percentage targets and appropriate benchmarks for
significant asset classes with the aim of achieving a prudent
balance between return and risk. strategic asset allocations in
other countries are selected in accordance with the laws and
practices of those countries. where appropriate, asset-liability
studies are also taken into consideration. the long-term
expected return on plan assets in the u.s.is based upon
historical real returns (net of inflation) for the asset classes
covered by the investment policy and projections of inflation
over the long-term period during which benefits are payable to
plan participants.
in determining annual expense for the principal
u.s.pension plan, the company uses a market-related value
of assets rather than their fair value. accordingly, there tends
to be a lag in recognition of changes in market valuation. as a
result, changes in the fair market value of assets are not
immediately reflected in the companys calculation of net
pension cost. the following table shows the market-related value
and fair market value of plan assets for the principal
u.s.pension plan.
(dollars in billions)
market-related value of assets
$
17.5
$
15.9
fair market value of plan assets
18.3
16.6
for other plans, pension expense is typically determined using
the fair value of assets. the fair value of assets in all
pension plans was $22billion at december31, 2006,
and the related projected benefit obligations were
$23billion. in addition, obligations under the
companys unfunded other postretirement benefit plans were
$4billion at december31, 2006.
the following table highlights the potential impact on the
companys pretax earnings due to changes in certain key
assumptions with respect to the companys pension and other
postretirement benefit plans, based on assets and liabilities at
december31, 2006:
1/2percentage
1/2percentage
(dollars in millions)
point increase
point decrease
discount rate
$
$
(89
)
expected rate of return on plan
pension assets
(103
)
additional information with respect to pension and other
postretirement employee expenses, liabilities and assumptions is
discussed under long-term employee benefits
beginning on page47.
environmental
matters
dupont accrues for remediation activities when it is probable
that a liability has been incurred and a reasonable estimate of
the liability can be made. the companys estimates are
based on a number of factors, including the complexity of the
geology, the nature and extent of contamination, the type of
remedy, the outcome of discussions with regulatory agencies and
other prps at multiparty sites and the number of and financial
viability of other prps. the company has recorded a liability of
$349million on the consolidated balance sheet as of
december31, 2006; these accrued liabilities exclude claims
against third parties and are not discounted.
considerable uncertainty exists with respect to environmental
remediation costs and, under adverse changes in circumstances,
the potential liability may range up to two to three times the
amount accrued. much of this liability results from the
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability
act (cercla, often referred to as the superfund), the resource
conservation and recovery act (rcra) and similar state laws.
these laws require the company to undertake certain
investigative and remedial activities at sites where
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
the company conducts or once conducted operations or at sites
where company-generated waste was disposed. the accrual also
includes a number of sites identified by the company for which
it is probable that environmental remediation will be required,
but which are not currently the subject of cercla, rcra or state
enforcement activities. federal and state authorities may seek
fines and penalties for violation of the various laws and
governmental regulations and could, among other things, impose
liability on the company for cleaning up the damage resulting
from company-generated waste disposal. over the next two
decades, the company could incur significant costs under both
cercla and rcra.
remediation activities vary substantially in duration and cost
from site to site. these activities and their associated costs,
depend on the mix of unique site characteristics, evolving
remediation technologies, diverse regulatory agencies and
enforcement policies, as well as the presence or absence of
prps. therefore, it is difficult to develop accurate estimates
of future site remediation costs.
legal
contingencies
the companys results of operations could be affected by
significant litigation adverse to the company, including product
liability claims, patent infringement claims and antitrust
claims. the company records reserves for legal matters when the
information available indicates that it is probable that a
liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated. management makes adjustments to these
reserves to reflect the impact and status of negotiations,
settlements, rulings, advice of counsel and other information
and events that may pertain to a particular matter. predicting
the outcome of claims and lawsuits and estimating related costs
and exposure involves substantial uncertainties that could cause
actual costs to vary materially from estimates. in making
determinations of likely outcomes of litigation matters,
management considers many factors. these factors include, but
are not limited to, the nature of specific claims including
unasserted claims, the companys experience with similar
types of claims, the jurisdiction in which the matter is filed,
input from outside legal counsel, the likelihood of resolving
the matter through alternative dispute resolution mechanisms and
the matters current status. considerable judgment is
required in determining whether to establish a litigation
reserve when an adverse judgment is rendered against the company
in a court proceeding. in such situations, the company will not
recognize a loss if, based upon a thorough review of all
relevant facts and information, management believes that it is
probable that the pending judgment will be successfully
overturned on appeal. a detailed discussion of significant
litigation matters is contained in note20 to the
consolidated financial statements.
income
taxes
the breadth of the companys operations and the global
complexity of tax regulations require assessments of
uncertainties and judgments in estimating the ultimate taxes the
company will pay. the final taxes paid are dependent upon many
factors, including negotiations with taxing authorities in
various jurisdictions, outcomes of tax litigation and resolution
of disputes arising from federal, state and international tax
audits. the resolution of these uncertainties may result in
adjustments to the companys tax assets and tax liabilities.
deferred income taxes result from differences between the
financial and tax basis of the companys assets and
liabilities and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax
laws when changes are enacted. valuation allowances are recorded
to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not
that a tax benefit will not be realized. significant judgment is
required in evaluating the need for and magnitude of appropriate
valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. the
realization of these assets is dependent on generating future
taxable income, as well as successful implementation of various
tax planning strategies. for example, changes in facts and
circumstances that alter the probability that the company will
realize deferred tax assets could result in recording a
valuation allowance, thereby reducing the deferred tax asset and
generating a deferred tax expense in the relevant period. in
some situations these changes could be material.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
at december31, 2006, the company had a net deferred tax
asset balance of $1,778million, net of valuation allowance
of $1,259million. realization of these assets is expected
to occur over an extended period of time. as a result, changes
in tax laws, assumptions with respect to future taxable income
and tax planning strategies could result in adjustments to these
assets.
valuation
of assets
assessment of the potential impairment of property, plant and
equipment, goodwill, other purchased intangible assets and
investments in affiliates is an integral part of the
companys normal ongoing review of operations. testing for
potential impairment of long-lived assets is significantly
dependent on numerous assumptions and reflects managements
best estimates at a particular point in time. the dynamic
economic environments in which the companys businesses
operate and key economic and business assumptions with respect
to projected selling prices, market growth and inflation rates,
can significantly affect the outcome of impairment tests.
estimates based on these assumptions may differ significantly
from actual results. changes in factors and assumptions used in
assessing potential impairments can have a significant impact on
the existence and magnitude of impairments, as well as the time
in which such impairments are recognized. future changes in the
environment and the economic outlook for the assets being
evaluated could also result in additional impairment charges.
information with respect to the companys significant
accounting policies on long-lived assets is included in
note1 to the consolidated financial statements.
segment
reviews
segment sales include transfers and a pro rata share of equity
affiliates sales. segment pretax operating income (ptoi)
is defined as operating income before income taxes, minority
interests, exchange gains (losses), corporate expenses, interest
and the cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles. a
reconciliation of segment sales to consolidated net sales and
segment ptoi to income before income taxes and minority
interests for 2006, 2005 and 2004 is included in note27 to
the consolidated financial statements.
agriculture & nutrition
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.3
$
6.4
6.2
agriculture& nutrition leverages the companys
technology, customer relationships and industry knowledge to
improve the quantity, quality and safety of the global food
supply. global land area that can be used in agricultural
production is increasingly limited. therefore, increases in
production will need to be achieved principally through
improving crop yields and productivity rather than through
increases in planted acreage. agriculture& nutrition
delivers a broad portfolio of products and services that are
specifically targeted to achieve gains in crop yields and
productivity, including
pioneer
brand seed products and well-established brands of insecticides,
fungicides and herbicides. the segment operates across the food
value chain from inputs for production agriculture to global
production and distribution of soy-based food ingredients, food
quality diagnostic testing equipment and services and liquid
food packaging systems. research and development focuses on
leveraging technology to increase grower productivity and
enhance the value of grains and soy through improved seed
traits, superior germplasm and the effective use of
insecticides, herbicides and fungicides.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
agriculture& nutrition includes the companys
wholly owned subsidiary, pioneer, which is also the worlds
leading seed brand and a world leader in improving crop yields
with hybrid and varietal seeds that improve grower yields and
provide insect protection and herbicide tolerance. the principal
products of pioneer are hybrid seed corn and soybean seed. in
2006, farmers in north america continued to demonstrate a
preference for corn hybrids containing biotechnology traits and
pioneer had limited supplies of these products. as a result,
corn market share in north america declined slightly. in
soybeans, pioneer increased market share in key segments
supported by strong product performance. pioneer benefited from
the global launch of 22 new soybean varieties and 90 new
pioneer
brand corn hybrids that include new combinations of corn borer,
corn rootworm and weed management traits highlighted by the
expansion of the
herculex1
family of traits.
agriculture& nutrition also serves the global
production agriculture industry with crop protection products in
the grain and specialty crop sectors, forestry and vegetation
management. principal crop protection products are herbicides,
fungicides, insect control products and plant growth regulators.
sales of crop protection products declined modestly in 2006,
with largest declines in herbicides in north america and europe
and indoxacarb insecticide in asia pacific, but were partially
offset by higher sales in latin america. the segment continued
to expand its presence in fruit and vegetable specialty markets
and continues to expand product offerings in the professional
pest control market.
additionally, agriculture& nutrition operates within
the specialty food ingredients market, including soy proteins
and lecithins through its majority-owned venture with bunge
limited, the solae company. sales from these products increased
in 2006, primarily due to slightly increased volume and
increased prices of soy proteins and lecithins.
in 2006, the segment launched a restructuring plan to increase
investment in plant genetics, biotechnology and other growth
opportunities while consolidating manufacturing assets,
technology centers and marketing strategies in its nutrition and
crop protection businesses. the segment recorded a charge of
$194million in the fourth quarter for employee separations
and asset impairments associated with this investment and
streamlining plan. the plan includes the closure of
manufacturing units and the elimination of approximately 1,500
positions. operating costs savings of approximately
$100million per year will be reinvested into the seed
business to increase the speed to market of seed products with
next-generation biotech traits (see note5 to the
consolidated financial statements).
2006 versus 2005sales of
$6.3billion were 1percent lower than last year
reflecting slightly lower usd selling prices and volumes. lower
selling prices reflect declines in the crop protection market
partially offset by prices for a richer mix in corn and soybean
seed. volume declines were driven by lower corn seed sales in
north america, specialty products in india and herbicide sales
in north america and europe, partially offset by increases in
the sale of soybeans. 2006 includes some earlier than
anticipated seed sales for the 2007 planting season in europe.
the segment continues to invest resources in r&d and
introduced approximately 210 new products and product
applications during 2006.
2006 ptoi was $507million versus $862million, down
41percent. the decline in 2006 ptoi reflects the charge of
$194million described above. in addition, 2006 ptoi
reflects the sales decline and higher production costs across
most of the segment, slightly offset by income of
$73million related to technology transfers, licensing
agreements and asset sales.
2005 versus 2004sales of
$6.4billion increased 2percent reflecting
4percent higher usd selling prices and 2percent
lower volumes. higher selling prices reflect a richer mix in
corn and soybean seed. volume declines were driven by lower corn
seed sales in north america and specialty food ingredients
partially offset by increases in the sale of soybeans,
insecticides in latin america and herbicides for cereals in
europe. during the year approximately 160 new products and
product applications were introduced.
1registered trademark of dow agrosciences llc
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
2005 ptoi was $862million versus $769million in
2004, up 12percent. the improvement in 2005 ptoi reflects
higher usd selling prices partially offset by lower volumes and
higher raw material costs. 2004 results also included
restructuring charges of $34million. in addition, during
2005 the segment continued to increase research spending and
drive productivity improvements while managing overall fixed
costs to a level consistent with 2004.
outlookin 2007, the segment
anticipates modest earnings growth through increased pioneer
corn value offerings, including stacked traits and seed
treatments in the u.s. and canada and corn volumes in key
international markets. pioneer also expects continued market
share gains in key soybean markets including the u.s., canada
and brazil. the segments introduction of new crop
protection products is projected to drive volume gains. segment
margins will be challenged by higher production and raw material
costs and continued investments in research, which will drive
long-term profitability.
technology will continue to play an important role for
agriculture& nutrition. pioneer will build on their
global product offerings with the addition of 21 new soybean
varieties and 90 new
pioneer
brand corn hybrids.
coatings& color technologies
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.3
$
6.1
5.9
coatings& color technologies is one of the
worlds leading automotive coatings suppliers and the
worlds largest manufacturer of titanium dioxide white
pigments. products offered include high performance liquid and
powder coatings for automotive oems, the automotive aftermarket
(known as refinish) and general industrial applications, such as
coatings for heavy equipment, pipes and appliances and
electrical insulation. the company markets its refinish products
using the
duponttm,
standox,
spies
hecker
and
nason
brand names.
standox
and spies
hecker
are focused on the high-end refinish markets, while
nason
is primarily focused on economy coating applications. the
segments broad line of
duponttm
ti-pure
titanium dioxide products, in both slurry and powder form, serve
the coatings, plastic and paper industries.
the segments titanium tetrachloride business has moved
from a startup business to an established, growing venture,
shipping product globally. in october, the business publicly
announced a $30million investment in additional titanium
tetrachloride facilities at its titanium dioxide plant in
tennessee. when completed in mid-summer 2008, these facilities
will supply up to 100million pounds of high purity
titanium tetrachloride annually to allegheny titaniums new
titanium metal plant in utah. the business also launched and
began commercial production in 2006 of its own titanium metal
powder growth initiative.
the key markets in which coatings& color technologies
operates continued to grow in 2006, with more significant growth
in the latin america and asia pacific regions. a key driver of
the segments sales growth in 2006 was the completion of
clean-up and
repair of damage from hurricane katrina at its delisle,
mississippi titanium dioxide plant. the facility began a phased
in restart in january 2006, returning to full operation by the
end of the second quarter. during 2006, the segment was able to
return the delisle plant back to full operations and regain
market share lost during the hurricane related outage in 2005.
global demand for titanium dioxide white pigment was strong in
2006 with global market volumes up about 5percent from
2005.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
sales for refinish products grew in all regions, most notably in
the u.s., europe and latin america. while the oem market
realized growth in latin america and asia pacific, it was more
than offset by declines in the u.s., canada and europe. this
reflects the flat or lower 2006 north american and european
builds of automobiles and light trucks. powder coatings sales
grew in all regions, more significantly in asia pacific, u.s.
and europe, while demand in latin america showed improvement.
worldwide sales in electrical insulation and metal coatings
markets continued to improve.
2006 versus 2005sales of
$6.3billion were up 4percent, reflecting about
2percent higher usd selling prices for the segment. an
additional 2percent increase from volume was primarily
realized in the pigments business, reflecting strong global
demand as well as the first quarter startup of the delisle plant
following hurricane katrina. higher selling prices reflect
concerted efforts within the segment to increase prices for the
majority of its products as part of its efforts to offset the
impact of higher raw material costs and the impact of lower
global oem automotive volumes. during the year approximately 390
new products and product applications were introduced.
ptoi in 2006 of $795million increased from
$528million in the prior year. lower fixed costs in both
years and higher volumes in pigments contributed to the improved
2006 earnings. ptoi in 2006 includes a net charge of
$132million for restructuring and $30million
primarily for accelerated depreciation related to the
transformation plan that was initiated in first quarter 2006
(see note5 to the consolidated financial statements). 2006
ptoi also includes $142million in insurance proceeds,
primarily related to the hurricane damages suffered in 2005.
2005 ptoi included charges of $116million related to the
clean-up and
restoration of manufacturing operations, as well as the
write-off of inventory and plant assets that were destroyed by
hurricanes.
2005 versus 2004sales of
$6.1billion were up 3percent, reflecting
6percent higher usd selling prices, partly offset by
3percent lower volumes. higher selling prices reflect
concerted efforts within the segment to increase prices for the
majority of its products as part of its efforts to offset the
impact of higher raw material costs. sales volumes were lower
due to the delisle plant outage and the impact of lower global
oem automotive volumes. during the year approximately 360 new
products and product applications were introduced.
ptoi in 2005 of $528million decreased from
$698million in the prior year. higher raw material costs
and lower sales volumes negatively affected 2005 earnings. ptoi
in 2005 includes a $116million hurricane charge while 2004
included charges of $96million for employee separation
costs and an automotive refinish litigation settlement.
outlookthe segment expects sales in
2007 to increase slightly, while taking actions to reduce costs
and improve profitability. industry demand for titanium dioxide
is expected to moderate in 2007, in line with more moderate
global economic growth of about 2percent. competitive
conditions in the global coatings industry will continue to
provide a challenging operating environment in 2007. modest
growth is expected for refinish markets in mature economies
while strong growth is expected to continue in emerging markets.
profitability of coatings sold to automotive oem producers is
highly dependent upon volume at specific plants the company
services. north american and european 2007 automotive builds are
expected to be essentially flat with 2006 levels, with moderate
growth in asia pacific.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
electronic& communication technologies
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
3.8
$
3.7
3.4
electronic& communication technologies provides a
broad range of advanced materials for the electronics industry,
flexographic printing and color communication systems and a wide
range of fluoropolymer and fluorochemical products. the segment
also continues to pursue development activities related to
displays and fuel cells.
in the electronics industry, dupont is a leading supplier of
electronic and advanced display materials. the company offers a
broad portfolio of ceramic, flexible and rigid organic circuit
materials; materials for semiconductor fabrication and
packaging; and a wide range of products for advanced displays.
the segments products enable electronic devices to be more
portable with higher functionality. major product lines include
dupont
kapton
polyimide film,
pyralux
flexible laminates,
fodel
photoimageable thick-film pastes,
riston
dry film photoresists,
plasmasolve
post-etch residue removers, solamet conductor compositions for
photovoltaic cells and
microplanar
slurries for chemical mechanical planarization.
electronic& communication technologies is the market
leader in flexographic printing and color communication serving
the packaging and commercial printing industries. its offerings
include
duponttm
cyrel
and
cyrelfasttm
flexographic printing systems, as well as color communication
systems, including
duponttm
waterproof,
cromalin
and
dylux.
cyrelfasttm
is the only solvent-free thermal flexographic platemaking
technology commercially available. this technology is helping to
offset the continuing decline in the proofing technology market.
the segment also includes a portfolio of industrial and
specialty fluorochemicals and fluoropolymers which are sold into
the refrigeration, insulation, aerosol packaging,
telecommunications, aerospace, automotive, electronics, chemical
processing and housewares industries. as the largest global
manufacturer of fluoroproducts, the companys offerings
include
duponttm
suva
and isceon refrigerants,
teflon
and
tefzel
fluoropolymer resins,
autograph
and
teflon
non-stick finishes and
teflon
and
tedlar
fluoropolymer films.
electronic& communication technologies leverages
duponts strong materials and technology base to target
growth opportunities in electronics, fluoropolymers,
fluorochemicals, packaging graphics and ink-jet materials. in
semiconductor fabrication, packaging and interconnect, the
segment is extending and broadening its portfolio of materials
to address critical needs in the industry, e.g., chemical
mechanical planarization for semiconductor manufacture, flex
circuitry and embedded passives enabling miniaturization. in the
rapidly growing market for flat panel displays, the segment
continues to be a leading materials supplier for plasma
displays. in addition, the segment is developing new innovative
technologies for liquid crystal displays, such as thermal color
filters and display films, while continuing to invest in
developing materials technologies for organic light-emitting
diode (oled) displays and field emission displays. in
fluoropolymers and fluorochemicals, the segment continues to
pursue product renewal innovations such as next generation
refrigerants, while broadening the scope of applications into
high growth areas such as communications cabling and
photovoltaics. in packaging graphics, products such as
cyrelfasttm
have rapidly grown, solidifying the segments market
leadership position. also, dupont is maintaining its leadership
position in
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
inks for ink-jet printing while continuing to pursue exciting
new opportunities within
artistritm
digital textile printing offerings.
2006 versus 2005sales of
$3.8billion increased about 4percent over 2005,
reflecting 2percent higher usd prices coupled with a
2percent improvement in volume. price improvements reflect
higher metals prices primarily for micro circuit materials.
higher volumes reflect increased demand for fluoroproducts and
electronic materials. sales growth was strongest outside the
u.s.during the year, approximately 190 new
products& product applications were introduced.
ptoi in 2006 was $589million versus $571million in
2005. earnings growth in 2006 resulted from improved volume,
modest pricing improvement and continued productivity gains.
2005 included a gain of $48million on the sale of the
companys remaining interest in dupont photomasks, inc.
2005 versus 2004sales of
$3.7billion increased about 7percent, on
6percent higher usd prices and a 1percent
improvement in volume. price improvements reflect higher prices,
primarily for fluorochemicals. higher volumes reflect increased
demand primarily for fluoroproducts and electronic materials
partly offset by the divestiture of the remaining interest in
dupont photomasks, inc. sales growth was strongest outside the
u.s.during the year, approximately 220 new products and
product applications were introduced.
ptoi in 2005 was $571million, which included a gain of
$48million on the sale of the companys remaining
interest in dupont photomasks, inc. versus $212million in
the prior year. 2004 included net charges of $108million
for pfoa matters (see note20 to the consolidated financial
statements) and $67million for employee separation costs
and asset impairment charges. earnings growth in 2005 also
resulted from improved pricing, modest demand improvement and
continued productivity gains.
outlookfor 2007, the segment expects
moderate sales growth with gains in fluoropolymers, packaging
graphics and the impact of higher precious metals prices in
electronic materials. ptoi will reflect moderate growth for 2007
versus 2006 as sales growth is offset by higher investments in
growth markets and technologies. this segment manufactures
products that could be affected by uncertainties associated with
pfoa matters. see the discussion on
pages51-53
under the subheading pfoa.
performance materials
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
6.9
$
6.8
6.6
performance materials provides customers with more productive,
higher performance polymer materials, systems and solutions to
improve the uniqueness, functionality and profitability of their
product offerings. performance materials delivers a broad
polymer-based materials product portfolio, including engineering
polymers that are primarily used by customers to fabricate
components for mechanical and electrical systems, as well as
specialized resins and films used in various packaging and
industrial applications. these applications include food
packaging, sealants and adhesives, sporting goods and
interlayers for laminated safety glass. key brands include
duponttm
zytel
nylon resins,
delrin
acetal resins,
hytrel
polyester thermoplastic elastomer resins,
tynex
filaments,
surlyn
resins,
sentryglas
plus and
butacite
laminate interlayers,
mylar
and
melinex
polyester films,
kalrez
perfluoroelastomer and
viton
fluoroelastomers.
the key markets served by the segment include the automotive oem
and associated after-market industries, as well as electrical,
electronics, packaging, construction and consumer durable goods.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
the segments core competency is applied materials science,
focusing on substituting traditional materials with new
materials that offer advantages such as performance, durability,
aesthetics and weight reduction. new applications and processing
materials into innovative parts and systems are also areas of
focus. a recent example of this core innovation capability is
sentryglas
expressionstm,
which links
duponttm
polymer materials with ink jet technologies to develop specialty
decorative interlayers for architectural applications.
on june30, 2005, dupont completed a transaction with dow
related to dupont dow elastomers llc (dde), a 50/50 joint
venture. dow acquired from dde certain assets related to the
engage,
nordel
and
tyrin
businesses. upon the completion of this transaction, the
remaining elastomers business became a wholly owned subsidiary
of dupont and was renamed dupont performance elastomers, llc. in
response to a long-term declining demand for the polychloroprene
products and the anticipated capital investment requirements at
the louisville, kentucky facility, the company now plans to
consolidate production at its upgraded laplace, louisiana,
facility by the end of 2007 at which time neoprene production
will cease at the louisville site. in 2005, the company recorded
a restructuring charge of $34million, reflecting severance
and related costs for approximately 275 employees. annual cost
reductions related to ceasing neoprene production at louisville
and consolidating production at laplace are expected to offset
reduced revenue related to declining demand. cash payouts of
$25million are largely expected to be paid in 2008.
2006 versus 2005sales of
$6.9billion were 2percent higher than 2005
reflecting 3percent higher usd selling prices, partly
offset by 1percent lower volume. sales volume reflects the
year over year impact of the businesses transferred to dow at
june30, 2005. excluding from 2005 the sales related to
assets transferred to dow ($386million), sales volumes
were up reflecting stronger business environment in asia and
europe and the recovery from the segments business
interruption due to the 2005 hurricanes. during 2006, the
segment introduced approximately 160 new products and product
applications.
ptoi in 2006 was $627million compared to $523million
in 2005. ptoi in 2006 includes a $27million impairment
charge and reflects increased selling prices and aggressive cost
controls that reduced fixed costs. 2005 ptoi of
$523million included a $17million hurricane charge,
$47million in operating income related to certain dde
assets sold, a $25million gain on sale of these dde assets
and a charge of $34million related to the planned
consolidation of the companys neoprene operations at its
laplace, louisiana facility.
2005 versus 2004sales of
$6.8billion were 2percent higher than 2004,
reflecting 8percent higher usd selling prices, partly
offset by 6percent lower sales volumes. sales volumes
declined due to the business interruption caused by the
hurricanes, the aforementioned change in the elastomers business
and exiting the dmt business, pricing actions to improve mix and
margins and lower demand from markets tied to motor vehicle
production in the u.s. and europe.
excluding sales from the businesses transferred to dow of
$386million and $536million from the years 2005 and
2004, respectively, segment sales were up 4percent,
reflecting 8percent higher usd selling prices and
4percent lower volume. during 2005, approximately 180 new
products and product applications were introduced.
ptoi was $523million compared to $295million in
2004. 2005 ptoi includes $47million in operating income
related to certain elastomers assets sold and a $25million
gain on the sale of these assets. 2005 ptoi also reflects a
charge of $17million related to hurricane damage and a
$34million charge related to the aforementioned plans for
the louisville and laplace sites. in 2005, higher selling prices
partly offset substantial increases in raw materials costs and
the impact of the hurricanes on supply and production. 2004 ptoi
includes $268million in elastomers antitrust litigation
charges (see note20 to the consolidated financial
statements) and $67million in employee separation
activities and asset impairment charges.
outlooknorth american and european
2007 automotive builds are expected to be essentially flat as
compared to 2006 levels, with moderate growth in asia pacific.
however, the half year pattern is expected to be the reverse of
2006 with higher production in the second half of 2007. global
packaging market growth is
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
expected to remain at current levels. the residential
construction market in north america is expected to be softer
than 2006 and it is anticipated that the electrical and
electronics markets will continue to improve. performance
materials expects to realize continued revenue growth in 2007.
ptoi is expected to increase, benefiting from higher revenue,
price increases, improved fixed cost performance and
customer-driven innovations for products and processes. the
level of earnings improvements in 2007 will depend on offsetting
the continued high intermediate feedstock costs with price
increases and further productivity gains.
pharmaceuticals
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
$
on october1, 2001, dupont pharmaceuticals was sold to the
bristol-myers squibb company. dupont retained its interest in
cozaar
(losartan potassium) and
hyzaar
(losartan potassium with hydrochlorothiazide). these drugs were
discovered by dupont and developed in collaboration with merck
and are used in the treatment of hypertension. the
u.s.patents covering the compounds, pharmaceutical
formulation and use for the treatment of hypertension, including
approval for pediatric use, will expire in 2010. dupont has
exclusively licensed worldwide marketing and manufacturing
rights for
cozaar
and
hyzaar
to merck. pharmaceuticals receives royalties and net proceeds as
outlined in these licenses and related agreements. merck is
responsible for manufacturing, marketing and selling
cozaar
and
hyzaar.
in september 2002, the u.s.food& drug
administration (fda) approved
cozaar
to reduce the rate of progression of nephropathy (kidney
disease) in type 2 diabetic patients with hypertension and
nephropathy (hereafter referred to as the renaal study). through
2005, approvals based on the renaal study have been granted in
60 countries, with further approvals pending.
the losartan intervention for endpoint reduction in hypertension
study (life) results were reported and published in march 2002
at the annual meeting of the american college of cardiology. the
study found that use of
cozaar
significantly reduced the combined risk of cardiovascular death,
heart attack and stroke in patients with hypertension and left
ventricular hypertrophy (lvh) compared to the beta-blocker
atenolol. in march 2003, the fda approved
cozaar
as the first and only hypertensive medicine to reduce the risk
of stroke in patients with hypertension and lvh. in total, 64
countries have granted regulatory licenses to
cozaar
based on the life study. in 2005, the fda approved
hyzaar
to reduce the risk of stroke based on the life study.
the fda granted a new indication for
hyzaar
in 2004 for use in patients with severe hypertension. this fixed
dose combination is not indicated for initial therapy of
hypertension, except when the hypertension is severe enough that
the value of achieving prompt blood pressure control exceeds the
risk of initiating combination therapy in these patients. in
november 2006, canada granted a new indication for
hyzaar
use in severe hypertension. the indication is identical to that
in the u.s.
in october 2005,
hyzaar
100-12.5mg
tablets were introduced offering a new treatment alternative for
doctors with patients whose blood pressure is not adequately
controlled by
cozaar
100mg alone. a total of 13 countries have granted approval
and more are pending.
preminent,
trademark for losartan 50mg and hydrochlorothiazide 12.5mg in
japan, received marketing authorization in october of 2006.
preminent
is the first aiia combination product to be commercialized in
japan.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
outlookdupont and merck continue to
support
cozaar
and
hyzaar
with clinical studies designed to identify additional
therapeutic benefits for patients with hypertension and
co-morbid conditions. the company expects the ongoing
cozaar/hyzaar
collaboration to continue to be an important contributor to
earnings until the u.s.patents expire in 2010. thereafter,
earnings are expected to decline significantly.
safety& protection
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
$
5.6
$
1,080
5.2
4.7
safety& protection satisfies the growing global needs
of businesses, governments and consumers for solutions that make
life safer, healthier and more secure. by uniting market-driven
science with the strength of highly regarded brands such as
kevlar,
tyvek
and
nomex,
safety& protection has built a unique presence in the
marketplace since its inception in 2002.
the segment serves a large number of customers in markets that
range from construction, transportation, communications,
industrial chemicals, oil and gas, automotive, power and
manufacturing to defense, homeland security and safety
consulting. in addition to serving its existing customer base,
the segment is investing in the future by going where the growth
is. its growth initiatives respond to critical needs, making
people safer at home and at work; assisting the government,
military and law enforcement; and preserving and protecting the
environment. these initiatives include building innovations,
personal protection, cleaning and disinfection solutions,
government solutions, environmental solutions and safety
consulting services.
in 2006, disease preparedness and emergency response continued
to be high priorities. the introduction of the
duponttm
personal biosecurity kit,
duponttm
workplace biosecurity kit and
duponttm
biosecurity kit for the farm reflects an integrated systems
approach to help prevent the spread of disease in humans and
animals in the event of an avian flu pandemic. this multi-level
methodology incorporates special protective apparel, clean and
disinfect chemicals and safety management solutions.
products, including
kevlar
and
nomex,
provide weight savings, strength and durability as well as help
meet stringent safety standards.
kevlar,
nomex
and
tyvek
continue to hold strong positions in the personal and life
protection markets due to the strong demand for military and law
enforcement body armor and for personal protective gear in the
oil and gas industry and in emerging regions. these include
solutions for emergency response, military, law enforcement and
firefighting apparel, given the ongoing concerns about homeland
security. global demand for products that prevent disease and
improve productivity in the food, health care and industrial
markets continue to create growth opportunities for the
segments clean and disinfect offerings.
refinery solutions business has made steady progress toward its
goal of becoming the leading global provider of fully integrated
environmental solutions, including air and water, for refineries
and associated industries.
through building innovations, safety& protection
continued to strengthen and enhance the building envelope and
building interiors. new product launches are a key business
driver; in 2006, building innovations launched
duponttm
tyvek
weatherization systems. this product improves comfort, emergency
efficiency, air quality and protection from the elements. the
business is also positioning itself to take advantage of
substantial growth opportunities in china, india and eastern
europe and focusing more on commercial construction and
remodeling markets to make up for the slowdown in
u.s.residential construction.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
dupont safety resources continued to help organizations
worldwide reduce workplace injuries and fatalities while gaining
sustainable improvement in operating costs, productivity and
quality. dupont is a leader in this consulting field, selling
materials and consulting. it operates within a range of business
models, including sharing of client gains due to lower
injury/workmans compensation claims.
initiated by dupont in 2005, the world safety declaration, the
first-ever agreement by industry to improve workplace safety
globally, continues to attract attention around the world. in
2006, 11 chinese companies and organizations made a public,
global commitment to safety by signing the declaration, bringing
the total number of charter signers to 45.
2006 versus 2005sales of
$5.6billion were up 7percent due to 5percent
higher usd prices and 2percent higher volumes. all
businesses in the platform grew sales year over year with the
strongest growth in chemical solutions and aramids. segment
sales experienced slower u.s.growth as a result of shifts
in demand for construction, but were offset by higher sales
growth in other regions, especially emerging regions. during
2006, approximately 170 new products and product applications
were introduced.
ptoi in 2006 was $1,080million, up 10percent from
$982million in the prior year. the increase in ptoi
reflects pricing gains and tight fixed cost control. 2006 ptoi
includes a $47million asset impairment charge related to
an industrial chemical asset held for sale, partially offset by
a $33million benefit from insurance proceeds. 2005 ptoi
includes a charge of $27million related to hurricane costs
and a $31million gain from the sale of a non-core asset.
2005 versus 2004sales of
$5.2billion were up 11percent, due to 6percent
higher usd selling prices and 5percent higher volumes. the
segments aramids fibers and safety consulting offerings
primarily drove revenue growth. segment sales were negatively
affected during the last four months of the year by the
hurricanes, particularly in the aniline and acrylonitrile
product lines. the latin america and asia pacific regions
experienced
higher-than-average
sales growth in 2005. during the year, approximately 200 new
products and product applications were introduced.
ptoi in 2005 was $982million, up 17percent from
$837million in the prior year. 2005 includes a charge of
$27million related to hurricane costs and a
$31million gain from the sale of a non-core asset. this
net benefit, along with strong earnings growth from aramid
fibers and safety consulting helped increase the segments
ptoi. pricing momentum continued within the segment during 2005,
but was offset by higher raw material and transportation costs.
2004 includes charges of $70million for employee
separation activities and the impairment of certain european
manufacturing assets.
outlooksafety& protection
will continue to drive growth in its product lines globally with
the strength of its brands. u.s. and global demand for aramids
is expected to remain strong. continued u.s. and local level
homeland security funding is expected during 2007 and will
support growth in personal protective systems. the personal
protection, medical packaging and medical fabrics market
segments are expected to grow during the year. volume growth in
u.s.residential markets will continue to be lower than
2006, but mitigated by continued healthy growth in commercial,
remodel markets and
non-u.s.residential.
overall, safety& protection expects continued revenue
growth and moderate earnings growth in 2007 based on continued
market penetration, the introduction of new products and
technologies and continued investment in its growth initiatives.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
textiles& interiors
segment sales
ptoi
(dollars in billions)
(dollars in millions)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
$
3.3
$
(515
)
on april30, 2004, the company sold the majority of the net
assets of textiles& interiors (invista) to
subsidiaries of koch, inc. (koch) for $3,844million,
except for the transfer of certain equity affiliates, pending
the approval of equity partners. beginning in 2005, financial
transactions related to the remaining assets of
textiles& interiors are reported in other.
other
the company combines the results of its developmental and
nonaligned businesses under other. developmental businesses
include bio-based materials and other growth initiatives. dupont
bio-based materials is focused on the development of
biotechnology solutions using biology, chemistry, materials
science and engineering in an integrated fashion to serve our
customers. specific growth projects across the company globally
are consolidated within bio-based materials to capitalize on the
market opportunities and technology needs in this high-growth
industry, including crop-based products and technologies, the
biorefinery initiative with the u.s.department of energy
and metabolic engineering capability to manufacture biofuels.
dupont partnered with tate& lyle plc to produce
1,3-propanediol
(bio-pdotm),
the key building block for
duponttm
sorona
polymer, using a proprietary fermentation and purification
process based on corn sugar. this bio-based method uses
40percent less energy and reduces greenhouse gas emissions
by 20percent versus petroleum-based propanediol. the first
commercial-scale plant to manufacture
bio-pdotm
began production in november 2006, marking the beginning of
commercial availability of the companys bio-based pipeline.
nonaligned businesses includes activities and costs associated
with
benlate
fungicide and other discontinued businesses and, since january
2005, activities related to the remaining assets of
textiles& interiors. in 2005, the company completed
the transfer of three equity affiliates to koch and sold its
interest in another equity affiliate. in january 2006, the
company completed the sale of its interest in an equity
affiliate to its equity partner for proceeds of $14million
thereby completing the sale of all the net assets of
textiles& interiors. additional details regarding
textiles& interiors are contained in note6 to
the consolidated financial statements. in the aggregate, sales
in other for 2006, 2005 and 2004 represent less than
1percent of total segment sales.
ptoi in 2006 was a loss of $134million compared to a loss
of $78million in 2005. the losses in 2006 are reflective
of the concentration of activities in bio-based materials. ptoi
in 2005 included a net gain of $62million related to the
disposition of equity affiliates, primarily associated with the
textiles& interiors separation.
ptoi in 2005 was a loss of $78million compared to a loss
of $242million in 2004. the improvement in 2005 reflects
the gain relating to the disposition of four equity affiliates.
the 2004 loss includes $94million for employee separation
activities, a $29million charge to write off abandoned
technology and a $20million benefit from insurance
proceeds related to
benlate
litigation.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
liquidity&
capital resources
the companys liquidity needs can be met through a variety
of independent sources, including: cash provided by operating
activities, cash and cash equivalents, marketable debt
securities, commercial paper, syndicated credit lines, bilateral
credit lines, equity and long-term debt markets and asset sales.
the companys relatively low long-term borrowing level,
strong financial position and credit ratings provide excellent
access to these markets.
management considers its strong liquidity, financial position
and flexibility to be a competitive advantage. this advantage is
based on strong business operating cash flows over an economic
cycle and a commitment to cash discipline regarding working
capital, capital expenditures and acquisitions. pursuant to its
cash discipline policy, the company seeks first, to maintain a
strong balance sheet and second, to return excess cash to
shareholders unless the opportunity to invest for growth is
compelling. cash and cash equivalents and marketable debt
securities balances of $1.9billion as of december31,
2006, provide primary liquidity to support all short-term
obligations. secondary liquidity, sufficient to meet upcoming
debt maturities, comes from excellent access to capital markets
and strong cash flow generation. management believes that the
companys ability to generate cash and access the capital
markets will be adequate to meet anticipated future cash
requirements to fund working capital, capital spending, dividend
payments and other cash needs for the foreseeable future. in the
unlikely event that the company would not be able to meet its
short-term liquidity needs, the company has access to
approximately $3.5billion in same day credit
lines with several major financial institutions. these credit
lines are primarily multi-year facilities.
in october 2005, standard& poors (s&p),
moodys investors service (moodys) and fitch ratings
(fitch) downgraded the companys long-term debt credit
rating following the companys announced $5billion
share buyback program. management expected the revision and it
had minimal impact on the companys borrowing costs and
ability to access capital markets. the credit rating agencies
left the companys short-term credit ratings at or near the
highest rating levels. the companys long-term (lt) and
short-term (st) rating history at year end over the last three
years follows:
lt/st/outlook
lt/st/outlook
lt/st/outlook
s&p
a/a-1/stable
a/a-1/stable
aa-/a-1+/negative
moodys
a2/p-1/negative
a2/p-1/negative
aa3/p-1/stable
fitch
a/f1/stable
a/f1/stable
aa-/f1+/stable
(dollars in millions)
cash provided by operating
activities
$
3,736
$
2,542
$
3,231
the companys cash provided by operating activities was
$3.7billion in 2006, a $1.2billion increase from the
$2.5billion generated in 2005. the increase is primarily
due to higher net income in 2006 and a reduction in
contributions made to pension plans, partially offset by the
timing of tax payments. working capital productivity measures of
days sales outstanding and inventory days supply were
essentially flat in 2006 versus 2005, while days payable
outstanding slightly decreased.
the companys cash provided by operating activities was
$2.5billion in 2005, a $689million decrease from the
$3.2billion generated in 2004. the
year-over-year
decrease principally reflects higher contributions to pension
plans, primarily a $1billion contribution to the principal
u.s.pension plan. changes in accounts receivable and
inventories were modest. working capital productivity measures
of days sales outstanding, inventory days supply and days
payable outstanding in 2005 were essentially flat versus 2004.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
(dollars in millions)
cash (used for) provided by
investing activities
$
(1,345
)
$
(602
)
$
1,936
in 2006, cash used for investing activities totaled
$1.3billion compared to the $602million used in
2005. the increase reflects higher purchases of property, plant
and equipment and lower proceeds from the sale of assets. in
addition, the settlement of forward exchange contracts issued to
hedge the companys net exposure, by currency, related to
monetary assets and liabilities resulted in the receipt of
$45million in 2006 versus the receipt of $653million
in 2005. these settlements were largely offset by revaluation of
the items being hedged, which are reflected in the appropriate
categories in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
purchases of plant, property and equipment in 2006 totaled
$1.5billion.
in 2005, cash was used for investing activities totaling
$602million compared to investing activities that provided
cash of $1.9billion in 2004. the primary difference was
related to proceeds from the sale of assets, which were
$312million in 2005 compared to $3.9billion in 2004,
the latter related principally to the sale of invista (see
notes6 and 24 to the consolidated financial statements).
in addition, in 2005, the settlement of forward exchange
contracts issued to hedge the companys net exposure, by
currency, related to monetary assets and liabilities resulted in
the receipt of $653million versus cash payments of
$509million in 2004. the cash inflow in 2005 was primarily
related to the stronger usd while the payments in 2004 were
primarily attributable to the weaker usd. these settlements were
largely offset by revaluations of the items being hedged, which
are reflected in the appropriate categories in the consolidated
statements of cash flows. purchases of plant, property and
equipment in 2005 totaled $1.3billion, including
$70million to replace plant assets destroyed by the
hurricanes.
the company expects 2007 purchases of plant, property and
equipment to be modestly higher than 2006 levels.
(dollars in millions)
cash used for financing
activities
$
(2,323
)
$
(2,851
)
$
(5,550
)
changes in cash flows related to financing activities are
principally related to the companys borrowings and share
repurchase activity. total debt at december31, 2006 was
$7.5billion, a $650million decrease from
december31, 2005. this decrease was primarily due to the
repayment of borrowings related to the 2005 ajca cash
repatriation program partially offset by the issuance of
$1billion in 10 and 30year notes in december 2006.
total debt at december31, 2005, was $8.2billion, an
increase of $1.7billion from december31, 2004,
primarily due to new foreign borrowings to support the ajca cash
repatriation program, the $1billion contribution to the
principal u.s.pension plan and other cash needs, partially
offset by domestic debt pay downs from the cash repatriated
under the ajca program.
dividends paid to common and preferred shareholders were
$1.4billion in 2006, 2005 and 2004. dividends per share of
common stock were $1.48 in 2006, $1.46 in 2005 and $1.40 in
2004. the common dividend declared in the first quarter 2007 was
the companys 410thconsecutive dividend since the
companys first dividend in the fourth quarter 1904.
the companys board of directors authorized a
$2billion share buyback plan in june 2001. during 2005,
the company purchased and retired 9.9million shares at a
total cost of $505million. during 2006, there were no
purchases of stock under this program. as of december31,
2006 and 2005, the company has purchased
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
20.5million shares at a total cost of $962million.
management has not established a timeline for the buyback of the
remaining stock under this plan.
in october 2005, the board of directors authorized a
$5billion share buyback plan. on october27, 2005,
the company repurchased 75.7million shares of its common
stock under an accelerated share repurchase agreement and paid
$3.0billion for the repurchase. upon the conclusion of the
agreement in 2006, the company paid $180million in cash to
goldman, sachs & co. to settle the agreement. in addition,
the company made open market purchases of its shares for
$100million bringing purchases to date under the
$5billion share buyback plan to about $3.3billion.
the company anticipates completing the remaining
$1.7billion of the program, consistent with its financial
discipline principles, by the end of 2007. see note21 to
the consolidated financial statements for a reconciliation of
shares activity and certain derivative instruments
under off balance sheet arrangements for more
information.
cash,
cash equivalents and marketable debt securities
cash and cash equivalents and marketable debt securities totaled
$1.9billion at december31, 2006 and 2005, and
$3.5billion at december31, 2004, respectively. the
$1.6billion decrease in cash from 2004 to 2005 was due
mainly to the $3billion share buyback and debt pay down
partially offset by new borrowings to fund the repatriation of
$9.1billion under ajca and positive net cash flow in
several regions.
debt
total debt at december31, 2006 and 2005 was
$7.5billion and $8.2billion, respectively. the
company defines net debt as total debt less cash and cash
equivalents and marketable debt securities. management believes
that net debt is meaningful because it provides the investor
with a more holistic view of the companys liquidity and
debt position since the companys cash balance is available
to meet operating and capital needs, as well as to provide
liquidity around the world. net debt also allows the investor to
more easily compare cash flow between periods without adjusting
for changes in cash and debt. at december31, 2006, net
debt was $5.6billion compared to $6.3billion and
$2.9billion at year-end 2005 and 2004, respectively. the
$692million decrease in net debt from 2005 to 2006
reflects the companys positive cash flow during 2006. the
$3.4billion increase in net debt from 2004 to 2005 was
primarily due to the $3.5billion share repurchase program
in 2005.
the following table reconciles total debt to net debt:
(dollars in millions)
december31,
commercial paper
$
long-term debt due in one year
$
1,163
$
other short-term debt
total short-term debt
1,517
1,397
long-term debt
6,013
6,783
5,548
borrowings and capital leases held
for sale
total debt
$
7,530
$
8,180
$
6,485
cash and cash equivalents
1,814
1,736
3,369
marketable debt securities
net debt
$
5,637
$
6,329
$
2,949
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
the following table summarizes changes in net debt throughout
2006, 2005 and 2004:
(dollars in millions)
december31,
net debt-beginning of year
$
6,329
$
2,949
$
7,106
cash provided by continuing
operations
(3,736
)
(2,542
)
(3,231
)
purchases of property,
plant& equipment and investments in affiliates
1,563
1,406
1,298
net payments for businesses
acquired
proceeds from sales of assets
(148
)
(312
)
(68
)
proceeds from sale of
assets-textiles& interiors, net of cash sold
(3,840
)
debt assumed by koch
(255
)
forward exchange contract
settlements
(45
)
(653
)
dividends paid to stockholders
1,378
1,439
1,404
acquisition of treasury stock
3,530
effect of exchange rate changes on
cash
(10
)
(404
)
other
(34
)
(416
)
(146
)
increase (decrease) in net debt
(692
)
3,380
(4,157
)
net debt-end of year
$
5,637
$
6,329
$
2,949
off-balance
sheet arrangements
certain
guarantee contracts
indemnifications
the company has indemnified respective parties against certain
liabilities that may arise in connection with acquisitions and
divestitures and related business activities prior to the
completion of the transactions. the terms of these
indemnifications, which typically pertain to environmental, tax
and product liabilities, are generally indefinite. in addition,
the company indemnifies its duly elected or appointed directors
and officers to the fullest extent permitted by delaware law,
against liabilities incurred as a result of their activities for
the company, such as adverse judgments relating to litigation
matters. if the indemnified party were to incur a liability or
have a liability increase as a result of a successful claim,
pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, the company would
be required to reimburse the indemnified party. the maximum
amount of potential future payments is generally indeterminable.
the carrying amounts recorded for all indemnifications as of
december31,2006 and 2005 is $105million and
$103million, respectively. although it is reasonably
possible that future payments may exceed amounts accrued, due to
the nature of indemnified items, it is not possible to make a
reasonable estimate of the maximum potential loss or range of
loss. no assets are held as collateral and no specific recourse
provisions exist.
in connection with the sale of invista, the company indemnified
koch against certain liabilities primarily related to taxes,
legal and environmental matters and other representations and
warranties. the estimated fair value of these obligations of
$70million is included in the indemnifications balance of
$105million at december31,2006. the fair value
was based on managements best estimate of the value
expected to be required to issue the indemnifications in a
stand-alone, arms length transaction with an unrelated
party and, where appropriate, by the utilization of
probability-weighted discounted net cash flow models. the
company does not believe that these indemnities will have a
material impact on the future liquidity of the company (see
note6 to the consolidated financial statements).
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
obligations
for equity affiliates and others
the company has directly guaranteed various debt obligations
under agreements with third parties related to equity
affiliates, customers, suppliers and other unaffiliated
companies. at december31,2006, the company had
directly guaranteed $551million of such obligations, plus
$262million relating to guarantees of obligations for
divested subsidiaries and affiliates. this represents the
maximum potential amount of future (undiscounted) payments that
the company could be required to make under the guarantees. the
company would be required to perform on these guarantees in the
event of default by the guaranteed party. no material loss is
anticipated by reason of such agreements and guarantees. at
december31,2006, the liabilities recorded for these
obligations were not material.
existing guarantees for customers and suppliers arose as part of
contractual agreements. existing guarantees for equity
affiliates arose for liquidity needs in normal operations. in
certain cases, the company has recourse to assets held as
collateral as well as personal guarantees from customers and
suppliers.
the company has guaranteed certain obligations and liabilities
related to divested subsidiaries including conoco and its
subsidiaries and affiliates and consolidation coal sales
company. the restructuring, transfer and separation agreement
between dupont and conoco requires conoco to use its best
efforts to have conoco, or any of its subsidiaries, substitute
for dupont. conoco and consolidation coal sales company have
indemnified the company for any liabilities the company may
incur pursuant to these guarantees. no material loss is
anticipated by reason of such agreements and guarantees. at
december31,2006, the company has no liabilities
recorded for these obligations.
additional information with respect to the companys
guarantees is included in note20 to the consolidated
financial statements. historically, the company has not had to
make significant payments to satisfy guarantee obligations;
however, the company believes it has the financial resources to
satisfy these guarantees should unforeseen circumstances arise.
certain
derivative instruments
during 2005, the company entered into an accelerated share
repurchase agreement with goldman, sachs&co.
(goldman sachs) under which the company purchased and retired
75.7million shares of duponts outstanding common
stock from goldman sachs on october27,2005 at a
price of $39.62per share, with goldman sachs purchasing an
equivalent number of shares in the open market over the
following nine-month period.
on july27,2006, goldman sachs completed its purchase
of 75.7million shares of duponts common stock at a
volume weighted average price (vwap) of $41.99 per share. upon
the conclusion of the agreement, the company made a settlement
payment to goldman sachs of $180million, which the company
elected to pay in cash. the final settlement price was based
upon the difference between the vwap per share for the
nine-month
period, which ended july27,2006, and the purchase
price of $39.62per share. the amount paid to settle the
contract was recorded as a reduction to additional paid-in
capital during the third quarter 2006.
synthetic
leases
at december31,2006, the company has one synthetic
lease program relating to miscellaneous short-lived equipment
valued at approximately $116million. lease payments for
these assets totaled $58million in 2006, $51million
in 2005 and $54million in 2004, and were reported as
operating expenses in the consolidated income statement. the
leases under this program are considered operating leases and
accordingly the related assets and liabilities are not recorded
on the consolidated balance sheet. furthermore, the lease
payments associated with this program vary based on one month
libor. the company may terminate the program at any time by
purchasing the assets. should the company decide neither to
renew the leases nor to exercise its purchase option, it must
pay the owner a residual value guarantee amount, which may be
recovered from a sale of the property to a third party. residual
value guarantees totaled $101million at
december31,2006.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
contractual
obligations
information related to the companys significant
contractual obligations is summarized in the following table:
payments due in
total at
december31,
(dollars in millions)
2008-2009
2010-2011
and beyond
long-term and short-term
debt1
$
7,162
$
1,163
$
2,378
$
$
2,728
expected cumulative cash
requirements for interest payments through maturity
2,737
1,504
capital
leases1
operating leases
purchase
obligations2
information technology
infrastructure& services
raw material obligations
research& development
agreements
utility obligations
invista-related
obligations3
human resource services
other4
total purchase obligations
2,136
other long-term
liabilities1,5
workers compensation
asset retirement obligations
environmental remediation
legal settlements
other6
total other long-term liabilities
total contractual obligations
$
13,545
$
2,532
$
4,103
$
1,858
$
5,052
included in the consolidated
financial statements.
represents enforceable and legally
binding agreements in excess of $1million to purchase
goods or services that specify fixed or minimum quantities;
fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the
approximate timing of the agreement.
includes raw material supply
obligations of $526million and contract manufacturing
obligations of $132million.
primarily represents obligations
associated with distribution, health care/benefit administration
and other professional and consulting contracts.
pension and other postretirement
benefit obligations have been excluded from the table as they
are discussed below within long-term employee benefits.
primarily represents
employee-related benefits other than pensions and other
postretirement benefits.
the company expects to meet its contractual obligations through
its normal sources of liquidity and believes it has the
financial resources to satisfy these contractual obligations
should unforeseen circumstances arise.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
long-term
employee benefits
the company has various obligations to its employees and
retirees. the company maintains retirement-related programs in
many countries that have a long-term impact on the
companys earnings and cash flows. these plans are
typically defined benefit pension plans and medical, dental and
life insurance benefits for pensioners and survivors. about
80percent of the companys worldwide benefit
obligation for pensions and essentially all of the
companys worldwide benefit obligation for retiree medical,
dental and life insurance benefits are attributable to the
benefit plans covering substantially all u.s.employees.
pension coverage for employees of the companys
non-u.s.consolidated
subsidiaries is provided, to the extent deemed appropriate,
through separate plans. the company regularly explores
alternative solutions to meet its global pension obligations in
the most cost effective manner possible as demographics, life
expectancy and country-specific pension funding rules change.
where permitted by applicable law, the company reserves the
right to change, modify or discontinue its plans that provide
pension and medical, dental and life insurance benefits.
benefits under defined benefit pension plans are based primarily
on years of service and employees pay near retirement.
pension benefits are paid primarily from trust funds established
to comply with applicable laws and regulations. unless required
by law, the company does not make contributions that are in
excess of tax deductible limits. the actuarial assumptions and
procedures utilized are reviewed periodically by the plans
actuaries to provide reasonable assurance that there will be
adequate funds for the payment of benefits. by law, no
contributions are currently required to be made to the principal
u.s.pension plan in 2007 and no contributions are
currently anticipated. contributions beyond 2007 are not
determinable since the amount of any contribution is heavily
dependent on the future economic environment and investment
returns on pension trust assets. u.s.pension benefits that
exceed federal limitations are covered by separate unfunded
plans and these benefits are paid to pensioners and survivors
from operating cash flows.
funding for each pension plan is governed by the rules of the
sovereign country in which it operates. thus, there is not
necessarily a direct correlation between pension funding and
pension expense. in general, however, improvements in plans
funded status tends to moderate subsequent funding needs. in
2006, the company contributed $280million to its pension
plans. the company anticipates that it will make approximately
$290million in contributions in 2007 to pension plans
other than the principal u.s.pension plan.
the pension protection act of 2006 (the act) was
signed into law in the u.s.in august 2006. the act
introduces new funding requirements for single-employer defined
benefit pension plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension
plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes,
introduces benefit limitations for certain underfunded plans and
raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement
plans. the new funding requirements become effective for plan
years beginning after december31,2007. although
significant regulatory guidance will be required prior to its
2008 effective date, the company does not anticipate that the
act will have a material near-term impact on its required
contributions.
in august 2006, the company announced major changes to its
principal u.s.pension plan and principal savings and
investment plan. covered employees on the rolls as of
december31,2006 will participate in an enhanced
savings plan effective january1,2008 and will also
accrue additional benefits in the pension plan, but the annual
rate of pension accrual will be one-third of the current rate.
in addition, company-paid postretirement survivor benefits for
these employees will not continue to grow after
december31,2007. covered employees hired in the
u.s.after december31,2006 will participate in
the enhanced savings plan, but not in the pension plan. eligible
employees who contribute to the enhanced savings plan will
receive a 100percent company match on the first
6percent of their savings rate, effectively doubling the
current company match percentage, which is 50percent on
the first 6percent of the employees savings rate. in
addition to the savings match, the enhanced savings plan will
assure a 100percent employee participation in the plan by
means of a company contribution of 3percent of each
employees eligible compensation into their account.
further, the definition of eligible compensation has been
expanded to be consistent with the definition of the eligible
compensation in the pension plan.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
as a result of the amendment to the principal u.s.pension
plan, the company was required to remeasure its pension expense
for the remainder of 2006, reflecting plan assets and benefit
obligations as of the remeasurement date. better than expected
return on plan assets and a higher discount rate of
6percent decreased pretax pension expense for 2006 by
$72million. for 2007, the plan amendment is expected to
result in a reduction in pension expense of about
$40million. additional information related to these
changes in the plans noted above is included in note22 to
the consolidated financial statements.
on december31,2006, the company adopted
sfas158 and recorded a $1,555million after-tax
charge to stockholders equity primarily due to
reclassifying unrecognized losses related to the pension plans.
additional information related to the companys adoption of
sfas158 is included in note2 to the companys
consolidated financial statements.
medical, dental and life insurance plans are unfunded and the
cost of the approved claims is paid from operating cash flows.
pretax cash requirements to cover actual net claims costs and
related administrative expenses were $322million,
$395million and $435million for 2006, 2005 and 2004,
respectively. this amount is expected to be about
$340million in 2007. changes in cash requirements during
this period reflect higher per capita health care costs,
demographic changes and changes in participant premiums, co-pays
and deductibles.
the companys income can be significantly affected by
pension benefits as well as retiree medical, dental and life
insurance benefits. the following table summarizes the extent to
which the companys income over each of the last
3years was affected by pretax charges and credits related
to long-term employee benefits.
(dollars in millions)
pension charges
$
$
$
other postretirement benefit
charges (credits)
(241
)
net charge
$
$
$
these expenses are determined as of the beginning of each year.
the decrease in pension expense in 2006 reflects favorable
returns on pension assets, plan amendments and changes in
discount rates. the decrease in 2006 other postretirement
benefit charges principally reflects the favorable medical
trends in 2005 and refinements in estimates to reflect the
anticipated commencement of the medicare prescription drug
program. the decrease in 2005 pension expense as compared to
2004 is primarily attributable to the absence of
$446million net settlement and curtailment charges
recorded in 2004 in connection with the sale of invista. in
addition, the lower expense in 2005 reflects favorable returns
on pension assets, higher contributions to pension plans and
changes in discount rates. the increase in 2005 other
postretirement benefit expenses principally reflects the absence
of $436million curtailment gains recognized in 2004 in
connection with the sale of invista.
the companys key assumptions used in calculating its
long-term employee benefits are the expected return on plan
assets, the rate of compensation increases and the discount rate
(see note22 to the consolidated financial statements). for
2007, the higher than expected returns on pension assets, the
impact of the u.s.plan amendment and changes in
demographic and discount rates in 2006 are expected to result in
a reduction in pension and other postretirement benefit pretax
expenses of about $200million.
environmental
matters
dupont operates global manufacturing facilities, product
handling and distribution facilities that are subject to a broad
array of environmental laws and regulations. company policy
requires that all operations fully meet or exceed legal and
regulatory requirements. in addition, dupont implements
voluntary programs to reduce air emissions, eliminate the
generation of hazardous waste, decrease the volume of waste
water discharges,
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
increase the efficiency of energy use and reduce the generation
of persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic materials. the costs to
comply with complex environmental laws and regulations, as well
as internal voluntary programs and goals, are significant and
will continue for the foreseeable future. while these costs may
increase in the future, they are not expected to have a material
impact on the companys financial position, liquidity or
results of operations.
pretax environmental expenses charged to current operations
totaled $521million in 2006 compared with
$468million in 2005 and $455million in 2004. these
expenses include the remediation accruals discussed below;
operating, maintenance and depreciation costs for solid waste,
air and water pollution control facilities and the costs of
environmental research activities. while expenses related to the
costs of environmental research activities are not a significant
component of the companys overall environmental expenses,
the company expects these costs to become proportionally greater
as the company increases its participation in businesses for
which environmental assessments are required during product
development. the largest of the environmental expenses in 2006
was $109million for the operation of water pollution
control facilities and $127million for solid waste
management. about 78percent of total annual environmental
expenses resulted from operations in the u.s.
in 2006, dupont spent approximately $135million on
environmental capital projects either required by law or
necessary to meet the companys internal environmental
goals. the company currently estimates expenditures for
environmental-related capital projects will total
$143million in 2007. in the u.s., significant capital
expenditures are expected to be required over the next decade
for treatment, storage and disposal facilities for solid and
hazardous waste and for compliance with the clean air act (caa).
until all caa regulatory requirements are established and known,
considerable uncertainty will remain regarding future estimates
for capital expenditures. total caa capital costs over the next
two years are currently estimated to range from $40million
to $70million.
the goal of the toxic substances control act (tsca) is to
prevent unreasonable risks of injury to health or the
environment associated with the manufacture, processing,
distribution in commerce, use, or disposal of chemical
substances. under tsca, the epa has established reporting,
record-keeping, testing and
control-related
requirements for new and existing chemicals. in 1998, the epa
challenged the u.s.chemical industry to voluntarily
conduct screening level health and environmental effects testing
on nearly 3,000 high production volume (hpv) chemicals or to
make equivalent information publicly available. an hpv chemical
is a chemical listed on the 1990 inventory update rule with
annual u.s.cumulative production and imports of one
million pounds or more. the company is sponsoring more than two
dozen hpv chemicals under the epas challenge program. an
extended hpv program has been initiated by the american
chemistry council in which dupont has agreed to sponsor an
additional eleven new hpv chemicals listed on the 2002 inventory
update rule. since 2000, the entire chemical industry has spent
an estimated $250million on hpv testing. in anticipation
of the hpv challenge program ending, the epa adopted two new
rules under tsca that require manufacturers to submit certain
unpublished health and safety data and production/exposure data
for certain hpv chemicals to the epa.
in december 2006, the european union adopted a new regulatory
framework concerning the registration, evaluation and
authorization of chemicals. this regulatory framework known as
reach will enter into force on june1,2007. one of
its main objectives is the protection of human health and the
environment. reach requires manufacturers and importers to
gather information on the properties of their substances that
meet certain volume or toxicological criteria and register the
information in a central database to be maintained by a chemical
agency in finland. the regulation also calls for the progressive
substitution of the most dangerous chemicals when suitable
alternatives have been identified. management is currently
evaluating the impact of the adoption of reach on its operations
and consolidated financial position.
global climate change is being addressed by the united nations
framework convention on climate change (the convention) adopted
in 1992. the kyoto protocol (the protocol), adopted in december
1997, is an effort
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
to establish short-term actions under the convention. the
protocol entered into force in february 2005 in most countries
in which dupont operates. the u.s.has declined to ratify
the protocol. the european union (eu) has already begun a
program to reduce emissions that includes emissions trading
system linked to the protocol. the u.s.continues to pursue
a less-restrictive climate policy framework, emphasizing
voluntary action. the protocol establishes significant emission
reduction targets for six gases considered to have global
warming potential and is driving mandatory reductions in
developed nations outside the u.s.dupont has a stake in a
number of these
gases-co2,
hfcs and pfcs-and has been voluntarily reducing its emissions of
these gases since 1991. dupont has achieved reductions that are
well ahead of the target and timetable of the protocol. however,
the company faces the possibility of country-specific
restrictions in several countries where major reductions have
not yet been achieved. high energy prices in europe and the
u.s.in recent years are also due, at least in part, to
expectations of future emission reduction mandates in the u.s.
and the impact of european climate change policies. dupont is
participating in emissions trading in the eu through the
regulatory driven emissions trading scheme and in the
u.s.through the voluntary chicago climate exchange
program. emission reduction mandates within the u.s.are
not expected in the near future, although congressional
proposals for such mandates have been introduced and a number of
states are pursuing
state-level
programs.
dupont has discovered that very low levels of dioxins (parts per
trillion to low parts per billion) and related compounds are
inadvertently generated during its titanium dioxide pigment
production process. the company has launched an extensive
research and process engineering development program to identify
the cause of the dioxin generation and to identify process
modifications that will eliminate dioxin formation. the programs
implemented to date have resulted in reductions of almost
50percent. in the first half of 2007, dupont will
implement capital projects to achieve the aggressive goals to
reduce such dioxin generation by 90percent by year end
2007. over 99percent of the dioxin generated at
duponts production plants becomes associated with process
solid wastes that are disposed in controlled landfills where
public exposure is negligible.
remediation
expenditures
the rcra extensively regulates and requires permits for the
treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. rcra
requires that permitted facilities undertake an assessment of
environmental contamination at the facility. if conditions
warrant, companies may be required to remediate contamination
caused by prior operations. in contrast to cercla, the costs of
the rcra corrective action program are typically borne solely by
the company. the company anticipates that significant ongoing
expenditures for rcra remediation activities may be required
over the next two decades. annual expenditures for the near
term, however, are not expected to vary significantly from the
range of such expenditures experienced in the past few years.
longer term, expenditures are subject to considerable
uncertainty and may fluctuate significantly. the companys
expenditures associated with rcra and similar remediation
activities were approximately $44million in 2006,
$49million in 2005, and $43million in 2004.
from time to time, the company receives requests for information
or notices of potential liability from the epa and state
environmental agencies alleging that the company is a prp under
cercla or similar state statutes. cercla is often referred to as
the superfund and requires companies to undertake certain
investigative and research activities at sites where it conducts
or once conducted operations or where company generated waste
has been disposed. the company has also, on occasion, been
engaged in cost recovery litigation initiated by those agencies
or by private parties. these requests, notices and lawsuits
assert potential liability for remediation costs at various
sites that typically are not company owned, but allegedly
contain wastes attributable to the companys past
operations.
as of december31,2006, the company had been notified
of potential liability under cercla or state laws at 390 sites
around the u.s., with active remediation under way at 140 of
these sites. in addition, the company has resolved its liability
at 185 sites, either by completing remedial actions with other
prps or by participating
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
in de minimis buyouts with other prps whose waste,
like the companys, represented only a small fraction of
the total waste present at a site. the company received notice
of potential liability at six new sites during 2006 compared
with eight similar notices in 2005 and four in 2004. the
companys expenditures associated with cercla and similar
state remediation activities were approximately $19million
in 2006, $27million in 2005, and $27million in 2004.
for nearly all superfund sites, the companys potential
liability will be significantly less than the total site
remediation costs because the percentage of waste attributable
to the company versus that attributable to all other prps is
relatively low. other prps at sites, where the company is a
party, typically have the financial strength to meet their
obligations and, where they do not, or where prps cannot be
located, the companys own share of liability has not
materially increased. there are relatively few sites where the
company is a major participant and the cost to the company of
remediation at those sites and at all cercla sites in the
aggregate, is not expected to have a material impact on the
financial position, liquidity or results of operations of the
company.
total expenditures for previously accrued remediation activities
under cercla, rcra and similar state laws were $64million
in 2006, $79million in 2005, and $74million in 2004.
remediation
accruals
at december31,2006, the consolidated balance sheets
included an accrued liability of $349million compared to
$343million at december31,2005. considerable
uncertainty exists with respect to environmental remediation
costs and, under adverse changes in circumstances, potential
liability may range up to two to three times the amount accrued
as of december31,2006. of the $349million
accrued liability, approximately 10percent was reserved
for
non-u.s.facilities.
approximately 65percent of the reserve balance was
attributable to rcra and similar remediation liabilities, while
about 25percent was attributable to cercla liabilities.
remediation accruals of $71million, $64million and
$58million were added to the reserve in 2006, 2005 and
2004, respectively.
pfoa
dupont manufactures fluoropolymer resins and dispersions as well
as fluorotelomers, marketing many of them under the
teflon
and
zonyl
brands. the fluoropolymer resin and dispersion businesses are
part of the electronic& communication technologies
segment; the fluorotelomers business is part of the
safety& protection segment.
fluoropolymer resins and dispersions are high-performance
materials with many end uses including architectural fabrics,
telecommunications and electronic wiring insulation, automotive
fuel systems, computer chip processing equipment,
weather-resistant/breathable apparel and nonstick cookware.
fluorotelomers are used to make soil, stain and grease
repellants for paper, apparel, upholstery and carpets as well as
firefighting foams and coatings.
a form of pfoa (perfluorooctanoic acid and its salts, including
the ammonium salt) is used as a processing agent to manufacture
fluoropolymer resins and dispersions. for over 50years,
dupont purchased pfoa from a third party, but beginning in the
fall of 2002, it began producing pfoa to support the manufacture
of fluoropolymer resins and dispersions. pfoa is not used in the
manufacturing of fluorotelomers; however, it is an unintended
by-product present at trace levels in some fluorotelomer-based
products.
dupont performance elastomers, llc (dpe) uses pfoa in its
manufacture of
kalrez
perfluoroelastomer parts and certain fluoroelastomers marketed
under the
viton
trademark. dpe, a wholly owned subsidiary, is a part of the
performance materials segment.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
pfoa is bio-persistent and has been detected at very low levels
in the blood of the general population. as a result, the epa
initiated a process to enhance its understanding of the sources
of pfoa in the environment and the pathways through which human
exposure to pfoa occurs. in 2003, the epa issued a preliminary
risk assessment on pfoa that focuses on the exposure of the
u.s.general population to pfoa and possible health
effects, including developmental toxicity concerns. on
january12,2005, the epa issued a draft risk
assessment on pfoa. the draft stated that cancer data for pfoa
may be best described as suggestive evidence of
carcinogenicity, but not sufficient to assess human carcinogenic
potential under the epas guidelines for carcinogen
risk assessment. under the guidelines, the descriptor
suggestive is typically applied to agents if animal
testing finds any evidence that exposure causes tumors in one
species of animal.
the epa requested that the science advisory board (sab) review
and comment on the scientific soundness of this assessment. on
may31,2006, the sab released its report setting
forth the view, based on laboratory studies in rats, that the
human carcinogenic potential of pfoa is more consistent with the
epas descriptor of likely to be carcinogenic
as defined in the guidelines for carcinogen risk assessment.
however, in its report the sab indicated that additional data
should be considered before the epa finalizes its risk
assessment of pfoa. under the guidelines the likely
descriptor is typically applied to agents that have tested
positive in more than one species, sex, strain, site or exposure
route with or without evidence of carcinogenicity in humans. the
epa has acknowledged that it will consider additional data and
has indicated that another sab review will be sought after the
epa makes its risk assessment. dupont disputes the cancer
classification recommended in the sab report because it is based
on animal studies and does not adequately reflect human health
data which to date demonstrates no increase in cancer rates
known to be associated with pfoa.
in february 2006, a coalition of environmental and labor groups
submitted a petition to accelerate the consideration of pfoa
under california proposition 65 which requires the state to
publish a list of chemicals known to cause cancer, birth defects
or other reproductive harm. the petition was denied during
fourth quarter 2006.
the epa has stated that there remains considerable scientific
uncertainty regarding potential risks associated with pfoa. the
epa has also stated that it does not believe that there is any
reason for consumers to stop using any products because of
concerns about pfoa. in november 2006, dupont entered into an
order on consent under the safe drinking water act (sdwa) with
u.s.environmental protection agency (epa) establishing a
precautionary interim screening level for pfoa of 0.5 part per
billion (ppb) in drinking water sources in the area around the
washington works site located in parkersburg, west virginia. as
part of the order on consent, dupont will conduct a survey and
perform sampling and analytical testing of certain public and
private water systems in the area. dupont is required under the
agreement to install water treatment systems if pfoa levels at
or above 0.5 ppb are detected.
currently, there are no regulatory actions pending that would
prohibit the production or use of pfoa. however, there can be no
assurance that the epa or any other regulatory entity will not
choose to regulate or prohibit the production or use of pfoa in
the future. products currently manufactured by the company
representing approximately $1billion of 2006 revenues
could be affected by any such regulation or prohibition.
dupont respects the epas position raising questions about
exposure routes and the potential toxicity of pfoa and dupont
and other companies have outlined plans to continue research,
emission reduction and product stewardship activities to help
address the epas questions. in january 2006, dupont
pledged its commitment to the epas 2010/15 pfoa
stewardship program. the epa program asks participants
(1)to commit to achieve, no later than 2010, a
95percent reduction in both facility emissions and product
content levels of pfoa, pfoa precursors and related higher
homologue chemicals and (2)to commit to working toward the
elimination of pfoa, pfoa precursors and related higher
homologue chemicals from emissions and products by no later than
2015.
table of contents
partii
item7.
managements discussion and analysis of financial
condition and results of operations, continued
dupont submitted its baseline reporting data to the epa on
october31,2006. the company has refined its program
commitments based on a careful review of the data, the epa
program guidelines and the state of the technology. key elements
of the dupont commitment to epa include reducing global
emissions from manufacturing facilities by 97percent by
2007 (which incorporates the substantial achievement of
94percent reduction as of december31,2006
already realized through duponts ongoing reduction
program); reducing pfoa content in fluoropolymer dispersions
faster and further than the goals set by the program; and, by
2010, reducing pfoa content and any residual impurities in
fluorotelomer products that could break down to pfoa. dupont
will work individually and with others in the industry to inform
epas regulatory counterparts in the european union,
canada, china and japan about these activities and pfoa in
general, including emissions reductions from duponts
facilities, reformulation of the companys fluoropolymer
dispersions and new manufacturing processes for fluorotelomers
products.
dupont has developed technology that can reduce the pfoa content
in fluoropolymer dispersions by 97percent and is in the
process of launching low pfoa dispersion products. in addition,
the company started up a new process at its pascagoula,
mississippi manufacturing site that will reduce pfoa trace
levels in fluorotelomer products even further and began to
introduce products based on this new technology in late 2006.
recently, the company announced its commitment to eliminate the
need to make, buy or use pfoa by 2015. this plan creates an
opportunity for the company to leverage its research and
development strengths to develop new sustainable technologies
and products.
based on health and toxicological studies, dupont believes the
weight of evidence indicates that pfoa exposure does not pose a
health risk to the general public. to date no human health
effects are known to be caused by pfoa, even in workers who have
significantly higher exposure levels than the general population
although study of the chemical continues. dupont conducted a
two-phase employee health study on pfoa at its washington works
site. results from the first phase of this study for more than
1,000 workers indicate no association between exposure to pfoa
and most of the health parameters that were measured. the only
potentially relevant association is a modest increase in some,
but not all, lipid fractions, e.g. cholesterol, in some of the
highest exposed workers. the second phase was a mortality study
that involves the examination of all causes of death in more
than 6,000 employees who worked at the washington works site
during its more than fifty years of operation. based on the
observation of a modest increase in some lipid fractions in the
studys first phase, the second phase included a more
detailed analysis of heart disease. no overall increase in
deaths related to heart disease was found.
dupont has established reserves in connection with certain pfoa
environmental and litigation matters (see note20 to the
consolidated financial statements).
item7a.
quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market
risk
financial
instruments
derivatives
and other hedging instruments
under procedures and controls established by the companys
financial risk management framework, the company enters into
contractual arrangements (derivatives) in the ordinary course of
business to hedge its exposure to foreign currency, interest
rate and commodity price risks. the counterparties to these
contractual arrangements are major financial institutions,
petrochemical and petroleum companies and exchanges.
table of contents
partii
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk, continued
the company hedges foreign currency denominated monetary assets
and liabilities, certain business-specific foreign currency
exposures and certain energy feedstock purchases. in addition,
the company enters into exchange traded agricultural commodity
derivatives to hedge exposures relevant to agricultural
feedstock purchases.
concentration
of credit risk
financial instruments that potentially subject the company to
significant concentrations of credit risk consist principally of
cash, investments, accounts receivable and derivatives.
as part of the companys risk management processes, it
continuously evaluates the relative credit standing of all of
the financial institutions that service dupont and monitors
actual exposures versus established limits on a daily basis. the
company has not sustained credit losses from instruments held at
financial institutions.
the company maintains cash and cash equivalents, short- and
long-term investments, derivatives and certain other financial
instruments with various financial institutions. these financial
institutions are generally highly rated and geographically
dispersed and the company has a policy to limit the dollar
amount of credit exposure with any one institution.
the companys sales are not materially dependent on a
single customer or small group of customers. as of
december31,2006, no one individual customer balance
represents more than 5percent of the companys total
outstanding receivables balance. credit risk associated with its
receivables balance is representative of the geographic,
industry and customer diversity associated with the
companys global businesses.
the company also maintains strong credit controls in evaluating
and granting customer credit. as a result, it may require that
customers provide some type of financial guarantee in certain
circumstances. length of terms for customer credit varies by
industry and region.
foreign
currency risk
the companys objective in managing exposure to foreign
currency fluctuations is to reduce earnings and cash flow
volatility associated with foreign currency rate changes.
accordingly, the company enters into various contracts that
change in value as foreign exchange rates change to protect the
value of its existing foreign currency-denominated assets,
liabilities, commitments and cash flows.
the company routinely uses forward exchange contracts to offset
its net exposures, by currency, related to the foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities of its
operations. the primary business objective of this hedging
program is to maintain an approximately balanced position in
foreign currencies so that exchange gains and losses resulting
from exchange rate changes, net of related tax effects, are
minimized.
the following table summarizes the impacts of this program on
the companys results of operations for the years ended
december31,2006, 2005 and 2004.
(dollars in millions)
pretax exchange (loss)/gain
$
(4
)
$
$
(411
)
tax (expense)/benefit
(26
)
(483
)
after-tax loss
$
(30
)
$
(38
)
$
(51
)
this table includes the companys pro rata share of its
equity affiliates exchange gains and losses and
corresponding gains and losses on forward exchange contracts.
table of contents
partii
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk, continued
from time to time, the company will enter into forward exchange
contracts to establish with certainty the usd amount of future
firm commitments denominated in a foreign currency. decisions
regarding whether or not to hedge a given commitment are made on
a
case-by-case
basis taking into consideration the amount and duration of the
exposure, market volatility and economic trends. forward
exchange contracts are also used, from time to time, to manage
near-term foreign currency cash requirements and to place
foreign currency deposits and marketable securities investments.
interest
rate risk
the company uses interest rate swaps to manage the interest rate
mix of the total debt portfolio and related overall cost of
borrowing.
interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed for floating
rate interest payments to effectively convert fixed rate debt
into floating rate debt based on three- or six-month usd libor.
interest rate swaps allow the company to maintain a target range
of floating rate debt.
commodity
price risk
the company enters into over-the-counter and exchange-traded
derivative commodity instruments to hedge its exposure to price
fluctuations on certain raw material purchases.
a portion of energy feedstock purchases are hedged to reduce
price volatility using fixed price swaps and options. hedged
feedstock purchases include natural gas and ethane.
the company contracts with independent growers to produce
finished seed inventory. under these contracts, growers are
compensated with bushel equivalents that are marketed to the
company for the market price of grain for a period of time
following harvest. derivative instruments, such as commodity
futures that have a high correlation to the underlying
commodity, are used to hedge the commodity price risk involved
in compensating growers.
the company utilizes agricultural commodity futures to manage
the price volatility of soybean meal. these derivative
instruments have a high correlation to the underlying commodity
exposure and are deemed effective in offsetting soybean meal
feedstock price risk.
additional details on these and other financial instruments are
set forth in note25 to the consolidated financial
statements.
table of contents
partii
item7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about
market risk, continued
sensitivity
analysis
the following table illustrates the fair values of outstanding
derivative contracts at december31,2006 and 2005,
and the effect on fair values of a hypothetical adverse change
in the market prices or rates that existed at
december31,2006 and 2005. the sensitivity for
interest rate swaps is based on a one percent change in the
market interest rate. foreign currency, agricultural and energy
derivative sensitivities are based on a 10percent change
in market rates.
fair value
fair value
asset/(liability)
sensitivity
(dollars in millions)
interest rate swaps
$
(24.3
)
$
(8.0
)
$
(41.5
)
$
(104.5
)
foreign currency contracts
(5.4
)
30.5
(321.8
)
(348.5
)
agricultural feedstocks
27.1
5.8
(0.6
)
(16.8
)
energy
feedstocks1
(1.5
)
(0.6
)
there were no energy feedstock
derivatives outstanding as of december31,2005.
since the companys risk management programs are highly
effective, the potential loss in value for each risk management
portfolio described above would be largely offset by changes in
the value of the underlying exposure.
item8.
financial statements and supplementary data
the financial statements and supplementary data required by this
item are included herein, commencing on
pagef-1
of this report.
item9.
changes
in and disagreements with accountants on accounting and
financial disclosure
none.
item9a.
controls and procedures
the company maintains a system of disclosure controls and
procedures for financial reporting to give reasonable assurance
that information required to be disclosed in the companys
reports submitted under the securities exchange act of 1934 is
recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time
periods specified in the rules and forms of the sec. these
controls and procedures also give reasonable assurance that
information required to be disclosed in such reports is
accumulated and communicated to management to allow timely
decisions regarding required disclosures.
as of december31,2006, the companys chief
executive officer (ceo) and chief financial officer (cfo),
together with management, conducted an evaluation of the
effectiveness of the companys disclosure controls and
procedures pursuant to
rules13a-15(e)
and
15d-15(e) of
the exchange act. based on that evaluation, the ceo and cfo
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are
effective.
there has been no change in the companys internal control
over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter
2006 that has materially affected the companys internal
control over financial reporting. the company has completed its
evaluation of its internal controls and has concluded that the
companys system of internal controls was effective as of
december31,2006 (see
pagef-2).
table of contents
partii
item9a. controls and procedures, continued
the company continues to take appropriate steps to enhance the
reliability of its internal control over financial reporting.
management has identified areas for improvement and discussed
them with the companys audit committee and independent
registered public accounting firm.
item9b.
other information
none.
table of contents
partiii
item10.
directors, executive officers and corporate governance
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy. information related to directors is
included within the section entitled, election of
directors. the company has not made any material changes
to the procedures by which security holders may recommend
nominees to its board of directors since these procedures were
communicated in the companys 2006 proxy statement for the
annual meeting of stockholders held on april26,2006.
information related to the audit committee is incorporated
herein by reference to the proxy and is included within the
sections entitled committees of the board and
committee membership. information regarding
executive officers is contained in the proxy section entitled
section16(a) beneficial ownership reporting
compliance and in parti, item4 of this report.
the company has adopted a code of ethics for its ceo, cfo and
controller that may be accessed from the companys website
at www.dupont.com by clicking on investor center and then
corporate governance. any amendments to, or waiver from, any
provision of the code will be posted on the companys
website at the above address.
item11.
executive compensation
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy and is included in the sections
compensation discussion and analysis, summary
compensation table, grants of plan-based
awards, outstanding equity awards,
option exercises and stock vested, retirement
plan benefits, nonqualified deferred
compensation, employment agreements, and
directors compensation. information related to
the compensation committee is included within the sections
entitled compensation committee interlocks and insider
participation and compensation committee
report.
item12.
security
ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and
related stockholder matters
information with respect to beneficial owners is incorporated
herein by reference to the proxy and is included in the section
entitled ownership of company stock.
securities
authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans as of
december31,2006
(shares and option amounts in thousands)
number of securities
number of securities
weighted-average
remaining available
to be issued upon exercise
exercise price of
for future issuance
of outstanding options,
outstanding options,
under equity
plan category
warrants and
rights1
warrants and rights
compensation
plans2
equity compensation plans approved
by security holders
70,557
$
46.60
43,790
equity compensation plans not
approved by security
holders4
22,200
$
47.28
92,757
$
46.76
excludes restricted stock units or
stock units deferred pursuant to the terms of the companys
stock performance plan, variable compensation plan or stock
accumulation and deferred compensation plan for directors.
excludes securities reflected in
the first column.
reflects shares available under
rolling five-year average pursuant to the terms of the
shareholder-approved stock performance plan (see note23 to
the consolidated financial statements). does not include
indeterminate number of shares available for distribution under
the shareholder-approved variable compensation plan.
includes options totaling 20,896
granted under the companys 1997 and 2002 corporate sharing
programs (see note23 to the consolidated financial
statements) and 100options with an exercise price of
$46.50 granted to a consultant. also includes 1,203options
from the conversion of dupont canada options to dupont options
in connection with the companys acquisition of the
minority interest in dupont canada.
table of contents
partiii
item13.
certain
relationships and related transactions and director
independence
information with respect to the companys policy and
procedures for the review, approval or ratification of
transactions with related persons is incorporated by reference
herein to the proxy and is included in the section entitled
review and approval of transactions with related persons,
policies and procedures. information with respect to
director independence is incorporated by reference herein to the
proxy and is included in the sections entitled dupont
board of directors: corporate governance guidelines,
guidelines for determining the independence of dupont
directors, committees of the board and
committee membership.
item14.
principal accounting fees and services
information with respect to this item is incorporated herein by
reference to the proxy and is included in the sections entitled
ratification of independent registered public accounting
firm and
appendixa-1.
table of contents
partiv
item15.
exhibitsand financial statement schedules
(a)
financial statements, financial statement schedules and exhibits:
1.
financial statements (see the index to the consolidated
financial statements on
pagef-1
of this report).
2.
financial statement schedules
scheduleii
valuation and qualifying accounts
(dollars in millions)
balance at
charged to
balance at
beginning
costs and
end of
description
of period
expenses
deductions
period
for the year ended
december31, 2006
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from
assets
$
$
$
$
for the year ended
december31, 2005
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from
assets
$
$
$
$
for the year ended
december31, 2004
allowance for doubtful receivables
$
$
$
$
total allowances deducted from
assets
$
$
$
$
the following should be read in conjunction with the previously
referenced consolidated financial statements:
financial statement schedules listed under sec rules but not
included in this report are omitted because they are not
applicable or the required information is shown in the
consolidated financial statements or notes thereto incorporated
by reference.
condensed financial information of the parent company is omitted
because restricted net assets of consolidated subsidiaries do
not exceed 25percent of consolidated net assets. footnote
disclosure of restrictions on the ability of subsidiaries and
affiliates to transfer funds is omitted because the restricted
net assets of subsidiaries combined with the companys
equity in the undistributed earnings of affiliated companies
does not exceed 25percent of consolidated net assets at
december31, 2006.
separate financial statements of affiliated companies accounted
for by the equity method are omitted because no such affiliate
individually constitutes a 20percent significant
subsidiary.
3.
exhibits
table of contents
partiv
item 15. exhibitsand financial statement schedules,
continued
the following list of exhibits includes both exhibits submitted
with this
form10-k
as filed with the sec and those incorporated by reference to
other filings:
exhibit
number
description
.1
companys restated
certificate of incorporation (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3.1 of the companys annual report on
form10-k
for the year ended december31, 2002).
.2
companys bylaws, as last
revised january1, 1999 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit3.2 of the companys annual report on
form10-k
for the year ended december31, 2003).
the company agrees to provide the
commission, on request, copies of instruments defining the
rights of holders of long-term debt of the company and its
subsidiaries.
.1*
the dupont stock accumulation and
deferred compensation plan for directors, as last amended
effective january1, 2006 (incorporated by reference to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2006).
.2*
terms and conditions of time
vested restricted stock units to non-employee directors and the
companys stock accumulation and deferred compensation plan
(incorporated by reference to the companys quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2005).
.3*
companys supplemental
retirement income plan, as last amended effective june4,
1996.
.4*
companys pension restoration
plan, as restated effective july17, 2006 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit99.1 of the companys current
report on
form8-k
filed on july20, 2006).
.5*
companys rules for lump sum
payments adopted july17, 2006 (incorporated by reference
to exhibit99.2 of the companys current report on
form8-k
filed on july20, 2006).
.6*
companys stock performance
plan, as last amended effective january28, 1998
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.1 of the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2003).
.7*
terms and conditions of stock
options granted in 2006 under the companys stock
performance plan (incorporated by reference to exhibit10.6
of the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2006).
.8*
terms and conditions of
performance-based restricted stock units granted in 2006 under
the companys stock performance plan (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.7 of the companys quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2006).
.9*
terms and conditions of
time-vested restricted stock units granted in 2006 under the
companys stock performance plan (incorporated by reference
to exhibit10.9 of the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31, 2006).
.10*
companys variable
compensation plan, as last amended effective april30, 1997
(incorporated by reference to pages a1-a3 of the companys
annual meeting proxy statement dated march21, 2002).
.11*
companys salary
deferral& savings restoration plan, as last amended
effective january1, 2007.
.12*
companys retirement savings
restoration plan adopted effective january1, 2007.
.13*
companys retirement income
plan for directors, as last amended august 1995 (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.7 of the companys annual
report on
form10-k
for the year ended december31, 2002).
.14*
letter agreement and employee
agreement, dated as of july30, 2004, as amended, between
the company and r.r. goodmanson (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.8 of the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30, 2004).
.15
companys 1997 corporate
sharing plan, adopted by the board of directors on
january29, 1997.
table of contents
partiv
item 15. exhibitsand
financial statement schedules,
continued
exhibit
number
description
.16
companys bicentennial
corporate sharing plan, adopted by the board of directors on
december12,2001 and effective
january9,2002 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.12 of the companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the quarter ended march31,2002).
.17
purchase agreement by and among
the company as seller and the other sellers identified therein
and ked fiber ltd. and ked fiber llc as buyers, dated as of
november16,2003 (incorporated by reference to
exhibit10.12 of the companys annual report on
form10-k
for the year ended december31,2003). the company
agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule
to the commission upon request.
.18
amendment to the purchase
agreement dated december23,2003, by and among the
company as seller and the other sellers identified therein and
ked fiber ltd. and ked fiber llc as buyers (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.13 of the companys quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31,2004). the company
agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule
to the commission upon request.
.19
amendment to the purchase
agreement dated april7,2004, by and among the
company as seller and the other sellers identified therein and
ked fiber ltd. and ked fiber llc as buyers (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.14 of the companys quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended march31,2004). the company
agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule
to the commission upon request.
.20
amendment to the purchase
agreement dated april22,2004, by and among the
company as seller and the other sellers identified therein and
ked fiber ltd. and ked fiber llc as buyers (incorporated by
reference to exhibit10.15 of the companys quarterly
report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30,2004). the company
agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of any omitted schedule
to the commission upon request.
.21
master confirmation agreement and
the related supplemental confirmation dated as of
october24,2005, between goldman sachs& co
and the company relating to the companys accelerated stock
repurchase program (incorporated by reference to the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30,2006).
.22*
letter agreement dated
june16,2006 between the company and g.m.
pfeiffer. the company agrees to furnish supplementally a copy of
any omitted attachment to the commission upon request
(incorporated by reference to exhibit10.21 of the
companys quarterly report on
form10-q
for the period ended june30,2006.)
computation of the ratio of
earnings to fixed charges.
subsidiaries of the registrant.
consent of independent registered
public accounting firm.
.1
rule13a-14
(a)/15d-14
(a)certification of the companys principal executive
officer.
.2
rule13a-14
(a)/15d-14
(a)certification of the companys principal financial
officer.
.1
section1350 certification of
the companys principal executive officer. the information
contained in this exhibit shall not be deemed filed with the
securities and exchange commission nor incorporated by reference
in any registration statement filed by the registrant under the
securities act of 1933, as amended.
.2
section1350 certification of
the companys principal financial officer. the information
contained in this exhibit shall not be deemed filed with the
securities and exchange commission nor incorporated by reference
in any registration statement filed by the registrant under the
securities act of 1933, as amended.
*
management contract or compensatory
plan or arrangement required to be filed as an exhibit to this
form10-k.
table of contents
signatures
pursuant to the requirements of section13 of the
securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
date february23, 2006
e.i. du pont de nemours and company
by:
/s/j.
l. keefer
j. l. keefer
executive vice president and
chief financial officer
(principal financial and accounting
officer)
pursuant to the requirements of the securities exchange act
of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following
persons on behalf of the registrant in the capacities and on the
dates indicated:
signature
title(s)
date
/s/c.o.
holliday, jr
c.o.
holliday,jr.
chairman of the board and
chief executive officer and director
(principal executive officer)
february23, 2007
/s/a.j.p.
belda
a.j.p.
belda
director
february23, 2007
/s/r.h.
brown
r.h.
brown
director
february23, 2007
/s/c.j.
crawford
c.j.
crawford
director
february23, 2007
/s/j.t.
dillon
j.t.
dillon
director
february23, 2007
/s/e.i.
dupont,ii
e.i.
dupont,ii
director
february23, 2007
/s/l.d.
juliber
l.d.
juliber
director
february23, 2007
/s/m.
naitoh
m.
naitoh
director
february23, 2007
/s/s.
okeefe
s.
okeefe
director
february23, 2007
/s/w.k.
reilly
w.k.
reilly
director
february23, 2007
/s/c.m.
vest
c.m.
vest
director
february23, 2007
table of contents
e. i. du
pont de nemours and company
index to the consolidated financial statements
page(s)
consolidated financial
statements:
managements
reports on responsibility for financial statements and internal
control over financial reporting
f-2
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
f-3
consolidated income
statements for the years ended december31,2006, 2005
and 2004
f-4
consolidated
balance sheets as of december31,2006 and
december31,2005
f-5
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity for the years ended
december31,2006, 2005 and 2004
f-6
consolidated
statements of cash flows for the years ended
december31,2006, 2005 and 2004
f-7
notes to
consolidated financial statements
f-8- f-59
f-1
table of contents
managements
reports on responsibility for financial statements and
internal control over financial reporting
managements
report on responsibility for financial statements
management is responsible for the consolidated financial
statements and the other financial information contained in this
annual report on
form10-k.
the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in the united states of
america (gaap) and are considered by management to present
fairly the companys financial position, results of
operations and cash flows. the financial statements include some
amounts that are based on managements best estimates and
judgments. the financial statements have been audited by the
companys independent registered public accounting firm,
pricewaterhousecoopersllp. the purpose of their audit is
to express an opinion as to whether the consolidated financial
statements included in this annual report on
form10-k
present fairly, in all material respects, the companys
financial position, results of operations and cash flows. their
report is presented on the following page.
managements
report on internal control over financial
reporting
management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
adequate system of internal control over financial reporting as
defined in
rules13a-15(f)
and
15d-15(f)
under the securities exchange act of 1934. the companys
internal control over financial reporting is a process designed
to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. the companys internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
i.
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company;
ii.
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and
that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
only in accordance with authorization of management and
directors of the company;and
iii.
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisitions, use or disposition of
the companys assets that could have a material effect on
the financial statements.
internal control over financial reporting has certain inherent
limitations which may not prevent or detect misstatements. in
addition, changes in conditions and business practices may cause
variation in the effectiveness of internal controls.
management assessed the effectiveness of the companys
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31,2006, based on criteria set forth by the
committee of sponsoring organizations of the treadway commission
(coso) in internal control-integrated
framework.based on its assessment and those
criteria, management concluded that the company maintained
effective internal control over financial reporting as of
december31,2006.
managements assessment of the effectiveness of the
companys internal control over financial reporting as of
december31,2006 has been audited by
pricewaterhousecoopers llp, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report presented on the
following page.
charles o. holliday,jr.
jeffrey l. keefer
chairman of the board
and
executive vice
president
chief executive
officer
and chief financial officer
february23,2007
f-2
table of contents
report of
independent registered public accounting firm
to the stockholders and the board of directors of
e. i. du pont de nemours and company:
we have completed integrated audits of e. i. du pont de nemours
and companys consolidated financial statements and of its
internal control over financial reporting as of
december31,2006 in accordance with the standards of
the public company accounting oversight board (united states).
our opinions, based on our audits, are presented below.
consolidated
financial statements and financial statement
schedule
in our opinion, the consolidated financial statements listed in
the index appearing under item15(a)(1) present fairly, in
all material respects, the financial position of e. i. du pont
de nemours and company and its subsidiaries at
december31,2006 and december31,2005, and
the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of
the three years in the period ended december31,2006
in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the united states of america. in addition, in our opinion, the
financial statement schedule listed in the index appearing under
item15(a) (2)presents fairly, in all material
respects, the information set forth therein when read in
conjunction with the related consolidated financial statements.
these financial statements and financial statement schedule are
the responsibility of the companys management. our
responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements and financial statement schedule based on our audits.
we conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with
the standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the financial statements are free of material misstatement. an
audit of financial statements includes examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used
and significant estimates made by management and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. we believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
as discussed in note1 to the consolidated financial
statements, the company changed its accounting for defined
benefit pension and other postretirement plans during 2006 and
for the consolidation of variable interest entities during 2004.
internal
control over financial reporting
also, in our opinion, managements assessment, included in
managements report on internal control over
financial reporting appearing on
pagef-2,
that the company maintained effective internal control over
financial reporting as of december31,2006 based on
criteria established in internal control
integrated framework issued by the committee of sponsoring
organizations of the treadway commission (coso), is fairly
stated, in all material respects, based on those criteria.
furthermore, in our opinion, the company maintained, in all
material respects, effective internal control over financial
reporting as of december31,2006, based on criteria
established in internal control integrated
framework issued by the coso. the companys management
is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness
of internal control over financial reporting. our responsibility
is to express opinions on managements assessment and on
the effectiveness of the companys internal control over
financial reporting based on our audit. we conducted our audit
of internal control over financial reporting in accordance with
the standards of the public company accounting oversight board
(united states). those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. an audit of internal
control over financial reporting includes obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
evaluating managements assessment, testing and evaluating
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control and
performing such other procedures as we consider necessary in the
circumstances. we believe our audit provides a reasonable basis
for our opinions.
a companys internal control over financial reporting is a
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles. a companys
internal control over financial reporting includes those
policies and procedures that (i)pertain to the maintenance
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii)provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of the company; and (iii)provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the
companys assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
philadelphia, pennsylvania
february23,2007
f-3
table of contents
e. i. du
pont de nemours and company
consolidated financial statements
consolidated
income statements
(dollars in millions, except per share)
for the year ended
december31,
net sales
$
27,421
$
26,639
$
27,340
other income, net
1,561
1,852
total
28,982
28,491
27,995
cost of goods sold and other
operating charges
20,440
19,683
20,827
selling, general and
administrative expenses
3,224
3,223
3,141
amortization of intangible assets
research and development expense
1,302
1,336
1,333
interest expense
separation
activities-textiles& interiors
(62
)
total
25,653
24,928
26,553
income before income taxes and
minority interests
3,329
3,563
1,442
provision for (benefit from)
income taxes
1,470
(329
)
minority interests in earnings
(losses) of consolidated subsidiaries
(15
)
(9
)
net income
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
basic earnings per share of
common stock
$
3.41
$
2.08
$
1.78
diluted earnings per share of
common stock
$
3.38
$
2.07
$
1.77
see pages f-8- f-59 for
notes to consolidated financial statements.
f-4
table of contents
e. i. du
pont de nemours and company
consolidated financial statements
consolidated
balance sheets
(dollars in millions, except per share)
december31,
assets
current assets
cash and cash equivalents
$
1,814
$
1,736
marketable debt securities
accounts and notes receivable, net
5,198
4,801
inventories
4,941
4,743
prepaid expenses
income taxes
total current assets
12,870
12,422
property, plant and
equipment
25,719
24,963
less: accumulated depreciation
15,221
14,654
net property, plant and equipment
10,498
10,309
goodwill
2,108
2,087
other intangible
assets
2,479
2,684
investment in
affiliates
other assets
3,019
4,945
total
$
31,777
$
33,291
liabilities and
stockholders equity
current liabilities
accounts payable
$
2,711
$
2,670
short-term borrowings and capital
lease obligations
1,517
1,397
income taxes
other accrued liabilities
3,534
3,075
total current liabilities
7,940
7,436
long-term borrowings and
capital lease obligations
6,013
6,783
other liabilities
7,692
8,441
deferred income taxes
1,179
total liabilities
21,914
23,839
minority interests
commitments and contingent
liabilities
stockholders
equity
preferred stock, without par
value-cumulative; 23,000,000shares authorized; issued at
december31:
$4.50 series
1,672,594shares (callable at $120)
$3.50 series
700,000shares (callable at $102)
common stock, $.30par value;
1,800,000,000shares authorized;
issued at
december31,2006 1,009,109,136;
2005 1,006,651,566
additional paid-in capital
7,797
7,678
reinvested earnings
9,679
7,990
accumulated other comprehensive
loss
(1,867
)
(518
)
common stock held in treasury, at
cost
(shares:
december31,2006 and 2005 87,041,427)
(6,727
)
(6,727
)
total stockholders equity
9,422
8,962
total
$
31,777
$
33,291
see pages f-8- f-59 for
notes to consolidated financial statements.
f-5
table of contents
e. i. du
pont de nemours and company
consolidated financial statements
consolidated
statements of stockholders equity
(dollars in millions, except per share)
accumulated
additional
other
total
preferred
common
paid-in
reinvested
comprehensive
treasury
stockholders
comprehensive
stock
stock
capital
earnings
loss
stock
equity
income
balance january1,2004
$
$
$
7,522
$
10,185
$
(1,761
)
$
(6,727
)
$
9,781
net income
1,780
1,780
$
1,780
cumulative translation adjustment
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to earnings
minimum pension liability
1,245
1,245
1,245
net unrealized gain on securities
total comprehensive income
$
3,118
common dividends
($1.40pershare)
(1,394
)
(1,394
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
treasury stock
acquisition
(457
)
(457
)
retirement
(3
)
(75
)
(379
)
common stock issued
compensation plans
balance december31,2004
$
$
$
7,784
$
10,182
$
(423
)
$
(6,727
)
$
11,377
net income
2,056
2,056
$
2,056
cumulative effect from initial
application of planned major maintenance change, net of
taxof$27
cumulative translation adjustment
(109
)
(109
)
(109
)
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to earnings
(2
)
(2
)
(2
)
minimum pension liability
net unrealized loss on securities
(11
)
(11
)
(11
)
total comprehensive income
$
1,961
common dividends ($1.46per
share)
(1,429
)
(1,429
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
treasury stock
acquisition
(3,530
)
(3,530
)
retirement
(25
)
(644
)
(2,861
)
3,530
common stock issued
compensation plans
balance december31,2005
$
$
$
7,678
$
7,990
$
(518
)
$
(6,727
)
$
8,962
net income
3,148
3,148
$
3,148
cumulative translation adjustment
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to earnings
minimum pension liability
net unrealized gain on securities
total comprehensive income
$
3,354
common dividends ($1.48per
share)
(1,368
)
(1,368
)
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
treasury stock
acquisition
(180
)
(100
)
(280
)
retirement
(1
)
(18
)
(81
)
common stock issued
compensation plans
adjustment to initially apply
defined benefit plan standard, net of tax of $1,043 and minority
interest of$8
(1,555
)
(1,555
)
balance december31,2006
$
$
$
7,797
$
9,679
$
(1,867
)
$
(6,727
)
$
9,422
see pages f-8-f-59
for notes to consolidated financial statements.
f-6
table of contents
e. i. du
pont de nemours and company
consolidated financial statements
consolidated
statements of cash flows
(dollars in millions)
for the year ended
december31,
operating activities
net income
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
adjustmentstoreconcilenetincometocashprovidedbyoperatingactivities:
depreciation
1,157
1,128
1,124
amortization of intangible assets
deferred tax (benefit)/expense
(615
)
(421
)
other noncash charges and credits,
net
(388
)
separation activities
textiles& interiors
(62
)
contributions to pension plans
(280
)
(1,253
)
(709
)
(increase) decrease in operating
assets:
accounts and notes receivable
(194
)
(74
)
(309
)
inventories and other operating
assets
(61
)
increase (decrease) in operating
liabilities:
accounts payable and other
operating liabilities
(406
)
accrued interest and income taxes
(359
)
(524
)
cash provided by operating
activities
3,736
2,542
3,231
investing activities
purchases of property, plant and
equipment
(1,532
)
(1,340
)
(1,232
)
investments in affiliates
(31
)
(66
)
(66
)
payments for
businesses net of cash acquired
(60
)
(206
)
(119
)
proceeds from sale of assets, net
of cash sold
3,908
net decrease (increase) in
short-term financial instruments
(137
)
forward exchange contract
settlements
(509
)
other investing
activities-net
cash (used for) provided by
investing activities
(1,345
)
(602
)
1,936
financing activities
dividends paid to stockholders
(1,378
)
(1,439
)
(1,404
)
net decrease in short-term (less
than 90days) borrowings
(263
)
(494
)
(3,853
)
long-term and other borrowings:
receipts
2,611
4,311
1,601
payments
(3,139
)
(2,045
)
(1,555
)
acquisition of treasury stock
(280
)
(3,530
)
(457
)
proceeds from exercise of stock
options
other financing
activities net
(22
)
(13
)
(79
)
cash used for financing activities
(2,323
)
(2,851
)
(5,550
)
effect of exchange rate changes on
cash
(722
)
increase (decrease) in cash and
cash equivalents
(1,633
)
cash and cash equivalents at
beginning of year
1,736
3,369
3,348
cash and cash equivalents at
end of year
$
1,814
$
1,736
$
3,369
supplemental cash flow
information:
cash paid during the year
for
interest, net of amounts
capitalized
$
$
$
taxes
see pages f-8- f-59 for
notes to consolidated financial statements.
f-7
table of contents
e. i. du
pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements
(dollars
in millions, except per share)
1.
summary
of significant accounting policies
dupont follows generally accepted accounting principles in the
united states of america (gaap). the significant accounting
policies described below, together with the other notes that
follow, are an integral part of the consolidated financial
statements.
preparation
of financial statements
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with gaap
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues
and expenses during the reporting period. actual results could
differ from those estimates.
accounting
changes
effective january1,2006, the company adopted
statement of financial accounting standards (sfas) no.123
(revised 2004), share based payments
(sfas123r) using the modified prospective application
transition method and began expensing new stock-based
compensation awards using a non-substantive approach whereby
compensation costs are recognized over at least six months for
awards granted to employees who are retirement eligible at the
date of grant or would become retirement eligible during the
vesting period of the grant. in addition, the company began
reporting tax benefits resulting from tax deductions in excess
of the compensation cost recognized for stock-based compensation
awards as financing cash flows. for years prior to adoption of
sfas123r, the company used the nominal vesting approach
for all awards and reported the tax benefit of option exercises
as operating cash flows. adoption of sfas123r did not have
a material impact on the companys financial position or
results of operations (see note23).
effective december31,2006, the company prospectively
adopted sfasno.158, employers accounting
for defined benefit pension and other post retirement plans, an
amendment of sfas87, 88, 106 and 132r
(sfas158). upon adoption, the company recognized in its
statement of financial position the funded status of its defined
benefit postretirement plans and included in accumulated other
comprehensive loss, net of tax, the pretax gains and losses and
prior service costs and credits that, pursuant to
sfasno.87 and 106 prior to amendment by
sfas158, had been included in the assets and liabilities
reported for these plans. adoption of sfas158 will not
affect the companys future costs for its defined benefit
postretirement plans nor the december31 measurement date
for these plan (see note22).
in the fourth quarter 2006, the company early adopted fasb staff
position no.aug air-1
(fspaugair-1),
accounting for planned major maintenance activities,
which limits the accounting methods that may be used for planned
major maintenance activities. prior to the adoption of fsp aug
air-1, the company had principally used the
accrue-in-advance
method to account for planned major maintenance activities. this
method is not permitted by fsp aug air-1. adoption of fsp aug
air-1 was accomplished by retrospective application of the
defer-and-amortize
method effective january1,2005 and resulted in a $30
decrease in other accrued liabilities, a $49 increase in other
assets, a $10 decrease in deferred tax assets, a $17 increase in
deferred income taxes and $52 increase in reinvested earnings at
january1,2005. the effects of this accounting change
on the companys financial position and results of
operations after january1,2005 were not material.
retrospective application prior to january1,2005 was
impracticable due to the 2004 sale of textiles and interiors
assets (see note6).
in 2004, the company adopted fin46, consolidation of
variable interest entities (revised december 2003). the
company has entities identified and consolidated as variable
interest entities where dupont is considered the primary
beneficiary. at december31,2006 and 2005, the assets
and liabilities of these entities are immaterial to the
consolidated financial statements of the company.
f-8
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
basis of
consolidation
the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of
the company, subsidiaries in which a controlling interest is
maintained and variable interest entities (vie) for which dupont
is the primary beneficiary. for those consolidated subsidiaries
in which the companys ownership is less than
100percent, the outside stockholders interests are
shown as minority interests. investments in affiliates over
which the company has significant influence but not a
controlling interest are carried on the equity basis. this
includes majority-owned entities for which the company does not
consolidate because a minority investor holds substantive
participating rights. investments in affiliates over which the
company does not have significant influence are accounted for by
the cost method.
revenue
recognition
the company recognizes revenue when the earnings process is
complete. the majority of the companys revenues are from
the sale of a wide range of products to a diversified base of
customers around the world. revenue for product sales is
recognized upon delivery, when title and risk of loss have been
transferred, collectibility is reasonably assured and pricing is
fixed or determinable. substantially all product sales are sold
fob (free on board) shipping point or, with respect to
non-u.s.customers,
an equivalent basis. accruals are made for sales returns and
other allowances based on the companys experience. the
company accounts for cash sales incentives as a reduction in
sales and noncash sales incentives as a charge to cost of goods
sold or selling expense, depending on the nature of the
incentive. amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling
fees are included in net sales and costs incurred by the company
for the delivery of goods are classified as cost of goods sold
and other operating charges in the consolidated income
statements. taxes on revenue-producing transactions are excluded
from net sales.
the company periodically enters into prepayment contracts with
customers in the agriculture& nutrition segment and
receives advance payments for product to be delivered in future
periods. these advance payments are recorded as deferred revenue
and are included in other accrued liabilities on the
consolidated balance sheet. revenue associated with advance
payments is recognized as shipments are made and title,
ownership and risk of loss pass to the customer.
licensing and royalty income is recognized in accordance with
agreed upon terms, when performance obligations are satisfied,
the amount is fixed or determinable and collectibility is
reasonably assured.
the company adopted a dual approach to quantifying materiality
and elected to refine the accounting related to the following
existing cutoff practices. for certain of the companys
sales transactions, ownership title transfers when goods are
received by the customers. historically, the company recorded
these sales when shipped and monitored the impact of this
difference. additionally, some accruals were historically
recorded on a month-lag basis. the impacts of these sales and
accrual cutoff practices were considered to be immaterial in
every interim and annual period. during the fourth quarter of
2006, the company chose to change its practices to record these
sales when received by customers and to record certain accruals
without a lag. as a result, sales of $107 were not recorded as
of december31,2006 that historically would have
been. if the company had applied this new practice throughout
2006, sales would have been $81 higher than reported.
incremental accruals of $24 were also recorded at
december31,2006, that would not have been recorded
under prior practices. the after-tax impact on the 2006 income
statement of these changes was $39.
affiliate
and subsidiary stock transactions
gains or losses arising from issuances by an affiliate or a
subsidiary of its own stock are recorded as nonoperating items.
f-9
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
cash and
cash equivalents
cash equivalents represent investments with maturities of three
months or less from time of purchase. they are carried at cost
plus accrued interest, which approximates fair value because of
the short-term maturity of these instruments.
investments
in securities
marketable debt securities represent investments in fixed and
floating rate financial instruments with maturities of twelve
months or less from time of purchase. they are classified as
held-to-maturity
and recorded at amortized cost.
other assets include long-term investments in securities, which
comprise marketable equity securities and other securities and
investments for which market values are not readily available.
marketable equity securities are classified as
available-for-sale
and reported at fair value. fair value is based on quoted market
prices as of the end of the reporting period. unrealized gains
and losses are reported, net of their related tax effects, as a
component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in
stockholders equity until sold. at the time of sale, any
gains or losses calculated by the specific identification method
are recognized in other income. losses are also recognized in
income when a decline in market value is deemed to be other than
temporary. other securities and investments for which market
values are not readily available are carried at cost (see
note14).
inventories
the majority of the companys inventories are valued at
cost, as determined by the
last-in,
first-out (lifo) method; in the aggregate, such valuations are
not in excess of market. pioneer inventories are valued at the
lower of cost, as determined by the
first-in,
first-out (fifo) method, or market.
elements of cost in inventories include raw materials, direct
labor and manufacturing overhead. stores and supplies are valued
at cost or market, whichever is lower; cost is generally
determined by the average cost method.
property,
plant and equipment
property, plant and equipment (pp&e) is carried at cost and
is depreciated using the straight-line method. pp&e placed
in service prior to 1995 is depreciated under the
sum-of-the-years
digits method or other substantially similar methods.
substantially all equipment and buildings are depreciated over
useful lives ranging from 15 to 25years. capitalizable
costs associated with computer software for internal use are
amortized on a straight-line basis over 5 to 7years. when
assets are surrendered, retired, sold or otherwise disposed of,
their gross carrying values and related accumulated depreciation
are removed from the accounts and included in determining gain
or loss on such disposals.
maintenance and repairs are charged to operations; replacements
and improvements are capitalized.
goodwill
and other intangible assets
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for
impairment at least annually; however, these tests are performed
more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate
the carrying value may not be recoverable. the companys
fair value methodology is based on quoted market prices, if
available. if quoted market prices are not available, an
estimate of fair market value is made based on prices of similar
assets or other valuation methodologies including present value
techniques. impairment losses are included in income from
operations.
f-10
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
definite-lived intangible assets, such as purchased technology,
patents and customer lists are amortized over their estimated
useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 5 to
20years. the company continually evaluates the
reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets. once these
assets are fully amortized, they are removed from the
consolidated balance sheets.
impairment
of long-lived assets
the company evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets to
be held and used when events or changes in circumstances
indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. the carrying
value of a long-lived asset is considered impaired when the
total projected undiscounted cash flows from such asset are
separately identifiable and are less than its carrying value. in
that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which
the carrying value exceeds the fair market value of the
long-lived asset. the companys fair value methodology is
based on quoted market prices, if available. if quoted market
prices are not available, an estimate of fair market value is
made based on prices of similar assets or other valuation
methodologies including present value techniques. losses on
long-lived assets to be disposed of are determined in a similar
manner, except that fair market values are reduced for disposal
costs.
research
and development
research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
environmental
accruals for environmental matters are recorded in operating
expenses when it is probable that a liability has been incurred
and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated.
accrued liabilities do not include claims against third parties
and are not discounted.
costs related to environmental remediation are charged to
expense. other environmental costs are also charged to expense
unless they increase the value of the property or reduce or
prevent contamination from future operations, in which case,
they are capitalized.
asset
retirement obligations
the company records asset retirement obligations at fair value
at the time the liability is incurred. accretion expense is
recognized as an operating expense using the credit-adjusted
risk-free interest rate in effect when the liability was
recognized. the associated asset retirement obligations are
capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the long-lived
asset and depreciated over the estimated remaining useful life
of the asset, generally for periods ranging from 1 to
20years.
litigation
the company accrues for liabilities related to litigation
matters when the information available indicates that it is
probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of
the liability can be reasonably estimated. legal costs such as
outside counsel fees and expenses are charged to expense in the
period incurred.
insurance/self-insurance
the company self-insures certain risks where permitted by law or
regulation, including workers compensation, vehicle
liability and employee related benefits. liabilities associated
with these risks are estimated in part by considering historical
claims experience, demographic factors and other actuarial
assumptions. for other risks, the company uses a combination of
insurance and self-insurance, reflecting comprehensive reviews
of relevant risks.
f-11
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
income
taxes
the provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and
liability approach of accounting for income taxes. under this
approach, deferred taxes represent the future tax consequences
expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities are recovered or paid. the provision for income
taxes represents income taxes paid or payable for the current
year plus the change in deferred taxes during the year. deferred
taxes result from differences between the financial and tax
bases of the companys assets and liabilities and are
adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when changes are
enacted. valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred
tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit
will not be realized. provision has been made for income taxes
on unremitted earnings of subsidiaries and affiliates, except
for subsidiaries in which earnings are deemed to be permanently
invested. investment tax credits or grants are accounted for in
the period earned (the flow-through method). interest accrued
related to unrecognized tax benefits is included in interest
income, net of miscellaneous interest expense, under other
income, net. income tax related penalties are included in the
provision for income taxes.
foreign
currency translation
the u.s.dollar (usd) is the functional currency of most of
the companys worldwide operations. for subsidiaries where
the usd is the functional currency, all foreign currency asset
and liability amounts are remeasured into usd at
end-of-period
exchange rates, except for inventories, prepaid expenses,
property, plant and equipment, goodwill and other intangible
assets, which are remeasured at historical rates. foreign
currency income and expenses are remeasured at average exchange
rates in effect during the year, except for expenses related to
balance sheet amounts remeasured at historical exchange rates.
exchange gains and losses arising from remeasurement of foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are
included in income in the period in which they occur.
for subsidiaries where the local currency is the functional
currency, assets and liabilities denominated in local currencies
are translated into usd, at
end-of-period
exchange rates and the resultant translation adjustments are
reported, net of their related tax effects, as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in
stockholders equity. assets and liabilities denominated in
other than the local currency are remeasured into the local
currency prior to translation into usd and the resultant
exchange gains or losses are included in income in the period in
which they occur. income and expenses are translated into usd at
average exchange rates in effect during the period.
variable
interest entities (vies)
the company consolidates vies where dupont is considered the
primary beneficiary. at december31,2006, the assets,
liabilities and operations of these entities are not material to
the consolidated financial statements of the company.
the company is also involved with other entities that are vies
for which the company is not currently the primary beneficiary.
future events may require these vies to be consolidated if the
company becomes the primary beneficiary. at
december31,2006, the assets and liabilities of the
other vies are immaterial to the consolidated financial
statements of the company. the companys share of the net
income (loss) of these vies is included in other income in the
consolidated income statements and is not material.
hedging
and trading activities
derivative instruments are reported on the consolidated balance
sheets at their fair values. for derivative instruments
designated as fair value hedges, changes in the fair values of
the derivative instruments will generally be offset on the
income statement by changes in the fair value of the hedged
items. for derivative instruments designated as cash flow
hedges, the effective portion of any hedge is reported in
accumulated
f-12
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
other comprehensive income (loss) until it is cleared to
earnings during the same period in which the hedged item affects
earnings. the ineffective portion of all hedges is recognized in
current period earnings. changes in the fair values of
derivative instruments that are not designated as hedges are
recorded in current period earnings.
in the event that a derivative designated as a hedge of a firm
commitment or an anticipated transaction is terminated prior to
the maturation of the hedged transaction, gains or losses
realized at termination are deferred and included in the
measurement of the hedged transaction. if a hedged transaction
matures, or is sold, extinguished, or terminated prior to the
maturity of a derivative designated as a hedge of such
transaction, gains or losses associated with the derivative
through the date the transaction matured are included in the
measurement of the hedged transaction and the derivative is
reclassified as for trading purposes. derivatives designated as
a hedge of an anticipated transaction are reclassified as for
trading purposes if the anticipated transaction is no longer
likely to occur.
cash flows from derivative instruments accounted for as either
fair value hedges or cash flow hedges are reported in the same
category as the cash flows from the items being hedged. cash
flows from all other derivative instruments are generally
reported as investing activities in the consolidated statements
of cash flows. see note25 for additional discussion
regarding the companys objectives and strategies for
derivative instruments.
reclassifications
certain reclassifications of prior years data have been
made to conform to 2006 classifications.
accounting
standards issued not yet adopted
in june 2006, the financial accounting standards board (fasb)
issued fasb interpretation (fin) no.48 accounting
for uncertainty in income taxes an interpretation of fasb
statement no.109 accounting for income taxes
(fin48). fin48 clarifies the accounting for
uncertainty in income taxes recognized in financial statements
and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute
for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax
position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return.
fin48 will be adopted by the company on
january1,2007. while the company is still evaluating
the impact of adoption of fin48 on its consolidated
financial statements, it believes that adoption of fin48
will decrease the liabilities accrued for uncertainty in income
taxes at december31,2006 by $100 to $125 with a
corresponding increase in reinvested earnings at
january1,2007.
in september 2006, the fasb issued statement of financial
accounting standards no.157,
(sfas157)fair value measurements, which
addresses how companies should measure fair value when required
for recognition or disclosure purposes under generally accepted
accounting principles in the u.s.(gaap). the
standards provisions will be applied to existing
accounting measurements and related disclosures that are based
on fair value. sfas157 does not require any new fair value
measurements. the standard applies a common definition of fair
value to be used throughout gaap, with emphasis on fair value as
a market-based measurement versus an entity-specific
measurement and establishes a hierarchy of fair value
measurement methods. the disclosure requirements are expanded to
include the extent to which companies use fair value
measurements, the methods and assumptions used to measure fair
value and the effect of fair value measurements on earnings.
sfas157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after
november15,2007. the new standards provisions
applicable to the company will be applied prospectively and the
company is currently evaluating the impact of adoption on its
consolidated financial statements.
f-13
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
2.
effect of
adoption of sfas158
on adoption of sfas158, the company included in the ending
balance of stockholders equity accumulated other
comprehensive loss, net of tax, the gains and losses and prior
service costs and credits that pursuant to sfasno.87
and 106 have not been recognized as components of net periodic
benefit cost. the company also recognized in its statement of
financial position an asset or a liability that reflects the
funded status of its defined benefit postretirement plans.
sfas158 does not affect the companys defined benefit
postretirement cost or measurement date of december31. see
note22 for additional discussion of the companys
employee benefits.
the table below shows the incremental effect of applying
sfas158 on individual line items in the
december31,2006 consolidated balance sheet and
related footnotes.
consolidated
before
increase/(decrease)
balance sheet at
application of
required by
december31,
sfas158
sfas 158
other assets
employee benefits
pension
$
3,278
$
(2,238
)
$
1,040
intangible pension asset
(19
)
deferred income taxes
1,332
1,430
total other assets
5,178
(2,159
)
3,019
total assets
33,936
(2,159
)
31,777
other liabilities
employee benefits
accrued pension benefit costs
1,526
1,844
accrued other postretirement
benefit costs
4,081
(164
)
3,917
total other liabilities
7,538
7,692
deferred income taxes
1,019
(750
)
total liabilities
22,510
(596
)
21,914
minority interests
(8
)
accumulated other comprehensive
loss
(312
)
(1,555
)
(1,867
)
total stockholders equity
10,977
(1,555
)
9,422
total liabilities and stockholders
equity
$
33,936
$
(2,159
)
$
31,777
f-14
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
3.
other
income, net
cozaar/hyzaar
licensing income
$
$
$
royalty income
interest income, net of
miscellaneous interest expense
equity in earnings (losses) of
affiliates (note13)
(39
)
net gains on sales of assets
net exchange gains (losses)
(391
)
miscellaneous income and
expenses-net
$
1,561
$
1,852
$
the company routinely uses forward exchange contracts to offset
its net exposures, by currency, related to the foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities of its
operations. the objective of this program is to maintain an
approximately balanced position in foreign currencies in order
to minimize, on an after-tax basis, the effects of exchange rate
changes. the net pretax exchange gains and losses are largely
offset by the associated tax impact.
miscellaneous income and expenses-net, principally includes
sales of technology and intangible assets, insurance recoveries,
litigation settlements and other miscellaneous items. in 2006,
the company recognized $76 of insurance recoveries from its
insurance carriers of which $15 related to hurricane katrina and
$61 related to costs and settlements paid by the company over
the past twenty years with regard to asbestos litigation. all
asbestos proceeds are reflected in cash provided by operating
activities within the companys statements of cash flows.
4.
interest
expense
interest incurred
$
$
$
interest capitalized
(37
)
(23
)
(17
)
$
$
$
5.
restructuring
activities
activities
during 2006, the company initiated restructuring actions within
its agriculture& nutrition and coatings&
color technologies segments to improve the companys global
competitiveness. as a result, a net charge of $326 was recorded
in cost of goods sold and other operating charges for employee
separation and asset writedowns. further details are discussed
below. at december31,2006, total liabilities
relating to current and prior years restructuring activities
were $177.
agriculture&
nutrition
during the fourth quarter 2006, the agriculture&
nutrition platform launched plans to
re-deploy
capital and resources within various segments of the business.
the plans include the closing or streamlining of manufacturing
units at about twelve sites and the reduction of approximately
1,500positions globally, with most of the changes expected
to be completed in 2007. restructuring charges resulting from
the plans totaled
f-15
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
$194, including $64 for severance payments and $130 principally
for asset impairments, primarily related to definite-lived
intangible assets whose remaining useful lives were reduced,
abandoned technology and other non-personnel charges.
essentially all employee terminations and cash payments related
to this plan will begin during the first quarter 2007.
coatings&
color technologies
a business transformation plan was instituted during the first
quarter 2006 within the coatings& color technologies
segment to better serve the companys customers and improve
profitability. the plan includes the elimination of
1,700positions. restructuring charges resulting from the
plan totaled $135, including $123 related to severance payments
primarily in europe and the u.s. for approximately
1,300employees involved in manufacturing, marketing,
administrative and technical activities. in connection with this
program, a $12charge was also recorded related to exit
costs of non-strategic assets. as of
december31,2006, about 800employees were
separated from the company and approximately 360 were
redeployed. cash payments net of exchange impact on the reserve,
related to these separations were about $28 as of
december31,2006. essentially all employees are
expected to be off the rolls by fourth quarter 2007. during
2006, there was a change to the initial estimate related to
reserves established for restructuring initiatives recorded in
the first quarter 2006. the change in estimate resulted in a $3
credit to income in the fourth quarter of 2006.
both the agriculture& nutrition and
coatings& color technologies programs encompass
redeployment of employees in excess positions to the extent
possible.
account balances and activity for the 2006 restructuring
programs are summarized below:
employee
write-down
separation
of assets
costs
total
net charges to income in 2006
$
$
$
charges to accounts
cash payments and other
(32
)
(32
)
asset write-offs
(142
)
(142
)
balance at
december31,2006
$
$
$
activities
during 2005, the company did not institute any significant
restructuring programs. in 2005, payments of $133 were made to
separated employees associated with the 2004 program.
benefits of $13 were recorded in cost of goods sold and other
operating charges in 2005 for changes in estimates related to
restructuring initiatives undertaken in prior years. this
benefit consisted of $9 to reflect lower estimated benefit
settlements to separate employees related to the 2004
restructuring programs and $4 primarily for lower estimated
employee separation settlements for prior year programs.
activities
during 2004, the company recorded a net charge of $411 in cost
of goods sold and other operating charges for employee
separation costs and asset impairment charges. this charge
included net expenses of $302 related to cost reduction
initiatives taken to align resources and to adjust the
companys infrastructure following the sale of invista (see
note6), asset impairment charges which totaled $121 and
credits of $12 related to changes in estimates associated with
restructuring activities for 2002 and prior year programs. the
f-16
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
$302net charge consisted of accruals for termination
payments primarily in north america and western europe for
approximately 2,700employees involved in manufacturing,
marketing and sales, administrative and technical activities,
which reduced 2004 segment earnings as follows:
agriculture& nutrition$35;
coatings& color technologies$60;
electronic& communication
technologies$41; performance
materials$44; safety&
protection$28; and other$94.
at december31,2005, essentially all of the
2,700employees identified as part of the companys
2004 program have been removed from the companys rolls.
the 2004 charges also include $27 in electronic&
communication technologies related to the write-down to
estimated fair value of an investment, due to an other than
temporary decline in its value. in addition, the company
recorded a $23charge in performance materials associated
with the shutdown of certain u.s.manufacturing assets in
connection with the companys exit from the dimethyl
terephthalate (dmt) business. this charge covers the net book
value of the dmt assets.
the company also recorded a $42 charge in 2004 to reduce the
carrying value of certain european manufacturing assets in
safety& protection to estimated fair value. as a
result of ongoing competitive pressures and a shift in the
companys global sourcing of product during the second
quarter 2004, the company determined that expected cash flows
were not sufficient to recover the carrying value of these
assets. fair value of the assets was based on the assets
expected discounted cash flows. in addition, the company
recorded a charge of $29 in other to write off the net book
value of certain patents and purchased technology. due to
changes in the associated manufacturing process and executed
supply agreements in 2004, these abandoned assets were
determined to be of no future value to the company.
account balances and activity for the 2004 restructuring program
are summarized below:
employee
write-down
separation
of assets
costs
total
net charges to income in 2004
$
$
$
charges to accounts
employee separation settlements
(129
)
(129
)
facility shutdowns and asset
write-offs
(121
)
(121
)
balance at
december31,2004
$
$
$
credits to income in 2005
(9
)
(9
)
employee separation settlements
(133
)
(133
)
balance at
december31,2005
$
$
$
credits to income in 2006
(4
)
(4
)
employee separation settlements
(14
)
(14
)
balance at
december31,2006
$
$
$
other
activities
during 2002, the company implemented activities involving
employee separation and write-downs of assets. in 2006, payments
of $4 were made to separated employees associated with this
program. a benefit of $1 was recorded in 2006 for a change in
the estimate related to the 2002 restructuring initiative. the
remaining liability balance for the 2002 program at
december31,2006 was $12 and represents payments to
be made over time to separated employees.
f-17
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
6.separation
activities textiles& interiors
on april30,2004, the company sold a majority of the
net assets of textiles& interiors, referred to as
invista, to koch, inc. (koch). during 2005, the company sold its
investments in three affiliated companies to koch and its
investment in a fourth affiliated company to its equity partner.
in january 2006, the company completed the sale of its interest
in the last equity affiliate to its equity partner for proceeds
of $14 thereby completing the sale of all of the net assets of
textiles& interiors.
in 2005, the company recorded a net benefit of $62 resulting
from divesture activities. the companys transfer of its
interest in the affiliates to koch resulted in a gain of $35.
the sale of two of these affiliates had been delayed until the
company received approval from its equity partners. the company
also recorded a gain of $29 in 2005 related to the sale of the
companys investment in another equity affiliate and $2 of
other charges associated with the separation. net cash proceeds
from these transactions totaled $135.
in 2004, the company recorded a charge of $667. the amount
related to invista was $626 and included the following: a
reduction of the original sale price of $240, a charge of $77
related to the delayed transfer of certain equity affiliates,
$118 related to changes in the book value of net assets, $37
related to final settlement of working capital balances and
other separation charges of $154 which consisted primarily of
incremental legal, accounting and other advisory fees, other
employee separation costs and the early termination of a
long-term
supply contract. the following summarizes 2004 cash proceeds
related to the sale of invista:
sale of invista
(april30,2004)
$
3,844
cash retained by invista
businesses sold
(75
)
settlement of invista working
capital and pensions
sale of investment in equity
affiliate (november30,2004)
total
$
3,840
in addition, the company recorded a charge of $41 in 2004
related to the sale of an equity affiliate to its partner. total
proceeds from this sale were $108, which included $68 received
in 2004 and $40 received in 2005.
f-18
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
the net assets sold to koch consisted of the following:
april30, 2004
cash and cash equivalents
$
accounts and notes receivable
1,094
inventories
property, plant and equipment (net)
3,132
other intangible assets (net)
investment in affiliates
prepaid expenses and other assets
assets
$
5,508
accounts payable
$
borrowings and capital lease
obligations
deferred tax liability
other liabilities
minority interests
liabilities
$
1,597
during 2005, additional equity affiliates with a book value of
$84 were transferred to koch.
the company indemnified koch against certain liabilities
primarily related to taxes, legal matters, environmental matters
and representations and warranties. the fair value of these
indemnities is $70 and is included in the indemnification
liability balance (see note20). under the definitive
agreement, the companys total indemnification obligation
for the majority of the representations and warranties cannot
exceed approximately $1,400. the remaining indemnities are not
limited to this maximum payment amount.
f-19
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
7.provision
for (benefit from) income taxes
current tax expense (benefit):
u.s.federal
$
$
$
(300
)
u.s.state and local
(1
)
international
1,361
deferred tax expense (benefit):
u.s.federal
(297
)
u.s.state and local
(18
)
(13
)
international
(300
)
(82
)
(488
)
(615
)
(421
)
provision for (benefit from)
income taxes
$
$
1,470
$
(329
)
stockholders equity:
stock
compensation1
(2
)
(40
)
(27
)
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to
earnings2
(1
)
net unrealized (losses) gains on
securities2
(6
)
minimum pension
liability2
(20
)
pension benefits
net
losses3
(1,048
)
prior service
cost3
(51
)
other benefits
net
losses3
(391
)
net prior service
benefit3
$
(589
)
$
1,403
$
represents deferred tax benefits
for certain stock compensation amounts that are deductible for
income tax purposes but do not affect net income.
represents deferred tax charges
(benefits) recorded as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive loss in stockholders equity. see
note21.
on december31,2006, the
company adopted prospectively sfas158 and as required, the
company included in the ending balance of accumulated other
comprehensive loss, taxes associated with the gains and losses
and prior service costs and credits, that pursuant to
sfasno.87 and 106 prior to amendment by
sfas158 had not been recognized as components of net
periodic benefit cost.
f-20
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
deferred income taxes result from temporary differences between
the financial and tax basis of the companys assets and
liabilities. the tax effects of temporary differences and tax
loss/tax credit carryforwards/backs included in the deferred
income tax provision are as follows:
depreciation
$
(12
)
$
(3
)
$
(203
)
accrued employee benefits
(125
)
other accrued expenses
(329
)
inventories
(52
)
(46
)
(33
)
unrealized exchange (loss) gain
(62
)
(72
)
investment in subsidiaries and
affiliates
(7
)
amortization of intangibles
(14
)
(45
)
(111
)
other temporary differences
(108
)
tax loss/tax credit
carryforwards/backs
(230
)
(1,129
)
valuation allowance, net
(185
)
(108
)
$
(615
)
$
$
(421
)
the significant components of deferred tax assets and
liabilities at december31,2006 and 2005, are as
follows:
asset
liability
asset
liability
depreciation
$
$
1,380
$
$
1,337
accrued employee
benefits1
2,190
2,281
1,203
other accrued expenses
2,639
2,194
inventories
unrealized exchange gains
tax loss/tax credit
carryforwards/backs
2,506
2,420
investment in subsidiaries and
affiliates
amortization of intangibles
other
$
8,001
$
4,964
$
5,887
$
3,804
valuation
allowance1
(1,259
)
(1,363
)
$
6,742
$
4,524
includes an increase in deferred
tax assets of $98 and a decrease in deferred tax liabilities of
$750 at december31,2006 due to the initial
application sfas158. no incremental valuation allowance at
december31, 2006 resulted from the initial application of
sfas158.
current deferred tax assets of $656 and $820 at
december31,2006 and 2005, respectively, are included
in the caption income taxes within current assets of the
consolidated balance sheets. in addition, deferred tax assets of
$1,430 and $1,137 are included in other assets at
december31,2006, and 2005, respectively. see
note14. deferred tax liabilities of $39 and $58 at
december31,2006, and 2005, respectively, are
included in the caption income taxes within current liabilities
of the consolidated balance sheets.
f-21
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
an analysis of the companys effective income tax rate
(eitr) follows:
statutory u.s.federal income
tax rate
35.0
%
35.0
%
35.0
%
exchange
gains/losses1
0.6
9.4
(14.9
)
domestic operations
0.1
(1.4
)
1.2
lower effective tax rates on
international
operations-net
(12.4
)
(6.8
)
(19.6
)
tax settlements
(10.4
)
(1.4
)
(9.5
)
lower effective tax rate on export
sales
(0.8
)
(1.0
)
(3.3
)
the american jobs creation act of
(ajca)2
(0.6
)
8.2
valuation allowance release
(5.6
)
(0.7
)
(1.2
)
separation charges
textiles& interiors
(6.2
)
tax basis investment losses on
foreign
subsidiaries3
(9.5
)
elastomers antitrust litigation
5.2
5.9
%
41.3
%
(22.8
)%
principally reflects the benefit of
non-taxable exchange gains resulting from remeasurement of
foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities.
further information about the companys foreign currency
hedging program is included in note25 under the heading
currency risk.
reflects the tax impact associated
with the repatriation of $9.1billion under ajca.
reflects recording deferred tax
assets in two european subsidiaries for tax basis investment
losses to be recognized on local tax returns.
income (loss) before income taxes and minority interests shown
below is based on the location of the corporate unit to which
such earnings are attributable. however, since such earnings are
often subject to taxation in more than one country, coupled with
the impact of exchange gains/losses, the income tax provision
shown above as united states or international does not
correspond to the earnings shown in the following table:
united states (including exports)
$
1,974
$
2,795
$
(714
)
international
1,355
2,156
$
3,329
$
3,563
$
1,442
under the tax laws of various jurisdictions in which the company
operates, deductions or credits that cannot be fully utilized
for tax purposes during the current year may be carried forward
or back, subject to statutory limitations, to reduce taxable
income or taxes payable in future or prior years. at
december31,2006, the tax effect of such
carryforwards/backs, net of valuation allowance approximated
$1,264. of this amount, $1,049 has no expiration date, $36
expires after 2006 but before the end of 2011 and $179 expires
after 2011.
at december31,2006, unremitted earnings of
subsidiaries outside the united states totaling $7,866 were
deemed to be permanently reinvested. no deferred tax liability
has been recognized with regard to the remittance of such
earnings. it is not practical to estimate the income tax
liability that might be incurred if such earnings were remitted
to the united states.
f-22
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
8.
earnings
per share of common stock
set forth below is a reconciliation of the numerator and
denominator for basic and diluted earnings per share
calculations for the periods indicated:
numerator:
income before cumulative effect of
a change in accounting principle
$
3,148
$
2,056
$
1,780
preferred dividends
(10
)
(10
)
(10
)
net income available to common
stockholders
$
3,138
$
2,046
$
1,770
denominator:
weighted-average number of common
shares outstanding basic
921,474,024
982,192,597
997,624,239
dilutive effect of the
companys employee compensation plans and accelerated share
repurchase agreement
7,126,717
6,761,466
5,768,003
weighted average number of common
shares outstanding diluted
928,600,741
988,954,063
1,003,392,242
the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding in 2006
and 2005 declined as a result of the companys repurchase
and retirement of its common stock in connection with an
accelerated share repurchase agreement. see note21 for
further information.
the following average number of stock options are antidilutive
and therefore, are not included in the diluted earnings per
share calculation:
average number of stock options
63,294,340
52,957,608
54,526,028
9.
accounts
and notesreceivable
december 31,
accounts receivable-trade-net of
allowances of $233 in 2006 and $205 in 2005
$
4,335
$
3,907
other
$
5,198
$
4,801
accounts and notes receivable are carried at amounts that
approximate fair value and include amounts due from equity
affiliates of $58 for 2006, and $55 for 2005.
f-23
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
10.
inventories
december 31,
finished products
$
3,075
$
2,831
semifinished products
1,616
1,534
raw materials and supplies
5,495
5,228
adjustment of inventories to a
lifo basis
(554
)
(485
)
$
4,941
$
4,743
inventory values, before lifo adjustment, are generally
determined by the average cost method, which approximates
current cost. excluding pioneer, stores and supplies,
inventories valued under the lifo method comprised
80percent of consolidated inventories before lifo
adjustment for the periods ended december31,2006 and
2005. pioneer inventories of $1,115 and $1,088 at
december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, were valued under
the fifo method. stores and supplies inventories of $281 and
$245 at december31,2006 and 2005, respectively, were
valued under the average cost method.
11.
property,
plant and equipment
december 31,
buildings
$
4,081
$
3,982
equipment
20,058
19,457
land
construction
1,163
1,082
$
25,719
$
24,963
property, plant and equipment includes gross assets acquired
under capital leases of $61 and $89 at
december31,2006 and 2005, respectively. related
amounts included in accumulated depreciation were $33 and $45 at
december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
f-24
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
12.
goodwill
and other intangible assets
goodwill
the following table summarizes changes in the carrying amount of
goodwill for the year ended december31,2006, by
reportable segment:
goodwill
balance as of
adjustments
balance as of
december31,
and
december31,
segment
acquisitions
agriculture& nutrition
$
$
(1
)
$
coatings& color
technologies
electronic& communication
technologies
(2
)
performance materials
safety& protection
(26
)
other
total
$
2,108
$
(21
)
$
2,087
changes in goodwill in 2006 resulted from purchase accounting
refinements and other acquisitions and divestitures. in 2006,
the company performed its annual impairment tests for goodwill
and determined that goodwill impairments did not exist.
other
intangible assets
the following table summarizes the gross carrying amounts and
accumulated amortization of other intangible assets by major
class:
december31,2006
december31,2005
accumulated
accumulated
gross
amortization
net
gross
amortization
net
intangible assets subject to
amortization (definite-lived)
purchased technology
$
2,099
$
(1,253
)
$
$
2,179
$
(1,217
)
$
patents
(46
)
(45
)
trademarks
(14
)
(18
)
other1
(192
)
(176
)
2,829
(1,505
)
1,324
2,982
(1,456
)
1,526
intangible assets not subject to
amortization (indefinite-lived)
trademarks/tradenames
pioneer
germplasm2
1,155
1,155
1,158
1,158
$
3,984
$
(1,505
)
$
2,479
$
4,140
$
(1,456
)
$
2,684
primarily consists of sales and
grower networks, customer lists, marketing and manufacturing
alliances and noncompetition agreements.
pioneer germplasm is the pool of
genetic source material and body of knowledge gained from the
development and delivery stage of plant breeding. the company
recognized germplasm as an intangible asset upon the acquisition
of pioneer. this intangible asset is expected to contribute to
cash flows beyond the foreseeable future and there are no legal,
regulatory, contractual, or other factors which limit its useful
life. prior to the adoption of sfasno.142, the
company amortized germplasm on a straight-line basis over a
period of forty years, the maximum period previously allowed
under generally accepted accounting principles.
the aggregate pretax amortization expense for definite-lived
intangible assets was $227 for 2006, $230 for 2005, and $223 for
2004. the estimated aggregate pretax amortization expense for
2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011 is $230, $210, $180, $150 and
$140, respectively.
f-25
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
13.summarized
financial information for affiliated companies
summarized combined financial information for affiliated
companies for which the equity method of accounting is used (see
note1)is shown on a 100percent basis. the most
significant of these affiliates at december31,2006,
are dupont teijin films, dupont-toray company ltd. and
dupont-mitsui, all of which are owned 50percent by the
company. dividends received from equity affiliates were $61 in
2006, $107 in 2005 and $60 in 2004.
year ended december 31,
results of operations
net
sales1
$
3,491
$
3,789
$
6,152
earnings (losses) before income
taxes
net income
(loss)2
duponts equity in earnings
(losses) of affiliates:
partnerships-pretax3
(88
)4
corporate joint ventures-after tax
$
$
$
(39
)
includes sales to dupont of $624 in
2006, $631 in 2005, and $764 in 2004.
includes losses of $25 in 2005 and
$52 in 2004 in dupont photomasks, inc., an equity affiliate in
which dupont had approximately a 20percent ownership
interest. dupont sold its interest in dupont photomasks, inc. in
april 2005.
income taxes are reflected in the
companys provision for income tax.
includes a charge of $150 for
antitrust litigation matters associated with dupont dow
elastomers, llc, (dde), recorded during the first quarter of
2004, when dde was accounted for as an equity affiliate. (see
note20)
financial position at
december31,
current assets
$
1,376
$
1,292
noncurrent assets
1,752
1,780
total assets
3,128
3,072
short-term
borrowings1
other current liabilities
long-term
borrowings1
other long-term liabilities
total liabilities
1,676
1,597
duponts investment in
affiliates (includes advances)
$
$
the companys pro rata
interest in total borrowings was $651 in 2006 and $425 in 2005,
of which $300 in 2006 and $354 in 2005 were guaranteed by the
company. these amounts are included in the guarantees disclosed
in note20.
f-26
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
14.other
assets
december31,
employee benefits
pension (note22)
$
1,040
$
3,280
intangible pension asset
(note22)
long-term investments in securities
deferred income taxes (note7)
1,430
1,137
miscellaneous
$
3,019
$
4,945
included within long-term investments in securities are
securities for which market values are not readily available.
also included in long-term investments in securities are
securities classified as available for sale as follows:
december31,
cost
$
$
gross unrealized gains
gross unrealized losses
(1
)
(9
)
fair value
$
$
proceeds from sales of equity securities in 2006 and 2005 were
not material. the cost of the securities sold was determined
based on the original purchase price.
the table below discloses the fair value and unrealized losses
on investments included in other assets. the book value of
investments held less than 12months with a temporary
impairment is included in miscellaneous. the book value of
investments held 12months or greater with a temporary
impairment is included in long-term investments in securities.
less than 12months
12 months or greater
total
fair
unrealized
fair
unrealized
fair
unrealized
description of
securities
value
losses
value
losses
value
losses
marketable equity securities
$
$
$
$
(1
)
$
$
(1
)
marketable
equity securities
the companys investment in marketable equity securities
consists primarily of investments in common stocks of companies
in the electronic and communications industry.
the investments in common stock of three companies are in
unrealized loss positions. the severity of the impairments and
the duration of the impairments were reviewed by the company in
relation to industry averages. the company evaluated the
near-term prospects of the issuers in relation to the severity
and duration of the impairments. based on that evaluation and
the companys ability and intent to hold these investments
for a reasonable period of time sufficient for a forecasted
recovery of fair value, the company does not consider these
investments to be other than temporarily impaired at
december31,2006.
investments
in equity securities carried at cost
the aggregate of the companys cost investments totaled $73
at december31, 2006. none of these investments are
considered to be other than temporarily impaired at
december31,2006.
f-27
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
15.
accounts
payable
december31,
trade payables
$
2,162
$
2,138
payables to banks
miscellaneous
$
2,711
$
2,670
trade payables includes $47 in 2006 and $65 for 2005 due to
equity affiliates. payables to banks represent checks issued on
certain disbursement accounts but not presented to the banks for
payment. the reported amounts shown above approximate fair value
because of the short-term maturity of these obligations.
16.
short-term
borrowings and capital lease obligations
december31,
other loans-various currencies
$
$
long-term debt payable within one
year
1,163
industrial development bonds
capital lease obligations
$
1,517
$
1,397
the estimated fair value of the companys short-term
borrowings, including interest rate financial instruments, based
on quoted market prices for the same or similar issues, or on
current rates offered to the company for debt of the same
remaining maturities, was $1,500 and $1,400 at
december31,2006 and 2005, respectively. the change
in estimated fair value in 2006 was primarily due to an increase
in the current portion of
long-term
debt.
unused bank credit lines were approximately $3,500 at
december31,2006 and 2005. these lines support
short-term liquidity needs.
the weighted-average interest rate on short-term borrowings
outstanding at december31,2006 and 2005, was 5.4 and
4.8percent, respectively.
17.
other
accrued liabilities
december31,
compensation and other
employee-related costs
$
$
deferred revenue
employee benefits (note22)
discounts and rebates
miscellaneous
$
3,534
$
3,075
deferred revenue principally includes advance customer payments
related to businesses within the agriculture&
nutrition segment. miscellaneous other accrued liabilities
principally includes accrued plant and operating expenses,
accrued litigation costs, employee separation costs in
connection with the companys restructuring programs and
accrued environmental remediation costs.
f-28
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
18.
long-term
borrowings and capital lease obligations
december31,
u.s.dollar:
industrial development bonds due
2006-20291
$
$
medium-term notes due
2013-20482
8.25%notes due
6.75%notes due
3.375%notes due
5.75%notes due 2009
5.88%notes due 2009
6.88%notes due
4.125%notes due
4.75%notes due 2012
4.875%notes due 2014
5.25%notes due 2016
6.50%debentures due 2028
5.60%notes due 2036
other loans (average interest rate
of
2.0percent)3,5
foreign currency denominated loans
australian dollar loans (average
interest rates of
6.8percent)5
canadian dollar loans (average
interest rate of
4.5percent)3,5
euro loans (average interest rate
of
3.8percent)3,5
1,034
1,461
mexican peso loans (average
interest rate of
7.5percent)3,5
taiwan dollar loans (average
interest rate of
1.8percent)5
thai baht loans (average interest
rate of
4.9percent)5
other loans (various currencies)
7,162
7,752
less short-term portion of
long-term debt
1,163
5,999
6,766
capital lease obligations
total
$
6,013
$
6,783
average interest rates on
industrial development bonds for december31,2006 and
2005, were 6.0percent and 4.9percent, respectively.
average interest rates on
medium-term notes at december31,2006 and 2005, were
5.3percent and 4.8percent, respectively.
includes long-term debt due within
one year.
the company has outstanding
interest rate swap agreements with notional amounts totaling
$1,800. over the remaining terms of the notes and debentures,
the company will receive fixed payments equivalent to the
underlying debt and pay floating payments based on usd libor.
the fair value of the swaps at december31,2006 and
2005, was $(24) and $(8), respectively.
subsidiary borrowings decreased in
2006 primarily due to the repayment of borrowings used to
support the repatriation of foreign subsidiary earnings under
ajca. the majority of these borrowings will be repaid in 2008.
maturities of long-term borrowings, together with sinking fund
requirements, are $888, $1,490, $884 and $9 for the years 2008,
2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively, and $2,728 thereafter.
the estimated fair value of the companys long-term
borrowings, including interest rate financial instruments, based
on quoted market prices for the same or similar issues or on
current rates offered to the company for debt of the same
remaining maturities, was $6,000 and $6,900 at
december31,2006 and 2005, respectively. the change
in estimated fair value in 2006 was due to a decrease in
long-term debt, primarily subsidiary borrowings partly offset by
the december 2006 issuance of a total of $1,000 in 10 and
30year notes.
f-29
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
19.
other
liabilities
december31,
employee benefits
accrued other postretirement
benefit costs
$
3,917
$
4,311
accrued pension benefit costs
1,844
1,928
accrued environmental remediation
costs
miscellaneous
1,662
1,936
$
7,692
$
8,441
miscellaneous other liabilities include asset retirement
obligations, litigation reserves, tax contingencies and certain
obligations related to divested businesses.
20.
commitments
and contingent liabilities
guarantees
product
warranty
liability
the company warrants to the original purchaser of its products
that it will, at its option, repair or replace, without charge,
such products if they fail due to a manufacturing defect. the
term of these warranties varies (30days to 10years)
by product. the companys estimated product warranty
liability as of december31,2006 is $17. the company
has recourse provisions for certain products that would enable
recovery from third parties for amounts paid under the
warranties. the company accrues for product warranties when,
based on available information, it is probable that customers
will make claims under warranties relating to products that have
been sold and a reasonable estimate of the costs (based on
historical claims experience relative to sales) can be made.
indemnifications
in connection with acquisitions and divestitures, the company
has indemnified respective parties against certain liabilities
that may arise in connection with these transactions and
business activities prior to the completion of the transaction.
the term of these indemnifications, which typically pertain to
environmental, tax and product liabilities, is generally
indefinite. in addition, the company indemnifies its duly
elected or appointed directors and officers to the fullest
extent permitted by delaware law, against liabilities incurred
as a result of their activities for the company, such as adverse
judgments relating to litigation matters. if the indemnified
party were to incur a liability or have a liability increase as
a result of a successful claim, pursuant to the terms of the
indemnification, the company would be required to reimburse the
indemnified party. the maximum amount of potential future
payments is generally unlimited. the carrying amounts recorded
for all indemnifications as of december31,2006 and
2005 is $105 and $103, respectively. although it is reasonably
possible that future payments may exceed amounts accrued, due to
the nature of indemnified items, it is not possible to make a
reasonable estimate of the maximum potential loss or range of
loss. no assets are held as collateral and no specific recourse
provisions exist.
in connection with the sale of invista, the company indemnified
koch against certain liabilities primarily related to taxes,
legal and environmental matters and other representations and
warranties. the estimated fair value of these obligations of $70
is included in the indemnifications balance of $105 at
december31,2006. the fair value was based on
managements best estimate of the value expected to be
required to issue the indemnifications in a standalone,
arms length transaction with an unrelated party and, where
appropriate, by the utilization of probability weighted
discounted net cash flow models.
f-30
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
obligations
for equity affiliates& others
the company has directly guaranteed various debt obligations
under agreements with third parties related to equity
affiliates, customers, suppliers and other unaffiliated
companies. at december31,2006, the company had
directly guaranteed $551 of such obligations, plus $262 relating
to guarantees of historical obligations for divested
subsidiaries and affiliates. this represents the maximum
potential amount of future (undiscounted) payments that the
company could be required to make under the guarantees. the
company would be required to perform on these guarantees in the
event of default by the guaranteed party. no material loss is
anticipated by reason of such agreements and guarantees.
the fair value of the guarantees that have been issued or
modified since the companys adoption of fasb
interpretation no.45 on january1,2003, is not
material. as of december31,2006, the liabilities
recorded for these obligations were not material. in certain
cases, the company has recourse to assets held as collateral, as
well as personal guarantees from customers and suppliers.
assuming liquidation, these assets are estimated to cover
approximately 48percent of the $251 of guaranteed
obligations of customers and suppliers. set forth below are the
companys guaranteed obligations at
december31,2006:
short-
long-
term
term
total
obligations for customers,
suppliers and other unaffiliated
companies1
bank borrowings (terms up to
5years)
$
$
$
revenue bonds (term 2years)
obligations for equity
affiliates2
bank borrowings (terms up to
6years)
leases on equipment and facilities
(terms up to 4years)
total obligations for customers,
suppliers, other unaffiliated companies and equity affiliates
obligations for divested
subsidiaries and
affiliates3
conoco (terms from 2-20years)
consolidation coal sales company
(term 4-5years)
total obligations for divested
subsidiaries and affiliates
$
$
$
existing guarantees for customers
and suppliers arose as part of contractual agreements.
existing guarantees for equity
affiliates arose for liquidity needs in normal operations.
the company has guaranteed certain
obligations and liabilities related to divested subsidiaries,
including conoco and its subsidiaries and affiliates and
consolidation coal sales company. the restructuring, transfer
and separation agreement between dupont and conoco requires
conoco to use its best efforts to have conoco, or any of its
subsidiaries, substitute for dupont. conoco and consolidation
coal sales company have indemnified the company for any
liabilities the company may incur pursuant to these guarantees.
operating
leases
the company uses various leased facilities and equipment in its
operations. the terms for these leased assets vary depending on
the lease agreement.
as of december31,2006, the company had one synthetic
lease program relating to short-lived equipment. in connection
with this synthetic lease program, the company had residual
value guarantees in the amount of $101 at december31,
2006. the guarantee amounts are tied to the unamortized lease
values of the assets
f-31
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
under synthetic lease and are due should the company decide
neither to renew these leases nor to exercise its purchase
option. at december31,2006, the company had no
liabilities recorded for these obligations. any residual value
guarantee amounts paid to the lessor may be recovered by the
company from the sale of the assets to a third party.
future minimum lease payments (including residual value
guarantee amounts) under noncancelable operating leases are
$294, $155, $109, $82 and $59 for the years 2007, 2008, 2009,
2010 and 2011 respectively, and $107 for subsequent years and
are not reduced by noncancelable minimum sublease rentals due in
the future in the amount of $10. net rental expense under
operating leases was $282 in 2006, $265 in 2005, and $272 in
2004.
asset
retirement obligations
the company has recorded asset retirement obligations primarily
associated with closure, reclamation and removal costs for
mining operations related to the production of titanium dioxide
in coatings& color technologies. the companys
asset retirement obligation liabilities were $62 and $58 at
december31,2006 and 2005, respectively.
litigation
benlate
in 1991, dupont began receiving claims by growers that use of
benlate
50 df fungicide had caused crop damage. dupont has since been
served with thousands of lawsuits, most of which have been
disposed of through trial, dismissal or settlement. the status
of
benlate
cases is indicated in the table below.
statusofcasesatdecember31,
filed
resolved
pending
in march 2006, dupont settled the only case pending in australia
alleging plant damage for about 375 thousand dollars. nine cases
are pending in florida state court, involving allegations that
benlate
caused crop damage. the court dismissed for failure to prosecute
one of the nine cases in november 2006 on duponts motion.
plaintiffs are expected to appeal. two of the nine cases,
involving twenty-seven costa rican fern growers, were tried
during the second quarter of 2006 resulting in a $56 judgment
against dupont. at trial, the plaintiffs sought damages in the
range of $270 to $400. the plaintiffs as well as dupont have
filed post trial motions and dupont will appeal the verdict.
dupont believes that the appeal will be resolved in its favor
and, therefore, has not established a reserve relating to the
judgment.
twenty-three of the pending cases seek to reopen settlements
with the company by alleging that the company committed fraud
and misconduct, as well as violations of federal and state
racketeering laws. the dismissal of 16 of the reopener cases by
the florida federal court was affirmed by the 11thcircuit
court of appeals in late 2006. plaintiffs have until the end of
february 2007 to appeal. dupont settled one of the two cases
pending in florida state court for 200 thousand dollars in
september 2006. in december 2005, the ninth circuit court of
appeals reversed the hawaii federal courts dismissal of
the five reopener cases before it. these five cases are
consolidated for trial to begin in april 2007. the remaining
case in hawaii state court was settled in part for $1.2. the
remainder of this case was dismissed on duponts motion.
plaintiffs have appealed.
f-32
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
in one of the three cases involving allegations that
benlate
caused birth defects to children exposed in utero pending before
it, the delaware state court granted the companys motion
to dismiss due to insufficient scientific support for causation.
plaintiffs appealed and the delaware supreme court affirmed the
dismissal in september 2006. the remaining two cases, which were
stayed pending the outcome of the appeal, may be activated. it
is uncertain what impact, if any, the delaware supreme court
decision will have on the two remaining cases.
twenty-six cases involving damage to shrimp are pending against
the company in state court in florida. the company contends that
the injuries alleged are attributable to a virus, taura syndrome
virus and in no way involve
benlate
od. one case was tried in late 2000 and another in early 2001.
both trials resulted in adverse judgments of approximately $14
each. the intermediate appellate court subsequently reversed the
adverse verdicts and, in the first quarter of 2005, judgments
were entered in the companys favor in both cases.
plaintiffs have filed a motion seeking sanctions for alleged
discovery defaults in all of the cases, including the two cases
in which judgment has been entered for the company. hearings
regarding the motion for sanctions have concluded, but a ruling
has not been issued as of december31, 2006.
the company does not believe that
benlate
caused the damages alleged in each of these cases and denies the
allegations of fraud and misconduct. the company continues to
defend itself in ongoing matters. as of
december31,2006, the company has incurred costs and
expenses of approximately $2billion associated with these
matters. the company has recovered approximately $275 of its
costs and expenses through insurance and does not expect
additional insurance recoveries, if any, to be significant. as
of december31,2006, the company has reserves of $1.5
related to
benlate
litigation matters.
pfoa
environmental
actions involving the washington works site and surrounding
area
in november 2006, dupont entered into an order on consent under
the safe drinking water act (sdwa) with u.s.environmental
protection agency (epa) establishing a precautionary interim
screening level for pfoa (collectively, perfluorooctanoic acids
and its salts, including the ammonium salt) of 0.5 parts per
billion (ppb) in drinking water sources in the area around the
dupont washington works site located in parkersburg, west
virginia. as part of the order on consent, dupont will conduct a
survey and perform sampling and analytical testing of certain
public and private water systems in the area. dupont is required
under the agreement to install water treatment systems if pfoa
levels at or above 0.5 ppb are detected.
in 2001, dupont and the west virginia department of
environmental protection (wvdep) signed a multimedia consent
order (the wv order) that required environmental sampling and
analyses and the development of screening levels for pfoa that
is used or managed by the washington works plant. as a result,
in 2002, the wvdep established a screening level of 150
micrograms pfoa per liter screening level for drinking water, a
soil screening level of 240 parts per million, a screening level
of 1 microgram per cubic meter for air and a screening level of
1360ppb for aquatic life. under the wv order, sanctions
could be imposed if any of the screening levels were exceeded.
based on sampling through 2006 and air dispersion modeling,
dupont has not exceeded these screening levels. the company has
agreed to conduct annual sampling in 2007 for the city of
parkersburg. in addition, environmental sampling of the pfoa
levels in the groundwater and drinking water has been conducted
across the ohio river pursuant to a memorandum of understanding
among dupont, the ohio environmental protection agency, the
wvdep and the division of health and human resources, (the ohio
mou). additional monitoring was conducted in ohio through 2006.
in late 2005 dupont and epa entered into a memorandum of
understanding (epa mou) that requires dupont to monitor pfoa in
the soil, air, water and biota around the washington works site.
at december31,2006, dupont has established reserves
of about $1 to fund its activities under the wv order, epa mou
and order on consent.
f-33
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
epa
administrative complaints
in july and december2004, the epa filed administrative
complaints against dupont alleging that the company failed to
comply with the technical reporting requirements of the toxic
substances control act (tsca) and the resource conservation and
recovery act (rcra) regarding pfoa. the first complaint related
to information about pfoa for a period beginning in june 1981
through march 2001; the second related to information about pfoa
for a period beginning in late july 2004 to
mid-october2004. in december2005, the parties
entered into a settlement agreement to resolve the original
counts set forth in the complaints and the additional counts
raised by the epa in 2005. as a result in 2005, the company
established reserves of $16.5 to fund its obligations under the
settlement agreement. the agreement requires the company to pay
civil fines of $10.25 and fund two supplemental environmental
projects at a total cost of $6.25. the company paid the civil
fines of $10.25 in january 2006 and expects to complete the
projects by december27,2008.
department
of justice: grand jury subpoena
on may17,2005, dupont was served with a grand jury
subpoena from the u.s.district court for the district of
columbia. the subpoena, which was served by the environmental
crimes section of the environment and natural resources division
of the department of justice (doj), relates to pfoa, ammonium
perfluorooctanoate (apfo),
c-8 and
fc-143. the
subpoena calls for the production of documents previously
produced to the epa and other documents related to those
chemicals. dupont has been and will continue to be fully
responsive to the doj in this matter and has begun the
production of documents. it is expected that the collection,
review and production of documents will continue into 2007.
several former dupont employees have been subpoenaed to testify
before the grand jury.
classactions:
drinking water
in august 2001, a class action, captioned leachv. dupont,
was filed in west virginia state court against dupont and the
lubeck public service district. dupont uses pfoa as a processing
aid to manufacture fluoropolymer resins and dispersions at
various sites around the world including its washington works
plant in west virginia. the complaint alleged that residents
living near the washington works facility had suffered, or may
suffer, deleterious health effects from exposure to pfoa in
drinking water. the relief sought included damages for medical
monitoring, diminution of property values and punitive damages
plus injunctive relief to stop releases of pfoa. dupont and
attorneys for the class reached a settlement agreement in 2004
and as a result, the company established reserves of $108 in
2004. the agreement was approved by the wood county circuit
court on february28,2005 after a fairness hearing.
the settlement binds a class of approximately 80,000 residents.
as defined by the court, the class includes those individuals
who have consumed, for at least one year, water containing 0.05
parts per billion (ppb) or greater of pfoa from any of six
designated public water sources or from sole source private
wells.
in july 2005, the company paid the plaintiffs
attorneys fees and expenses of $23 and made a payment of
$70, which class counsel has designated to fund a community
health project. the company also is funding a health study by an
independent science panel of experts in the communities exposed
to pfoa to evaluate available scientific evidence on whether any
probable link exists between exposure to pfoa and human disease.
the independent science panel health study is estimated to cost
$15, of which $5 was originally placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account. as of 2006, the expected timeframe to complete
the study is four to six years. in addition, the company is
providing
state-of-the
art water treatment systems designed to reduce the level of pfoa
in water to six area water districts until the science panel
determines that pfoa does not cause disease or applicable water
standards can be met without such treatment. at
december31,2006, the estimated cost of constructing,
operating and maintaining these systems is $19 of which $10 was
originally placed in an interest-bearing escrow account. also,
the company is funding a bottled water program (estimated
f-34
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
to cost about $3) for residents in one water district on an
interim basis until the installation of the water treatment
systems. as a result of payments and activities undertaken
related to the settlement agreement during the period, the
reserve balance at december31, 2006 was $26, including $7
in interest bearing escrow accounts.
the settlement resulted in the dismissal of all claims asserted
in the lawsuit except for personal injury claims. if the
independent science panel concludes that no probable link exists
between exposure to pfoa and any diseases, then the settlement
would also resolve personal injury claims. if it concludes that
a probable link does exist between exposure to pfoa and any
diseases, then dupont would also fund up to $235 for a medical
monitoring program to pay for such medical testing. in this
event, plaintiffs would retain their right to pursue personal
injury claims. all other claims in the lawsuit would remain
dismissed by the settlement. dupont believes that it is remote
that the panel will find a probable link. therefore, at
december31,2006, the company had not established any
reserves related to medical monitoring or personal injury
claims. however, there can be no assurance as to what the
independent science panel will conclude.
in the second quarter of 2006, three purported class actions
were filed alleging that drinking water had been contaminated by
pfoa in excess of 0.05 ppb due to alleged releases from certain
dupont plants. one of these cases was filed in west virginia
state court on behalf of customers of the parkersburg city water
district, but was removed on duponts motion to the
u.s.district court for the southern district of west
virginia. the other two purported class actions were filed in
new jersey. one was filed in federal court on behalf of
individuals who allegedly drank water contaminated by releases
from duponts chambers works plant in deepwater, new
jersey. the second was filed in state court on behalf of
customers serviced primarily by the pennsville township water
department and was removed to new jersey federal district court
on duponts motion. the company intends to defend itself
vigorously against these lawsuits alleging contamination of
drinking water sources. while dupont believes that it is
reasonably possible that it will incur losses related to pfoa, a
range of such loss, if any, cannot be reasonably estimated at
this time.
consumer
products class actions
status of cases at december31,
filed
resolved
pending
as of december31,2006, 22 intrastate class actions
have been filed on behalf of consumers who have purchased
cookware with
teflon
non-stick coating in federal district courts against dupont. the
actions were filed on behalf of consumers in colorado,
connecticut, delaware, the district of columbia, florida,
illinois, indiana, iowa, kentucky, massachusetts, michigan,
missouri, new jersey, new mexico, new york, ohio, pennsylvania,
south carolina, texas and west virginia. two of the 22 actions
were filed in california. by order of the judicial panel on
multidistrict litigation, all of these actions have been
combined for coordinated and consolidated pretrial proceedings
in federal district court for the southern district of iowa. the
proceedings in this court will include the central question of
whether these cases can proceed as class actions. a ruling on
this issue is expected in 2007.
the actions allege that dupont violated state laws by engaging
in deceptive and unfair trade practices by failing to
disclose to consumers that products containing
teflon
were or are potentially harmful to consumers and that
dupont has liability based on state law theories of negligence
and strict liability. the actions allege that
teflon
contained or released harmful and dangerous substances;
including a chemical
f-35
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
(pfoa) alleged to have been determined to be likely
to cause cancer in humans. the actions seek unspecified monetary
damages for consumers who purchased cooking products containing
teflon,
as well as the creation of funds for medical monitoring and
independent scientific research, attorneys fees and other
relief. in december 2005, a motion was filed by a single named
plaintiff in the superior court for the province of quebec,
canada seeking authorization to institute a class action on
behalf of all quebec consumers who have purchased or used
kitchen items, household appliances or food-packaging containing
teflon
or
zonyl
non-stick coatings. a ruling on this motion is expected from the
court in 2007. the plaintiff withdrew its 2006 motion to include
all canadian consumers, not just quebec residents, of these
products as part of the class. damages are not quantified, but
are alleged to include the cost of replacement products as well
as one hundred dollars per class member as exemplary damages.
the company believes that the 22 class actions and the motion
filed in quebec are without merit and, therefore, believes it is
remote that it will incur losses related to these actions. at
december31,2006, the company had not established any
reserves related to these matters.
elastomers
antitrust matters
since 2002, the u.s., european union and canadian antitrust
authorities have investigated the synthetic rubber markets for
possible violations. these investigations included dde as a
result of its participation in the polychloroprene (pcp) and
ethylene propylene diene monomer (epdm) markets. dde was a joint
venture between the dow chemical company (dow) and dupont. dde
and dupont were named in related civil litigation.
in april of 2004, dupont and dow entered into a series of
agreements under which dupont obtained complete control over
directing ddes response to these investigations and the
related litigation and dupont agreed to a disproportionate share
of the ventures liabilities and costs related to these
matters. consequently, dupont bears any potential liabilities
and costs up to the initial $150. dow is obligated to indemnify
dupont for up to $72.5 by paying 15 to 30percent toward
liabilities and costs in excess of $150. on
june30,2005, dde became a wholly owned subsidiary of
dupont and was renamed dupont performance elastomers llc (dpe).
dde resolved all criminal antitrust allegations against it
related to pcp in the u.s.through a plea agreement with
the doj in january 2005 which was approved by the court on
march29,2005. the agreement requires the subsidiary
to pay a fine of $84 which, at its election, may be paid in six
equal, annual installments. the annual installment payments for
2005 and 2006 have been made. the agreement also requires the
subsidiary to provide ongoing cooperation with the dojs
investigation. dde responded to investigations by european union
and canadian antitrust authorities and dpe continues to
cooperate with the authorities.
in november of 2004, the court approved the settlement reached
by dde and attorneys for the class, of federal antitrust
litigation related to pcp for $42, including attorneys
fees and costs. dde also reached a settlement with attorneys for
the class, of federal antitrust litigation related to epdm for
$24.6, including attorneys fees and costs. the court
approved the epdm settlement in may 2005. during the second
quarter of 2006, the court-appointed fund administrators
returned a portion of the class settlement paid in connection
with the pcp class action related to individual claimants that
opted out of the class. including the pcp and epdm class
settlements, net of the pcp class action funds returned to the
company, related to civil lawsuits and claims alleging antitrust
violations in certain synthetic rubber markets, the company has
paid $106 through december31,2006. as of
december31,2006 there are no pending civil lawsuits
or claims.
as a result of its april 2004 agreements with dow, dupont
established reserves in 2004 of $268, of which $18 will be
reimbursed by dow to reflect its share of anticipated losses. at
december31,2006, the balance of the reserves is
$126, which reflects net adjustments made for claimants who
opted out of the pcp settlement during the second quarter 2006
and includes $56 for the remaining four installment payments to
be made under the plea agreement with the doj. given the
uncertainties inherent in predicting the outcome of these
f-36
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
matters and the likelihood of additional future claims it is
reasonably possible that actual losses may exceed the amount
accrued. however, a range of such losses cannot be reasonably
estimated at this time.
general
the company is subject to various lawsuits and claims arising
out of the normal course of its business. these lawsuits and
claims include actions based on alleged exposures to products,
intellectual property and environmental matters and contract and
antitrust claims. management has noted a nationwide trend in
purported class actions against chemical manufacturers generally
seeking relief such as medical monitoring, property damages,
off-site remediation and punitive damages arising from alleged
environmental torts without claiming present personal injuries.
such cases may allege contamination from unregulated substances
or remediated sites. for example, in september 2006, a west
virginia state court certified a class action against dupont
seeking damages similar to those listed above allegedly related
to a closed zinc smelter. the smelter was owned and operated by
at least three companies between 1910 and 2001, including dupont
between 1928 and 1950. dupont performed remedial measures at the
request of the epa in the late 1990s and in 2001
repurchased the site to facilitate and complete the remediation.
the company contests the merits of this case and plans to defend
itself vigorously against this and similar cases, if any, in the
future. although it is not possible to predict the outcome of
these various lawsuits and claims, management does not
anticipate they will have a material adverse effect on the
companys consolidated financial position or liquidity.
however, the ultimate liabilities may be significant to results
of operations in the period recognized. the company accrues for
contingencies when the information available indicates that it
is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of
the liability can be reasonably estimated.
environmental
the company is also subject to contingencies pursuant to
environmental laws and regulations that in the future may
require the company to take further action to correct the
effects on the environment of prior disposal practices or
releases of chemical or petroleum substances by the company or
other parties. the company accrues for environmental remediation
activities consistent with the policy set forth in note1.
much of this liability results from the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act (cercla,
often referred to as superfund), the resource conservation and
recovery act (rcra) and similar state laws. these laws require
the company to undertake certain investigative and remedial
activities at sites where the company conducts or once conducted
operations or at sites where company-generated waste was
disposed. the accrual also includes estimated costs related to a
number of sites identified by the company for which it is
probable that environmental remediation will be required, but
which are not currently the subject of cercla, rcra or state
enforcement activities.
remediation activities vary substantially in duration and cost
from site to site. these activities, and their associated costs,
depend on the mix of unique site characteristics, evolving
remediation technologies, diverse regulatory agencies and
enforcement policies, as well as the presence or absence of
potentially responsible parties. at december31,2006
and 2005, the consolidated balance sheet includes a liability of
$349 and $343, respectively, relating to these matters and, in
managements opinion, is appropriate based on existing
facts and circumstances. the average time frame, over which the
accrued or presently unrecognized amounts may be paid, based on
past history, is estimated to be
15-20years.
considerable uncertainty exists with respect to these costs and,
under adverse changes in circumstances, potential liability may
range up to two to three times the amount accrued as of
december31,2006.
other
the company has various purchase commitments incident to the
ordinary conduct of business. in the aggregate, such commitments
are not at prices in excess of current market.
f-37
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
21.
stockholders
equity
the companys board of directors authorized a
$2billion share buyback plan in june 2001. during 2005,
the company purchased and retired 9.9million shares at a
total cost of $505. during 2006, there were no purchases of
stock under this program. as of december31,2006 and
2005, the company has purchased 20.5million shares at a
total cost of $962. management has not established a timeline
for the buyback of the remaining stock under this plan.
in addition to the plan described above, in october 2005 the
board of directors authorized a $5billion share buyback
plan. the company entered into an accelerated share repurchase
agreement with goldman sachs& co. (goldman sachs)
under which the company purchased and retired 75.7million
shares of duponts outstanding common stock from goldman
sachs on october27,2005 at a price of
$39.62per share, with goldman sachs purchasing an
equivalent number of shares in the open market over the
following nine-month period.
on july27,2006, goldman sachs completed its purchase
of 75.7million shares of duponts common stock at a
volume weighted average price (vwap) of $41.99 per share. upon
the conclusion of the agreement in 2006, the company paid $180
in cash to goldman sachs to settle the agreement. the final
settlement price was based upon the difference between the vwap
per share for the nine-month period, which ended
july27,2006, and the purchase price of $39.62 per
share. the amount paid to settle the contract was recorded as a
reduction to additional paid-in capital during the third quarter
2006. in addition, the company made open market purchases of its
shares in the third quarter for $100 at an average price of
$42.27per share, bringing purchases to date under the
$5billion share buyback plan to $3.3billion.
the company anticipates completing the remaining
$1.7billion of the program, consistent with its financial
discipline principles, by the end of 2007.
set forth below is a reconciliation of common stock share
activity for the three years ended december31,2006:
held in
shares of common
stock
issued
treasury
balance january1,2004
1,084,325,552
(87,041,427
)
issued
7,656,496
treasury stock
acquisition
(10,600,000
)
retirement
(10,600,000
)
10,600,000
balance december31,2004
1,081,382,048
(87,041,427
)
issued
10,933,652
treasury stock
acquisition
(85,664,134
)
retirement
(85,664,134
)
85,664,134
balance december31,2005
1,006,651,566
(87,041,427
)
issued
4,823,253
treasury stock
acquisition
(2,365,683
)
retirement
(2,365,683
)
2,365,683
balance december31,2006
1,009,109,136
(87,041,427
)
f-38
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
the pretax, tax and after-tax effects of the components of other
comprehensive income/(loss) are shown below:
pretax
tax
after-tax
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
$
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to earnings
(9
)
minimum pension liability
adjustment (see note22)
(54
)
net unrealized gains on securities
(3
)
other comprehensive income
$
$
(66
)
$
cumulative translation adjustment
$
(109
)
$
$
(109
)
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to earnings
(3
)
(2
)
minimum pension liability
adjustment
net unrealized losses on securities
(17
)
(11
)
other comprehensive loss
$
(122
)
$
(95
)
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
$
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to earnings
(7
)
minimum pension liability
adjustment
1,920
(675
)
1,245
net unrealized gains on securities
(4
)
other comprehensive income
$
2,024
$
(686
)
$
1,338
balances of related after-tax components comprising accumulated
other comprehensive loss are summarized below:
december31,
cumulative translation adjustment
$
$
$
net revaluation and clearance of
cash flow hedges to earnings
minimum pension liability
adjustment
(594
)
(621
)
net unrealized gains/(losses) on
securities
(5
)
pension benefits
net gains/(losses)
(2,022
)
net prior service cost
(130
)
other benefits
net gains/(losses)
(720
)
net prior service cost
$
(1,867
)
$
(518
)
$
(423
)
f-39
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
22.
employee
benefits
the company offers various postretirement benefits to its
employees. where permitted by applicable law, the company
reserves the right to change, modify or discontinue the plans.
pensions
the company has both funded and unfunded noncontributory defined
benefit pension plans covering substantially all
u.s.employees. the benefits under these plans are based
primarily on years of service and employees pay near
retirement. the companys funding policy is consistent with
the funding requirements of federal laws and regulations.
pension coverage for employees of the companys
non-u.s.consolidated
subsidiaries is provided, to the extent deemed appropriate,
through separate plans. obligations under such plans are funded
by depositing funds with trustees, under insurance policies, or
remain unfunded.
other
postretirement benefits
the parent company and certain subsidiaries provide medical,
dental and life insurance benefits to pensioners and survivors.
the associated plans are unfunded and the cost of the approved
claims are paid from company funds. essentially all of the cost
and liabilities are attributable to the u.s.parent company
plans. these plans are contributory with pensioners and
survivors contributions adjusted annually to achieve a
50/50 target sharing of cost increases between the company and
pensioners and survivors. in addition, limits are applied to the
companys portion of the medical and dental cost coverage.
f-40
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
summarized information on the companys postretirement
plans is as follows:
pension benefits
other benefits
obligations and funded status
at december31,
change in benefit
obligation
benefit obligation at beginning of
year
$
22,935
$
21,757
$
4,089
$
4,807
service cost
interest cost
1,192
1,160
plan participants
contributions
actuarial loss (gain)
(609
)
1,537
(600
)
foreign currency exchange rate
changes
(402
)
benefits paid
(1,506
)
(1,503
)
(467
)
(518
)
amendments
(1
)
(19
)
net effects of
acquisitions/divestitures
benefit obligation at end of year
$
22,849
$
22,935
$
4,255
$
4,089
change in plan assets
fair value of plan assets at
beginning of year
$
19,792
$
18,250
$
$
actual gain on plan assets
3,056
2,038
foreign currency exchange rate
changes
(261
)
employer contributions
1,253
plan participants
contributions
benefits paid
(1,506
)
(1,503
)
(467
)
(518
)
net effects of
acquisitions/divestitures
fair value of plan assets at end
of year
$
21,909
$
19,792
$
$
funded status
u.s.plans with plan assets
$
$
(1,335
)
$
$
non-u.s.plans
with plan assets
(317
)
(385
)
all other plans
(1,515
)1
(1,423
)1
(4,255
)
(4,089
)
total
$
(940
)
$
(3,143
)
$
(4,255
)
$
(4,089
)
unrecognized prior service
cost2
(1,432
)
unrecognized actuarial
loss2
5,275
unrecognized transition
asset2
(2
)
net amount recognized
$
(940
)
$
2,341
$
(4,255
)
$
(4,661
)
amounts recognized in the
consolidated balance sheet consist of:
other assets
$
1,040
$
3,280
intangible assets
other accrued liabilities
(136
)
(60
)
(338
)
(350
)
other liabilities
(1,844
)
(1,750
)
(3,917
)
(4,311
)
accumulated other comprehensive
loss
net amount recognized
$
(940
)
$
2,341
$
(4,255
)
$
(4,661
)
includes pension plans maintained
around the world where full funding is not permissible or
customary.
on december31,2006, the
company adopted prospectively sfas158 and as required the
december31,2006 effects are recognized as a
component of the ending balance of accumulated other
comprehensive loss.
pension benefits
other benefits
net loss
$
3,070
$
1,053
prior service cost/(benefit)
(1,276
)
$
3,251
$
(223
)
f-41
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
the accumulated benefit obligation for all pension plans is
$20,880 and $20,789 at december31,2006, and 2005,
respectively.
information for pension plans
with projected benefit
obligation in excess of plan assets
projected benefit obligation
$
4,630
$
22,268
accumulated benefit obligation
4,140
20,177
fair value of plan assets
2,650
19,026
the significant reduction in
obligations and assets for 2006 resulted from a change in funded
status of the principal u.s.pension plan. for 2006, assets
exceeded the projected benefit obligation and as a result, the
obligations and assets for 2006 for the plan are not included in
the table above.
information for pension plans
with accumulated benefit
obligations in excess of plan assets
projected benefit obligation
$
4,018
$
4,219
accumulated benefit obligation
3,691
3,838
fair value of plan assets
2,113
2,088
pension benefits
components of net periodic
benefit cost (credit)
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
1,192
1,160
1,198
expected return on plan assets
(1,648
)
(1,416
)
(1,343
)
amortization of transition asset
(1
)
(1
)
(5
)
amortization of net loss
amortization of prior service cost
curtailment/settlement (gain) loss
(1
)
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
other benefits
components of net periodic
benefit cost (credit)
service cost
$
$
$
interest cost
amortization of net loss
amortization of prior service
benefit
(156
)
(155
)
(163
)
curtailment/settlement gain
(436
)
net periodic benefit cost
$
$
$
(241
)
the estimated pretax net loss and prior service cost for the
defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from
accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit
cost during 2007 are $115
f-42
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
and $18, respectively. the estimated pretax net loss and prior
service credit for the other defined benefit postretirement
plans that will be amortized from accumulated other
comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit cost during 2007
are $62 and $(156), respectively.
weighted-average assumptions
used to determine
pension benefits
other benefits
benefit obligations at december31,
discount rate
5.56
%
5.30
%
5.75
%
5.50
%
rate of compensation increase
4.32
%
4.31
%
4.50
%
4.50
%
weighted-average assumptions
used to determine net
pension benefits
other benefits
periodic benefit cost for the years ended
december31,
discount rate
5.43
%
5.58
%
5.50
%
5.75
%
expected return on plan assets
8.74
%
8.74
%
rate of compensation increase
4.31
%
4.29
%
4.50
%
4.50
%
the discount rate and the rate of compensation increase used to
determine the benefit obligation in the u.s.are
5.75percent and 4.50percent, respectively, for 2006
and 5.50percent and 4.50percent, respectively for
2005. for determining u.s.plans net periodic costs,
the discount rate, expected return on plan assets and the rate
of compensation increase are 5.50percent, 9.0percent
and 4.50percent for 2006 and 5.75percent,
9.0percent and 4.50percent for 2005. the discount
rate for determining the principal u.s.pension plans
net periodic benefit cost was increased to 6percent as of
august31, 2006 due to remeasurement.
in august 2006, the company announced major changes to its
principal u.s.pension plan. covered employees on the rolls
as of december31,2006 will continue to accrue
benefits in the principal u.s.pension plan, but at a
reduced rate of one-third of its current level effective
january1,2008. in addition, company-paid
postretirement survivor benefits for these employees will not
continue to grow after december31,2007. covered
employees hired after december31,2006 will not
participate in the principal u.s.pension plan. as a result
of this plan amendment, the company was required to remeasure
its pension expense for the remainder of 2006, reflecting plan
assets and benefit obligations as of the remeasurement date.
better than expected return on plan assets and a higher discount
rate of 6percent decreased pretax pension expense for 2006
by$72.
the company utilizes published long-term high quality corporate
bond indices to determine the discount rate at measurement date.
where commonly available, the company considers indices of
various durations to reflect the timing of future benefit
payments.
the long-term rate of return on assets in the u.s.was
selected from within the reasonable range of rates determined by
(a)historical real returns (net of inflation) for the
asset classes covered by the investment policy and
(b)projections of inflation over the long-term period
during which benefits are payable to plan participants. for
non-u.s.plans,
assumptions reflect economic assumptions applicable to each
country.
f-43
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
assumed health care cost trend
rates at december31,
health care cost trend rate
assumed for next year
10%
10%
rate to which the cost trend rate
is assumed to decline (the ultimate trend rate)
5%
5%
year that the rate reaches the
ultimate trend rate
assumed health care cost trend rates have a modest effect on the
amount reported for the health care plan. a one-percentage point
change in assumed health care cost trend rates would have the
following effects:
1-percentage
1-percentage
point increase
point decrease
effect on total of service and
interest cost
$
$
(3
)
effect on postretirement benefit
obligation
(55
)
in 2005, the company updated the mortality tables used for most
u.s.plans. the impacts of this change in mortality tables
and lower discount rates were more than offset by the effects of
favorable investment and other economic experience under these
plans.
plan
assets
the strategic asset allocation targets of the companys
pension plans as of december31, 2006, and the weighted
average asset allocation of these plans at december31,
2006, and 2005, by asset category are as follows:
plan assets at
strategic
december31,
asset category
target
equity securities
58%
57%
59%
debt securities
30%
29%
30%
real estate
5%
5%
4%
other*
7%
9%
7%
total
100%
100%
100%
*mainly private equity and private
debt.
essentially all pension plan assets in the u.s.are
invested through a single master trust fund. the strategic asset
allocation for this trust fund is selected by management,
reflecting the results of comprehensive asset liability
modeling. the general principles guiding investment of
u.s.pension assets are those embodied in the employee
retirement income security act of 1974 (erisa). these principles
include discharging the companys investment
responsibilities for the exclusive benefit of plan participants
and in accordance with the prudent expert standard
and other erisa rules and regulations. the company establishes
strategic asset allocation percentage targets and appropriate
benchmarks for significant asset classes with the aim of
achieving a prudent balance between return and risk. strategic
asset allocations in other countries are selected in accordance
with the laws and practices of those countries. where
appropriate, asset liability studies are utilized in this
process. u.s.plan assets and a significant portion of
non-u.s.plan
assets are managed by
f-44
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
investment professionals employed by the company. the remaining
assets are managed by professional investment firms unrelated to
the company. the companys pension investment professionals
have discretion to manage the assets within established asset
allocation ranges approved by senior management of the company.
plans invest in securities from a variety of countries to take
advantage of the investment opportunities that a global
portfolio presents and to increase portfolio diversification.
additionally, pension trust funds are permitted to enter into
certain contractual arrangements generally described as
derivatives. derivatives are primarily used to
reduce specific market risks, hedge currency and adjust
portfolio duration and asset allocation in a cost-effective
manner.
the companys pension plans directly held $486
(2percent of total plan assets) and $426 (2percent
of total plan assets) of dupont common stock at
december31, 2006 and 2005, respectively.
cash
flow
contributions
in 2006, the company contributed $280 to its pension plans. no
contributions were required or made to the principal
u.s.pension plan trust fund in 2006 and no contributions
are required or expected to be made to this plan in 2007. the
company will continue to monitor asset values during the year.
the pension protection act of 2006 (the act) was
signed into law in the u.s.in august 2006. the act
introduces new funding requirements for single-employer defined
benefit pension plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension
plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes,
introduces benefit limitations for certain underfunded plans and
raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement
plans. the new funding requirements become effective for plan
years beginning after december31, 2007. although
significant regulatory guidance will be required prior to the
acts effective date, the company does not anticipate that
the act will have a material near-term impact on its required
contributions. the company expects to contribute approximately
$290 in 2007 to its pension plans other than the principal
u.s.pension plan and also expects to make cash payments of
$338 in 2007 under its other postretirement benefit plans.
in 2005, the company made contributions of $1,253 to its pension
plans, including a $1,000 contribution to its principal
u.s.pension plan. in 2004, the company made contributions
of $709 to its pension plans, including a $300 contribution to
its principal u.s.pension plan.
estimated
future benefit payments
the following benefit payments, which reflect future service, as
appropriate, are expected to be paid:
pension
other
benefits
benefits
$
1,522
$
1,464
1,452
1,444
1,457
years 2012 2016
7,510
1,512
f-45
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
defined
contribution plan
the company sponsors several defined contribution plans, which
cover substantially all u.s.employees. the most
significant is the savings and investment plan (the plan). this
plan includes a non-leveraged employee stock ownership plan
(esop). employees are not required to participate in the esop
and those who do are free to diversify out of the esop. the
purpose of the plan is to provide additional retirement savings
benefits for employees and to provide employees an opportunity
to become stockholders of the company. the plan is a tax
qualified contributory profit sharing plan, with cash or
deferred arrangement and any eligible employee of the company
may participate. under the plan, the company will contribute an
amount equal to 50percent of the first 6percent of
the employees contribution election. the companys
contributions to the plan were $52, $51 and $53 for years ended
december31, 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. the
companys contributions vest immediately upon contribution
to the plan. in addition, the company made contributions of $34,
$30 and $29 for years ended december31, 2006, 2005 and
2004, respectively, to defined contributions plans other than
the savings and investment plan.
effective january1, 2007, for covered employees hired on
that date or thereafter and effective january1, 2008, for
covered employees on the rolls as of december31, 2006, the
company will contribute 100percent of the first
6percent of the employees contribution election and
also contribute 3percent of the employees eligible
compensation. in addition, the definition of eligible
compensation has been expanded to be consistent with the
definition of eligible compensation in the pension plan. this
enhanced savings plan was adopted in connection with the changes
to the principal u.s.pension plan discussed above.
23.
compensation
plans
the dupont stock performance plan provides for long-term
incentive grants of stock options, time-vested restricted stock
units and performance-based restricted stock units to key
employees.
effective january1, 2006, the company adopted
sfas123r using the modified prospective application
transition method. because the company adopted the fair value
recognition provisions of sfas123r prospectively on
january1, 2003, the adoption of sfas123r did not
have a material impact on the companys financial position
or results of operations. prior to adoption of sfas123r,
the nominal vesting approach was followed for all awards. upon
adoption of sfas123r on january1, 2006, the company
began expensing new stock-based compensation awards using a
non-substantive approach, under which compensation costs are
recognized over at least six months for awards granted to
employees who are retirement eligible at the date of the grant
or would become retirement eligible during the vesting period of
the grant. using the non-substantive vesting approach in lieu of
the nominal vesting approach would not have had a material
impact on the companys results of operations. prior to the
adoption of sfas123r, the company reported the tax benefit
of stock option exercises as operating cash flows. upon the
adoption of sfas123r, tax benefits resulting from tax
deductions in excess of compensation cost recognized for those
options or restricted stock units are reported as financing cash
flows.
f-46
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
the fair value based method has been applied to all unvested
outstanding awards in 2006. the following table illustrates the
effect on net income and earnings per share in 2005 and 2004 as
if the fair value based method had been applied to all
outstanding awards in each period.
net income, as reported
$
2,056
$
1,780
add: stock-based employee
compensation expense included in reported net income, net of
related tax effects
deduct: total stock-based employee
compensation expense determined under fair value based method
for all awards, net of related tax effects
pro forma net income
$
2,054
$
1,752
earnings per share:
basic as reported
$
2.08
$
1.78
basic pro forma
$
2.08
$
1.75
diluted as reported
$
2.07
$
1.77
diluted pro forma
$
2.06
$
1.73
the total stock-based compensation cost included in the
consolidated income statements was $140, $90 and $69 for 2006,
2005 and 2004, respectively. the income tax benefits related to
stock-based compensation arrangements were $46, $27 and $20 for
2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively.
the maximum number of shares that may be granted subject to
option or in the form of time-vested and performance-based
restricted stock units for any consecutive five-year period is
72million shares. of the 72million shares,
12million may be time-vested
and/or
performance-based restricted stock units. at december31,
2006, approximately 44million shares were authorized for
future grant under the companys plan. the companys
compensation committee determines the long-term incentive mix,
including stock options, time-vested and performance-based
restricted stock units and may authorize new grants annually.
stock
options
the company grants stock option awards under the dupont stock
performance plan. the purchase price of shares subject to option
is equal to the market price of the companys stock on the
date of grant. prior to 2004, options expired 10years from
date of grant; however, beginning in 2004, options serially vest
over a
three-year
period and carry a six-year option term. the plan allows
retirement eligible employees to retain any granted awards upon
retirement provided the employee has rendered at least six
months of service following grant date.
for purposes of determining the fair value of stock options
awards, the company uses the black-scholes option pricing model
and the assumptions set forth in the table below. the
weighted-average grant-date fair value of options granted in
2006, 2005 and 2004 was $7.28, $8.78 and $8.18, respectively.
dividend yield
3.8%
2.9%
3.2%
volatility
25.02%
23.35%
26.4%
risk-free interest rate
4.4%
3.7%
3.0%
expected life (years)
4.5
4.5
4.5
f-47
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
the company determines the dividend yield by dividing the
current annual dividend on the companys stock by the
option exercise price. a historical daily measurement of
volatility is determined based on the expected life of the
option granted. the risk free interest rate is determined by
reference to the yield on an outstanding u.s.treasury note
with a term equal to the expected life of the option granted.
expected life is determined by reference to the companys
historical experience.
stock option awards as of december31, 2006, and changes
during the year then ended were as follows:
weighted
weighted average
average
remaining
aggregate
number of shares
exercise price
contractual term
intrinsicvalue
(inthousands)
(pershare)
(years)
(inthousands)
outstanding, december31, 2005
92,943
$
46.90
granted
6,205
$
39.33
exercised
(3,726
)
$
40.09
forfeited
(310
)
$
42.75
cancelled
(2,355
)
$
43.78
outstanding, december31,
2006*
92,757
$
46.76
3.55
$
386,804
exercisable, december31, 2006
73,790
$
46.32
3.43
$
313,647
*
includes 12.3million and
8.3million options outstanding from the 2002 and 1997
corporate sharing program grants of 200shares to all
eligible employees at an option price of $44.50 and $52.50,
respectively.
on january28, 2007, 12.8million options granted on
january29, 1997, expired unexercised and were cancelled.
the aggregate intrinsic values in the table above represent the
total pretax intrinsic value (the difference between the
companys closing stock price on the last trading day of
2006 and the exercise price, multiplied by the number of
in-the-money
options) that would have been received by the option holders had
all option holders exercised their
in-the-money
options at year end. the amount changes based on the fair market
value of the companys stock. total intrinsic value of
options exercised for 2006, 2005 and 2004 were $22, $143 and
$115, respectively. in 2006, the company realized a tax benefit
of $6.5 from options exercised.
as of december31, 2006, $35 of total unrecognized
compensation cost related to stock options is expected to be
recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.38years.
time-vested
and performance-based restricted stock units
in 2004, the company began issuing time-vested restricted stock
units in addition to stock options. these restricted stock units
serially vest over a three-year period. concurrently, stock
option terms were reduced from ten years to six years and the
number of options granted was also reduced. a retirement
eligible employee retains any granted awards upon retirement
provided the employee has rendered at least six months of
service following grant date. additional restricted stock units
are also granted from time to time to key senior management
employees. these restricted stock units generally vest over
periods ranging from two to five years.
f-48
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
the company also grants performance-based restricted stock units
to senior leadership. vesting occurs upon attainment of
pre-established corporate revenue growth and return on
investment objectives versus peer companies at the end of a
three-year performance period. the actual award, delivered as
dupont common stock, can range from zero percent to
200percent of the original grant. during 2006, there were
361,100 performance-based restricted stock units granted at a
weighted average grant date fair value of $39.31. the fair value
of time-vested and performance-based restricted stock units is
based upon the market price of the underlying common stock as of
the grant date.
nonvested awards of time-vested and performance-based restricted
stock units as of december31, 2006 and 2005 are shown
below. the table also includes restricted stock units for the
board of directors that are settled in cash.
weighted
number of
averagegrant
shares
datefairvalue
(inthousands)
(per share)
nonvested, december31, 2005
2,086
$
45.59
granted
2,050
$
39.47
exercised
(515
)
$
45.17
forfeited
(143
)
$
41.59
nonvested, december31, 2006
3,478
$
41.94
as of december31, 2006, there was $49 unrecognized
stock-based compensation expense related to nonvested awards.
that cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average
period of 1.76years. the total fair value of shares vested
during 2006, 2005 and 2004 was $23, $15 and $2, respectively.
awards under the companys global variable compensation
plan may be granted in stock
and/or cash
to employees who have contributed most to the companys
success, with consideration being given to the ability to
succeed to more important managerial responsibility. such awards
were $153 for 2006, $129 for 2005 and $165 for 2004. amounts
credited to the global variable compensation fund are dependent
on company earnings and are subject to maximum limits as defined
by the plan. in accordance with the terms of the global variable
compensation plan, approximately 1,136,000shares of common
stock are awaiting delivery from awards for 2006 and prior years.
in addition, the company has other variable compensation plans
under which cash awards may be granted. the most significant of
these plans are the companys u.s.regional variable
compensation plan and pioneers annual reward program plan.
such awards were $60 for 2006, $69 for 2005, and $85 for 2004.
24.investing
activities
investments
during 2006, the company invested in 5 businesses for a cost of
$60, net of cash acquired. during 2005, the company invested in
12businesses for a cost of $206, net of cash acquired.
during 2004, the company invested in 13businesses for a
cost of $119, net of cash acquired. the results of these
investments have been included in the consolidated financial
statements from the respective dates of investment. goodwill
recognized in these transactions amounted to $18, $5 and $28 in
2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. identified
f-49
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
intangibles included in these transactions amounted to $93, $40
and $86 in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. these investments
did not have a material effect on the consolidated financial
statements.
proceeds
from sales of assets
during 2006, the company received proceeds from the sale of
assets, net of cash sold, of $148. these transactions were not
significant on an individual basis.
proceeds from sales of assets, net of cash sold, in 2005 were
$312 which principally included $110 from the sale of the
companys share in dupont sabanci international, llc and
$98 from the sale of the companys remaining interest in
dupont photomasks, inc.
during 2004, the company received proceeds from the sale of
assets, net of cash sold, of $3,908, primarily attributed to
$3,840 from the sale of textiles& interiors assets.
see note6 for further information.
25.derivatives
and other hedging instruments
objectives
and strategies for holding derivative instruments
under procedures and controls established by the companys
financial risk management framework, the company enters into
contractual arrangements (derivatives) in the ordinary course of
business to reduce its exposure to foreign currency, interest
rate and commodity price risks. the framework has established a
variety of approved derivative instruments to be utilized in
each risk management program, as well as varying levels of
exposure coverage and time horizons based on an assessment of
risk factors related to each hedging program. derivative
instruments utilized during the period include forwards,
options, futures and swaps. the company has not designated any
nonderivatives as hedging instruments.
the framework sets forth senior managements financial risk
management philosophy and objectives through a corporate
financial risk management policy. in addition, the policy
establishes oversight committees and risk management guidelines
that authorize the use of specific derivative instruments and
further establishes procedures for control and valuation,
counterparty credit approval and routine monitoring and
reporting. the counterparties to these contractual arrangements
are major financial institutions and major commodity exchanges.
the company is exposed to credit loss in the event of
nonperformance by these counterparties. the company manages this
exposure to credit loss through the aforementioned credit
approvals, limits and monitoring procedures and, to the extent
possible, by restricting the period over which unpaid balances
are allowed to accumulate. the company does not anticipate
nonperformance by counterparties to these contracts and no
material loss would be expected from such nonperformance. market
and counterparty credit risks associated with these instruments
are regularly reported to management.
the company hedges foreign currency denominated monetary assets
and liabilities, certain business specific foreign currency
exposures and certain energy feedstock purchases. in addition,
the company enters into exchange traded agricultural commodity
derivatives to hedge exposures relevant to agricultural
feedstock purchases.
fair
value hedges
during the year ended december31, 2006, the company has
maintained a number of interest rate swaps that involve the
exchange of fixed for floating rate interest payments which
allows the company to maintain a target range of floating rate
debt. all interest rate swaps qualify for the shortcut method of
hedge accounting, thus there is no ineffectiveness related to
these hedges. changes in the fair value of derivatives that
hedge interest rate risk are recorded in interest expense each
period. the offsetting changes in the fair values of the related
debt are also recorded in interest expense. the company
maintains no other fair value hedges.
f-50
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
cash flow
hedges
the company maintains a number of cash flow hedging programs to
reduce risks related to commodity price risk. commodity price
risk management programs serve to reduce exposure to price
fluctuations on purchases of inventory such as natural gas,
ethane, corn, soybeans and soybean meal. while each risk
management program has a different time maturity period, most
programs currently do not extend beyond the next two-year period.
hedges of inventory purchases are reported as a component of
cost of goods sold and other operating charges.
cash flow hedge results are reclassified into earnings during
the same period in which the related exposure impacts earnings.
reclassifications are made sooner if it appears that a
forecasted transaction will not materialize. cash flow hedge
ineffectiveness reported in earnings for 2006 is a pretax gain
of $1. during 2006, there were no pretax gains (losses) excluded
from the assessment of hedge effectiveness. the following table
summarizes the effect of cash flow hedges on accumulated other
comprehensive loss for 2006:
pretax
tax
after-tax
beginning balance
$
$
(1
)
$
additions and revaluations of
derivatives designated as cash flow hedges
(6
)
clearance of hedge results to
earnings
(3
)
ending balance
$
$
(10
)
$
portion of ending balance expected
to be reclassified into earnings over the next twelve months
$
$
(6
)
$
hedges of
net investment in a foreign operation
during the year ended december31, 2006, the company did
not maintain any hedges of net investment in a foreign operation.
derivatives
not designated in hedging relationships
the company uses forward exchange contracts to reduce its net
exposure, by currency, related to foreign currency-denominated
monetary assets and liabilities. the netting of such exposures
precludes the use of hedge accounting. however, the required
revaluation of the forward contracts and the associated foreign
currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities results in
a minimal earnings impact, after taxes. in addition, the company
maintains a few small risk management programs for agricultural
commodities that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
currency
risk
the company routinely uses forward exchange contracts to offset
its net exposures, by currency, related to monetary assets and
liabilities of its operations that are denominated in currencies
other than the designated functional currency. the primary
business objective is to maintain an approximately balanced
position in foreign currencies so that exchange gains and losses
resulting from exchange rate changes, net of related tax
effects, are minimized.
from time to time, the company will enter into forward exchange
contracts to establish with certainty the functional currency
amount of future firm commitments denominated in another
currency. decisions regarding
f-51
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
whether or not to hedge a given commitment are made on a
case-by-case
basis, taking into consideration the amount and duration of the
exposure, market volatility and economic trends. forward
exchange contracts are also used to manage near-term foreign
currency cash requirements and to place foreign currency
deposits and marketable securities investments.
interest
rate risk
the company primarily uses interest rate swaps to manage the
interest rate mix of the total debt portfolio and related
overall cost of borrowing.
interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed for floating
rate interest payments that are fully integrated with underlying
fixed-rate bonds or notes to effectively convert fixed rate debt
into floating rate debt based on three- or
six-month
usdlibor.
at december31, 2006, the company had entered into interest
rate swap agreements with total notional amounts of
approximately $1,800, whereby the company, over the remaining
terms of the underlying notes, will receive a fixed rate payment
equivalent to the fixed interest rate of the underlying note and
pay a floating rate of interest that is based on three- or
six-month
usdlibor.
interest rate swaps did not have a material effect on the
companys overall cost of borrowing at december31,
2006 and 2005. see note18 for additional descriptions of
interest rate swaps.
commodity
price risk
the company enters into
over-the-counter
and exchange-traded derivative commodity instruments to hedge
the commodity price risk associated with energy feedstock and
agricultural commodity exposures.
f-52
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
26.geographic
information
net
net
net
net
net
net
sales1
property2
sales1
property2
sales1
property2
united states
$
11,123
$
7,410
$
11,129
$
7,119
$
11,591
$
7,147
europe
belgium
$
$
$
$
$
$
germany
1,826
2,040
2,047
france
italy
luxembourg
the netherlands
spain
united kingdom
other
2,708
2,312
2,428
total europe
$
7,921
$
1,708
$
7,696
$
1,690
$
7,993
$
1,610
asia pacific
china/hong kong
$
1,415
$
$
1,198
$
$
1,197
$
india
japan
1,103
1,107
1,183
taiwan
korea
singapore
other
total asia pacific
$
4,759
$
$
4,515
$
$
4,725
$
canada& latin
america
brazil
$
1,191
$
$
1,055
$
$
$
canada
mexico
argentina
other
total canada& latin
america
$
3,618
$
$
3,299
$
$
3,031
$
total
$
27,421
$
10,498
$
26,639
$
10,309
$
27,340
$
10,224
net sales are attributed to
countries based on location of customer.
includes property, plant and
equipment less accumulated depreciation.
f-53
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
27.segment
information
the company has six reportable segments. five of the segments
constitute the companys growth platforms:
agriculture& nutrition, coatings& color
technologies, electronic& communication technologies,
performance materials and safety& protection. the
sixth segment, pharmaceuticals, is limited to income from the
companys interest in two drugs,
cozaar
and
hyzaar.
beginning in 2005, financial transactions related to the
remaining assets of textiles& interiors are included
in other.
major products by segment include: agriculture&
nutrition (hybrid seed corn and soybean seed, herbicides,
fungicides, insecticides, value enhanced grains and soy
protein); coatings& color technologies (automotive
finishes, industrial coatings and white pigments);
electronic& communication technologies
(fluorochemicals, fluoropolymers, photopolymers and electronic
materials); performance materials (engineering polymers,
packaging and industrial polymers, films and elastomers);
pharmaceuticals (representing the companys interest in the
collaboration relating to
cozaar/hyzaar
antihypertensive drugs, which is reported as other income); and
safety& protection(specialty and industrial
chemicals, nonwovens, aramids and solid surfaces). the company
operates globally in substantially all of its product lines.
in general, the accounting policies of the segments are the same
as those described in the summary of significant accounting
policies. exceptions are noted as follows and are shown in the
reconciliations below. prior years data have been
reclassified to reflect the 2006 organizational structure. in
addition, segment pretax operating income and segment net assets
for 2005 and 2006 include the companys retrospective
adoption of fsp aug air-1, relating to planned major maintenance
activities, effective january1, 2005. additional details
regarding this change can be found in note1. segment sales
include transfers and a pro rata share of equity
affiliates sales. products are transferred between
segments on a basis intended to reflect, as nearly as
practicable, the market value of the products. segment pretax
operating income (ptoi) is defined as operating income before
income taxes, minority interests, exchange gains (losses),
corporate expenses, interest and the cumulative effect of
changes in accounting principles. segment net assets includes
net working capital, net permanent investment and other
noncurrent operating assets and liabilities of the segment.
affiliate net assets (pro rata share) excludes borrowing and
other long-term liabilities. depreciation and amortization
includes depreciation on research and development facilities and
amortization of other intangible assets, excluding write-down of
assets which is discussed in note5. expenditures for
long-lived assets exclude investments in affiliates and include
payments for property, plant and equipment as part of business
acquisitions (see note24).
f-54
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
agriculture
coatings&
electronic&
safety
textiles
&
color
communication
performance
pharma-
&
&
nutrition
technologies
technologies
materials
ceuticals
protection
interiors
other
total
segment sales
$
6,329
$
6,309
$
3,814
$
6,892
$
$
5,584
n/a
$
$
28,985
less transfers
(49
)
(109
)
(65
)
(82
)
n/a
(305
)
less equity affiliate sales
(88
)
(19
)
(241
)
(823
)
(88
)
n/a
(1,259
)
net sales
6,241
6,241
3,464
6,004
5,414
n/a
27,421
pretax operating income (loss)
1,080
n/a
(134
)
4,283
depreciation and amortization
n/a
1,208
equity in earnings of affiliates
(2
)
n/a
(5
)
segment net assets
6,126
3,959
2,476
3,817
3,032
n/a
19,722
affiliate net assets
n/a
1,249
expenditures for long-lived assets
n/a
1,378
segment sales
$
6,394
$
6,082
$
3,658
$
6,750
$
$
5,230
n/a
$
$
28,166
less transfers
(48
)
(99
)
(74
)
(73
)
n/a
(294
)
less equity affiliate sales
(76
)
(27
)
(251
)
(794
)
(85
)
n/a
(1,233
)
net sales
6,318
6,007
3,308
5,882
5,072
n/a
26,639
pretax operating income (loss)
n/a
(78
)
4,139
depreciation and amortization
n/a
1,187
equity in earnings of affiliates
(2
)
n/a
segment net assets
6,085
3,567
2,296
3,602
2,689
n/a
18,556
affiliate net assets
n/a
1,270
expenditures for long-lived assets
n/a
1,208
segment sales
$
6,244
$
5,885
$
3,422
$
6,633
$
$
4,696
$
3,250
$
$
30,174
less transfers
(50
)
(88
)
(102
)
(90
)
(210
)
(13
)
(553
)
less equity affiliate sales
(79
)
(46
)
(284
)
(876
)
(64
)
(932
)
(2,281
)
net sales
6,165
5,789
3,050
5,655
4,542
2,108
27,340
pretax operating income (loss)
(515
)
(242
)
2,735
depreciation and amortization
1,205
equity in earnings of affiliates
(4
)
(100
)
(2
)
segment net assets
6,318
3,687
2,304
3,721
2,645
19,455
affiliate net assets
1,686
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,083
f-55
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
reconciliation
to consolidated financial statements
pretax operating income to
income before income taxes and minority interests
total segment ptoi
$
4,283
$
4,139
$
2,735
net exchange (losses)/gains
(includes affiliates)
(4
)
(411
)
corporate expenses and interest
(950
)
(1,021
)
(882
)
income before income taxes and
minority interests
$
3,329
$
3,563
$
1,442
segment net assets to total
assets
total segment net assets
$
19,722
$
18,556
$
19,455
corporate
assets1
5,876
8,144
9,704
liabilities included in net assets
6,179
6,591
6,473
total assets
$
31,777
$
33,291
$
35,632
pension assets are included in
corporate assets. the balance at december31, 2006 reflects
the adoption of sfas158 (seenote2).
segment
consolidated
other items
totals
adjustments
totals
depreciation and amortization
$
1,208
$
$
1,384
equity in earnings of affiliates
(20
)
affiliate net assets
1,249
(446
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,378
1,532
depreciation and amortization
$
1,187
$
$
1,358
equity in earnings of affiliates
affiliate net assets
1,270
(426
)
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,208
1,340
depreciation and amortization
$
1,205
$
$
1,347
equity in earnings of affiliates
(49
)
(39
)
affiliate net assets
1,686
(652
)
1,034
expenditures for long-lived assets
1,083
1,232
f-56
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
additional
segment details
2006 includes the following pretax benefits (charges):
agriculture&
nutritiona,c,d,g
$
(119
)
coatings& color
technologiesa,b,c,f
(7
)
electronic&
communication
technologiesa,c
performance
materialsa,c,h
(33
)
safety&
protectiona,b,c,e
(27
)
$
(181
)
a
in the fourth quarter 2006, the
company changed its practice relating to cutoff for certain
transactions (see note1). the impact of these changes in
the fourth quarter and full year 2006 is a reduction to net
sales of $107 and a net pretax charge of $58. the pretax charge
amount by segment was: agriculture&
nutrition $5; coatings& color
technologies $17; electronic&
communication technologies $5; performance
materials $18; and safety&
protection $13, respectively.
b
includes insurance recoveries
relating to the damage suffered from hurricane katrina in 2005.
pretax amounts by segment were: coatings& color
technologies $123 and safety&
protection $20.
c
includes a benefit of $61 of
insurance recoveries, net of fees, which relate to asbestos
litigation expenses incurred by the company in prior periods.
pretax amounts by segment for the insurance recoveries were:
agriculture& nutrition $7;
coatings& color technologies $19;
electronic& communication technologies
$10; performance materials $12; and
safety& protection$13.
d
includes a restructuring charge of
$194 in the agriculture& nutrition segment. see
note5 for more details.
e
includes an asset impairment charge
of $47 associated with an underperforming industrial chemicals
asset held for sale within the safety& protection
segment.
f
includes a net restructuring charge
of $132 in the coatings& color technologies segment.
see note5 for more details.
g
includes income of $73 in the
agriculture& nutrition segment related to technology
transfers, licensing agreements and asset sales.
h
includes a charge of $27 in the
performance materials segment to writedown certain manufacturing
assets to estimated fair value.
2005 includes the following pretax benefits (charges):
coatings& color
technologiesa
$
(116
)
electronic&
communication
technologiesb
performance
materialsa,c
safety&
protectiona
(27
)
otherd
$
(12
)
a
includes charges of $160 for
damaged facilities, inventory write-offs,
clean-up
costs and other costs related to the hurricanes, in the
following segments: coatings& color
technologies $116; performance materials
$17; and safety& protection $27.
b
reflects a gain from the sale of
the companys equity interest in dupont photomasks, inc.
c
includes a gain of $25 resulting
from the disposition of certain assets of dde to dow; and
operating income of $47 related to certain assets that were
disposed of on june30, 2005. the gain is partly offset by
a charge of $34 related to the shutdown of an
u.s.manufacturing facility.
d
reflects a net gain from the
disposition of four equity affiliates associated with the
separation of textiles& interiors, partly offset by
other separation costs.
f-57
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
2004 includes the following pretax charges:
agriculture&
nutritiona,b
$
(34
)
coatings& color
technologiesa,b,c
(96
)
electronic&
communication
technologiesa,b,d
(175
)
performance
materialsa,b,e
(335
)
safety&
protectiona,b,f
(70
)
textiles&
interiorsa,g
(657
)
othera,b,h
(103
)
$
(1,470
)
a
includes a benefit of $22 which
reflects changes in estimates related to 2004 and prior
years restructuring programs in the following segments:
agriculture& nutrition $2;
coatings& color technologies $4;
electronic& communication technologies $2;
performance materials $1; safety&
protection $1; textiles&
interiors $10; and other $2.
b
includes charges of $312 to provide
severance benefits for approximately 2,700 employees in the
following segments: agriculture& nutrition
$36; coatings& color
technologies$64; electronic&
communication technologies $42; performance
materials $45; safety&
protection $29; and other $96.
c
includes a charge of $36 to provide
for an automotive refinish litigation settlement.
d
includes charges of $108 associated
with the proposed settlement of the pfoa class action litigation
in west virginia; and $27 to reflect an other than temporary
decline in the value of an investment security.
e
includes a charge of $268 to
provide for anticipated losses associated with dde antitrust
litigation matters and a charge of $23 related to the shutdown
of manufacturing assets at a u.s.facility.
f
includes a charge of $42 related to
the impairment of certain european manufacturing assets.
g
includes a charge of $667
consisting of an agreed upon reduction in sales price;
settlement of working capital and other changes in estimates
associated with the sale of invista to koch; an increase in the
book value of net assets sold and additional separation costs;
and a write-down of an equity affiliate to fair market value.
h
includes a charge of $29 to write
off abandoned technology and a benefit of $20 from insurance
proceeds related to
benlate
litigation.
f-58
table of contents
e. i. du pont de nemours and company
notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued)
(dollars in millions, except per share)
28.
quarterly
financial data (unaudited)
for the quarter ended
march31,
june30,
september30,
december31,
net sales
$
7,394
$
7,442
$
6,309
$
6,276
cost of goods sold and other
expenses2
6,500
6,464
5,895
6,334
income before income taxes and
minority interests
1,050
1,255
net income
basic earnings per share of common
stock3
0.88
1.05
0.52
0.94
diluted earnings per share of
common
stock3
0.88
1.04
0.52
0.94
net sales
$
7,431
$
7,511
$
5,870
$
5,827
cost of goods sold and other
expenses2
6,228
6,482
5,839
5,923
income before income taxes and
minority interests
1,494
1,559
net income (loss)
1,015
(80
)10
basic earnings (loss) per share of
common
stock3
0.97
1.02
(0.09
)
0.16
diluted earnings (loss) per share
of common
stock3
0.96
1.01
(0.09
)
0.16
net sales
$
8,073
$
7,527
$
5,740
$
6,000
cost of goods sold and other
expenses2
6,968
7,105
5,614
5,837
income before income taxes and
minority interests
net income
basic earnings per share of common
stock3
0.67
0.50
0.33
0.28
diluted earnings per share of
common
stock3
0.66
0.50
0.33
0.28
in the fourth quarter 2006, the
company adopted planned major maintenance guidance and
retrospectively applied these provisions effective
january1, 2005. the effects of the accounting change on
the companys 2006 and 2005 quarterly results of operations
were not material (see note1).
excludes interest expense and
nonoperating items.
earnings per share for the year may
not equal the sum of quarterly earnings per share due to changes
in average share calculations.
includes a $135 restructuring
charge in coatings& color technologies in connection
with the companys plans to close and consolidate certain
manufacturing and laboratory sites within this segment.
includes a $50 benefit resulting
from initial insurance recoveries relating to the damage
suffered from hurricane katrina in 2005.
includes a charge of $58 relating
to sales being recorded on a destination basis that were
historically recorded when shipped and adjusted accruals that
were historically recorded on a lag-month basis, a $194 charge
for a restructuring program in agriculture& nutrition
and a $47 asset impairment charge in safety&
protection. these charges were partially offset by a $93 benefit
resulting from insurance recoveries relating to the damage
suffered from hurricane katrina in 2005, a benefit of $61
resulting from insurance recoveries, net of fees, which relate
to asbestos litigation expenses incurred by the company in prior
periods and a $90 benefit relating to interest on certain prior
year tax contingencies that had been previously reserved.
includes a benefit of $479 for
reversals of accruals related to tax settlements, reversals of
tax valuation allowances and the finalization of taxes related
to the companys repatriation of foreign earnings under the
ajca.
includes a net gain of $39
primarily relating to the disposition of three equity affiliates
associated with the ongoing separation of textiles&
interiors.
includes a $23 benefit primarily
reflecting a gain on the sale of an equity affiliate associated
with the ongoing separation of textiles& interiors and
a $146 charge for hurricane related charges.
includes charges of $320 for
estimated income taxes associated with the repatriation of cash
under ajca.
includes a charge of $345, which
includes an agreed upon reduction in sales price of $240 and
other changes in estimates associated with the sale of invista.
includes a charge of $183 related
to the divestiture of invista, which primarily reflects an
increase in the book value of net assets sold and additional
separation costs.
includes a charge of $61 related to
the separation of textiles& interiors and a charge of
$41 related to the write-down of an equity affiliate to fair
market value.
includes a charge of $37
principally related to the settlement of working capital on the
sale of invista to koch.
f-59
table of contents
information
for investors
corporate headquarters
e. i. du pont de nemours and
company
1007 market street
wilmington, de 19898
telephone: 302
774-1000
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
2007 annual meeting
the annual meeting of the
shareholders will be held at 10:30a.m., wednesday,
april25, in the dupont theatre in the dupont building,
1007 market street, wilmington, delaware.
stock exchange
listings
dupont common stock (symbol
dd)is listed on the new york stock exchange, inc. (nyse)
and on certain foreign exchanges. quarterly high and low market
prices are shown in item5 of the
form10-k.
on may26,2006, the company certified to the nyse
that it is not aware of any violations of the nyses
corporate governance listing standards. the company filed the
required certifications under section302 of the
sarbanes-oxley act with its annual report for the year ended
december31, 2006, on
form10-k.
dupont preferred stock is listed on
the new york stock exchange, inc. (symbol ddpra for $3.50 series
and symbol ddprb for $4.50 series).
dividends
holders of the companys
common stock are entitled to receive dividends when they are
declared by the board of directors. while it is not a guarantee
of future conduct, the company has continuously paid a quarterly
dividend since the fourth quarter 1904. dividends on common
stock and preferred stock are usually declared in january,
april, july and october. when dividends on common stock are
declared, they are usually paid mid march, june, september and
december. preferred dividends are paid on or about the
25thof january, april, july and october.
independent registered public
accounting firm
pricewaterhousecoopers llp
two commerce square, suite1700
2001 market street
philadelphia, pa 19103
shareholder services
inquiries from shareholders about
stock accounts, transfers, certificates, dividends (including
direct deposit and reinvestment), name or address changes and
electronic receipt of proxy materials may be directed to
duponts stock transfer agent:
computershare trust company,
n.a.
p.o. box43023
providence, ri
02940-3023
or call: in the united states and
canada888
983-8766
(toll-free)
other locations-781
575-2724
for the hearing impaired-
tdd: 800
952-9245
(toll-free)
or visit computershares home
page at http://www.computershare.com
investor relations
institutional investors and other
representatives of financial institutions should contact:
e. i. du pont de nemours and
company
dupont investor relations
1007 market street-d-11018
wilmington, de 19898
or call 302
774-4994
bondholder
relations
e. i. du pont de nemours and
company
dupont finance
1007 market street-d-8028
wilmington, de 19898
or call 302
774-8802
dupont on the internet
financial results, news and other
information about dupont can be accessed from the companys
website at http://www.dupont.com. this site includes
important information on products and services, financial
reports, news releases, environmental information and career
opportunities. the companys periodic and current reports
filed with the sec are available on its website, free of charge,
as soon as reasonably practicable after being filed.
product information /
referral
from the united states and canada:
441-7515
(toll-free)
from other locations: 302
774-1000
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
on the internet: http://www.dupont.com
printed reports available to
shareholders
the following company reports may
be obtained, without charge:
1.
2006 annual report to the
securities and exchange commission, filed on
form10-k;
2.proxy statement for 2007 annual meeting of
stockholders; and
3.quarterly reports to the securities and
exchange commission, filed on
form10-q
requests should be addressed to:
dupont corporate information
center
crp705-gs25
p.o. box80705
wilmington, de
19880-0705
or call 302
774-5991
e-mail:
find.info@usa.dupont.com
services for shareholders
online
accountaccess
registered shareholders may access
their accounts and obtain online answers to stock transfer
questions by signing up for internet account access. call
toll-free 888
983-8766
(outside the united states and canada, call 781
575-2724) to
obtain by mail a temporary personal identification number and
information on viewing your account over the internet.
dividend reinvestment
plan
an automatic dividend reinvestment
plan is available to all registered shareholders. common or
preferred dividends can be automatically reinvested in dupont
common stock. participants also may add cash for the purchase of
additional shares. a detailed account statement is mailed after
each investment. your account can also be viewed over the
internet if you have online accountaccess (see above). to
enroll in the plan, please contact computershare (listed above).
online delivery of proxy
materials
registered stockholders and holders
of shares in the companys u.s.employee benefit plans
may request their proxy materials electronically in 2008 by
visiting www.computershare.com/us/ecomms. stockholders with
brokerage accounts can determine if their brokers offer
electronic delivery by visiting www.icsdelivery.com.
direct deposit of
dividends
registered shareholders who would
like their dividends directly deposited in a u.s.bank
account should contact computershare (listed above).
